repository;interviewee;datebirth;dateinterview;text
RCAemployee;Conrad Haber;1947;2015;[START OF TRANSCRIPT] [0:00:08] Conrad Haber: My name is Conrad Haber and I started as a Systems Engineer here June 23rd, 1969. I worked with at the time it was Government Communications Systems Division, GCSD. The reason for coming here was because of all the space work that RCA had done with the ranger series, and all the moon pictures and photographic works. Once Apollo started up, this was the place to come and work. I made sure I got down here, and came in on the rotational program. And ended up getting an assignment up with Ed Nossen, up in the communications systems area. Ed was doing a lot of the Apollo work. I was in the perfect place at the right time to get in on that. Okay. Let’s talk about your first assignment. Right. You know, if you had mentors, what your impressions were, why you came to RCA? Yeah, I think the primary reason for coming was the space race was at its height, and as a technical person, I mean that was the place to be. I looked at what was going on, couldn’t get into NASA. They weren’t hiring. I decided the next best place was to come to a company that was providing all the hardware for the space effort. That was RCA, was a significant supplier. I came here and the group was phenomenal. The people here... Ed Nossen who was I ended up working for, who did a lot of work on coming up with some very creative solutions to solve navigation problems, and communication problems on the space program. In particular, between Apollo and LEM, and other things. I had people like John Allen and Carl Solomon to work with. Who were senior engineers and were exceptional people in terms of bringing along a young engineer, and inviting me to meetings. Just watching how these people think and solve problems was an incredible learning experience. It’s one thing to read about problem solutions in text books, but another thing to sit next to some really experienced people and watch how they frame a problem. Things they pay attention to. Things they don’t pay attention to as an engineer, and understand how to really solve the key parts of the problem, and come up with a solution rather quickly that’s effective enough to really get the design going. That you can’t learn in a book. These guys were great [0:00:53] Jim: [0:00:57] Conrad Haber: [0:00:57] Jim: [0:01:05] Conrad Haber: [0:02:42] Jim: [0:02:44] Conrad Haber: at doing it. I was very fortunate to be around three or four exceptional people, and I learned as much as I could from them. How did they treat you? It was interesting, I mean I felt rather intimidated. As a student, you know, I had all this knowledge in my head, and I thought it was important to remember equations and all the things I had learned. I figured these guys weren’t even going to recognize me, but they treated me as a peer. They explained things to me. No question was too stupid to ask. Slowly I became comfortable with saying, “I don’t understand that. Could you explain that a little bit more?” There was nothing I asked that they wouldn’t answer. If they couldn’t answer it or if they did answer it they would give me some references where to go and look further. This was pre-internet. So you just didn’t go Google this stuff and I mean you had to go to the library and do some research to look this stuff up. Having somebody there who could actually explain things to you was way more valuable than it is in these days when you can go Google and tap into experts who have written things, and different documents. Via your iPads, and all this stuff. It’s a different world back then. What was your contribution? I thought I wasn’t really going to have much of a contribution being so young. I think I had just learned all this stuff, but the interesting thing was something that turned out to be very significant for them. Was I would check all the calculations on the radio communication links from...in space. So RCA built a LEM, not a LEM, but the Lunar Rover. Which had a lot of the video transmitter and would send pictures directly back to Earth. Okay. There as a transmitter and a RF link, and somebody analyzed how much powder was necessary to get a good signal quality on the ground. This was pre-calculator. Everything was done in slide rules. Everybody was using slide rules to do these calculations. I looked at the documents and went through them. I was trying to understand how you do these calculations with very complex wave forms there. I did the math and looked like I found a mistake. I checked it ten times, and it looked like a mistake. It looked like they weren’t transmitting enough power to get the picture quality on the ground. I went to Frank Ortson, he was one of the guys that was working with. I got his attention and said, “Hey Frank, it looks like you guys aren’t transmitting enough power.” He says, “Yeah, okay, okay. I’ll check it out. I’ll check it out.” Well about two days later he called me in, and he was all happy. He said, “You know, there was a mistake. It was four watts too low.” He said, “And that would have degraded [0:03:46] Jim: [0:03:48] Conrad Haber:  [0:05:42] Jim: [0:05:45] Conrad Haber: the picture quality on the ground.” He says, “Which would have been a disaster, because that stuff was getting piped all over the world from the moon.” Actually I found that problem (laughter). I was pretty proud of that, and that was one of the things I did. I wasn’t here even a year when I found that out. It was pretty cool. Getting some congrats from some of these really high powered guys that I had a lot of respect for was an incredible experience. Yeah, I really enjoyed it. Did you do any calculations the same way they did? Well I just... They just put... Yeah, they had equation and they said, “Here’s the equation that defines the laws. If you put in this power it works out.” Like I said, my slide rule is the only you can do it. There are no calculators. Nobody had any. There was zero calculators. That technology was not invented yet. You go through with the slide, if you’re familiar with slide rules I’m sure. Most people aren’t. I mean you have to take care of decimal places in your head, and all that has to be done in your head as you move the slide. There’s a lot of calculations. It’s very easy to make a mistake. I checked it, like I said, ten times, and it was off. It was wrong. I was... It was a big deal to them and then it became a big deal to me. It was a very good experience. Talking to some of the other people involved with Apollo there is a story developing about the rendezvous radar, and maybe it was either less than adequate or maybe it needed a backup. Do you have anything you can add to that? Yeah. The rendezvous radar was critical, because what the radar permitted was when the LEM took off from the lunar surface after landing it had to re-rendezvous with the command service module. A command module which was... Which was orbiting...orbiting the moon. The primary way that the LEM could find these space craft was to use the rendezvous radar, but NASA’s design philosophy was that any systems that are critical to life support, like life support itself or radar like this. Because if those guys couldn’t find the command module to get back, they were done. They were dead. They don’t have one system. They always had two systems at least, backup. While the rendezvous radar was the primary system, they ended up using the ranging system that Ed Nossen developed, we developed here in Camden. Ed was the one to use the communication radios as a way to get range and range read, and sort of help you steer and find the command module if the LEM rendezvous radar was not working. That, Ed’s system got high priority. It had to be working [0:06:28] Jim: [0:06:45] Conrad Haber:  [0:08:51] Jim: [0:08:54] Conrad Haber: [0:08:54] Jim: [0:09:00] Conrad Haber: and on every launch to make sure if that radar failed, we had a backup. In fact that system works so well that when we did the Apollo Soyuz transfer experiment where the Apollo spacecraft and the Soyuz spacecraft actually docked together back I think in ’75 or so in orbit The Russians used our ranging system to find the docking module. Which was pretty cool. We gave them the schematics and stuff, and of course you have to build a transponder. They don’t have any semi-conductors, they only had tubes. We actually built it for them and got it installed on Soyuz. Which was really cool. That was the primary system for doing the rendezvous, and it worked really well. They docked up, and it was cool. We’re all familiar with Apollo 13. Mm-hm. It sounds to me that you may have actually experienced that time? Yeah. This was part of the learning process of being part of what was going on, and sitting in the room and listening to all the real movers and shakers, solve problems. Thirteen, we built the command radios. All the command radios for the 13 module. For all of the Apollo modules. What happened was we got a call from NASA, and they said, “Hey, have you guys ever figured out what would happen to the radios if we powered them down, and they had condensing water on them? Would they power up and operate again?” We said, “What?” (laughter) They said, “For real.” They next thing I knew there was a phone call, a conference call, all the guys in the room. I snuck in the door and sat in the back of the room and watched this thing unfold. Basically what they were described the problem and they asked us, “We got to power down the command module. Of course when we do that with the water vapor in the air it’s going to condense out. When we fire up, your radio has got to work, or we can’t communicate with these guys. Have you ever tested it that way?” “No.” “We need you test it.” Guys went off and took them in environmental lab, you know, put them in with the humidity. Got them condensing in moisture. I wasn’t doing any of this. I was just watching this unfold. It was incredible. Yeah, they worked. The guys got back, we closed with NASA. There was a lot of fury. We were working like through the night. Just running on this thing 24-7 to get this question answered. It was an amazing time. Our radios, we said they would work, and they worked when the guys powered up that command module, those radios were on. They had grounds... and they got comms with CAPCON on the ground. Worked really good. Good stuff. I didn’t  [0:10:55] Jim: [0:11:03] Conrad Haber: design any of those. I can’t take any credit for all of that, but it was great being a technical person. Just being around guys who did, and watching this whole thing unfold. Now, how does your career get from there to where you are now as a Staff Systems Engineer? I think I... The funny thing about engineering is that technology changes rapidly, and as we all know even faster. It’s geometric with time. The thing that is invariant with time are the underlying physical principals under which devices work. The approach to solving problems which you can’t learn in a book, and those lessons once you learn them will really, really transfer nicely to the newer technologies as they come through. The terminology changes, the technology changes, but at the heart of all of this are the same physical principals. When you have problems, the way you solve these problems are the same as they are back then. Everything I was fortunate enough to learn in school and from the people I work with, and have mentored me here, has transferred over the 46 years to now. I can still sit in a room with guys who are half my age and we can solve problems together. I can participate, and get solutions. That’s an incredible feeling to be able to do that. Even though when I came into work here, we were transitioning from tubes to semiconductors and as everybody knows now, most people don’t even know what a transistor is anymore. I mean, it’s just flat packs and integrated circuits, and the technology is so far advanced from anything we could have imagined back then. The physics is the same. The math is the same. How you solve a problem is pretty much the same. Those are the things I think I’ve really valued having learned here in my early part of my career. Are you now mentoring engineers? Yes. As many as I can. The young folks in here, and I just give them... I just dump everything on them. I mean, I give them what I got. As much as they can stand. Because I’m not going to be here very much longer, and some guys check out early other guys can take it in. The thing that’s really great about a lot of the young folks that come in now, is which I didn’t have, they’ll go off. You know, I’ll give them a dump on some RF stuff and how you solve a problem in communications. They’ll take notes, and they’ll go off, look at the words, things they don’t understand they go on Google. Keyword searches. They’ll get articles, they’ll read them. In one night they can do all this. They come back to me with follow up questions the next day, and they say, “Hey, I read this paper. I read this.” [0:12:41] Jim: [0:12:44] Conrad Haber:  [0:13:55] Jim: [0:14:00] Conrad Haber: In ’69, when I came here, that would have taken weeks to research. They’re real fast. I can get to a lot of guys. In fact, I’ve got three guys that I’m working with. They’re very bright and very interested, and as long as you have the interest you can take advantage of the fabulous technologies out there now to learn things. I’m excited about that. Let’s talk about your RCA co-workers. It was intimidating. Guys like Ed Nossen who were, you know, had 40 patents, and just about a genius in terms of doing things, but still would take the time to interact with me. Look at my stuff and he wasn’t a very talkative person, but he would pay attention and give me some guidance. There were guys here like other people, like Jim Feller, who had not only great technical capabilities but had photographic memories. They could remember every detail about everything they’ve ever seen. They were phenomenal people working and interacting with them as well. There were some very talented designers here who were very capable of using the existing technology to build circuits and radios that worked phenomenally. Like Sam Pietrofitta who was one who worked on the command module radio. That was before I came here back in the late ‘60s. I came in ’69, but I had a chance to work with Sam a lot on some other RF programs after that. We had a mix of what I call the very conceptual people. Who could deal with the mathematics and the concepts, and we had some very, very technologists who could build things. Getting those groups together was very powerful. We had talented people in every one of those groups. Made some fantastic products, and responded to problems very quickly. What about your supervisors? Did they value your work? Yeah for the most part they did. I noticed no one ever discouraged me. No one... Everyone took the time to look at what I did. A lot of times when I saw how my task fit into what was going on in the program, it really wasn’t significant. A lot of what they did was, but they looked at it as a learning experience for me, on something to learn. No one ever said... No one ever dismissed anything as being trivial, not correct, or no one made me feel inadequate in any way. We’re always encouraged to learn more and to do things. Then only when I could see what happened at the end, I could say, “Gee, that piece of work wasn’t going to make it anywhere.” I wouldn’t have known it from when I got reviewed to the... Did you feel that RCA valued your work? [0:15:29] Jim: [0:15:35] Conrad Haber: [0:16:20] Jim:  [0:16:22] Conrad Haber: [0:16:59] Jim: [0:17:05] Conrad Haber: Yes. This place was a technical company, and it was run by engineers. Engineering talent, technical skills were valued very highly. That may have been the demise of this place in terms of its business modeling, and being able to be competitive into the future. As an engineer, this was a phenomenal place to work back then. We were working on programs critical to the space race, the defense of the country, with really confident people, and we had good contracts. We had the funding here to do things and we did them. Learned a lot. We heard from a lot of people a term, “the RCA family.” What’s that mean to you? I’ve never worked anyplace else. I came here for about five years. I wanted to get out of school, get some experience, and move on. Get to another environment. I’m still here. It’s not RCA anymore. It’s changing, it’s changing. There’s still remnants of the culture back then. When I came here, this wasn’t a job. This was a career. The people that you interacted with, it wasn’t a sterile interaction. It was an interaction that was almost like a family. I mean you had people who were concerned about how you were feeling. How you’re growing technically, and how you were supporting the overall organization. There was a lot of concern about that here, and they were concerned about bringing people in. People took care of people. Even people who were key contributors and for some reason they were a little off their game, these people are part of the family and were assigned places where they could still produce. Still be productive and still come to work. I think in a modern company that was a little more Draconian, those people might have been laid off, discharged. You know, “What have you done for me lately?” Kind of attitude. There was not much of that back then. When you did something significant and there were people who did very significant things in this company, the family took care of you. Because you had made a key contribution, and you were a valuable person. Yeah maybe you changed now, you’re a little different in the kind of things you can do, but we owe you. You’re part of this family. We owe you. We’re going to find a place here where you can still be productive. I don’t see that in companies now. I don’t see that attitude towards people anymore. It’s more, “Yeah, you did that great thing but you got paid for it, and now what are you doing for me?” That wasn’t the way it was. It was truly like a family. Like you treat your siblings and your parents. Through good times and bad, that was your family, and you stuck together. That really was how it was here.  [0:19:05] [0:19:24] Jim: [0:19:27] Conrad Haber: [0:19:29] Jim: [0:19:35] Conrad Haber: Therefore, instead of staying here for five years, I’m here for most of my career. Or all my career. For that reason. I mean that’s a layer that makes it really nice to come to work. You have that relationship with the people, technical challenge, and get paid for it. I mean, it doesn’t get much better than that, I don’t think. What about outside of work? Oh. How do you mean? Would I... Did you associate with any of your co-workers outside of work? Yeah. Engineers, there’s a wide spectrum of personalities. Engineering, its traditional engineering personality, very introverted, quiet, kind of nerdy. We had those kind of guys, and I was sort of like that back in the beginning of my career. I mean, that’s sort of the kind of folks that got attracted to engineer school. There were other people here who had totally different personalities. Like John Allen was somebody that I was fortunate enough to work with who turned out to be... Was a senior scientist here at the end of his career in Camden. He was in that systems group with me. John was an excellent engineer, a very vigorous guy, he had a Christmas party every year. Which he invited me and my wife to the first time we were here. It was incredible. I mean, I work with these people, now I’m going to be invited to this social event. Not only was John there, but all the people that I worked with were there. I saw everybody in a totally different venue. This was a “have fun” kind of environment. It wasn’t technical. People were bringing in dishes they had made, and this happened every year. Every year that John was working here, and even after he left until he passed away. We went to the party every year with him. My wife and I, we went to every party. Those kinds of things were really special. Of course, travelling with these guys on trips. When we would go on these trips they’d bring me along just to observe and see how things were going. Incredible experience watching how these people... Just the discussions. We’d talk about world affairs. These were multifaceted, really rich people from a human standpoint. They had a lot of facets and personality and being exposed to that was a great experience. I had a lot of that. These guys were great. That was a great... That’s part of the family thing. Where you get to see all the facets of somebody and you can have a much better relationship with them, and when you know who they are.  [0:21:26] Jim: [0:21:36] Conrad Haber: Yeah, we also heard from people about lunch hour and Christmas Eve, and things like that. (Laughter) Yeah. Christmas Eve here was a day you wanted to come into work, but you didn’t do any work. There were parties. People would have celebrations. John Allen, from the systems group, every Christmas Eve he would have a poetry reading session in the conference room. Where he would start reading... I forget it was somebody from... I forget now... something about the north country and being in the Arctic...He would read these poems, and ordinarily there would be soda and food and snacks. We’d be going on doing that. There was a lot of discussions and having a good time. Every Christmas Eve that’s how it went. We worked for a couple of hours and spent the rest of the day there with the rest of the family so to speak, having a good time. We’ve also heard from people about RCA’s influence on South Jersey. Do you have anything to say about that? Well, I think RCA was... RCA and Campbell’s Soup were South Jersey. I mean everybody in this area that I ever met either worked at one of those two places or knew somebody who did, or had a family member that was here. When both plants were here, there were a lot of restaurants and support places, and stores, Camden changed a lot since then, that supported all the people here. There was a lot of business that we provided them. Anytime people asked me where I worked, of course I’d say RCA, and they’d know exactly where and “Who you worked with?” You know that kind of discussion. You know they either knew somebody in here, had worked here themselves, or had a family member that did. It was... just seemed like South Jersey was either Campbell’s or RCA. I was surprised. I came from New York City when I went to school and came down here in Southern New Jersey. I knew nothing about, but it was pretty clear that those were the two big companies. Alright so, how would you sum up your time here at RCA, your career? How would you sum that up? I would say it was a great personal experience. In terms of meeting some incredibly fine people. It was an intellectually stimulating and rewarding experience, and I got a chance to really grow technically. More importantly work on some programs that really had an impact on the world. Space and some of the other areas I worked on in the classified arena. Which I got a chance to see what the impact of those was. That is very fulfilling. It was very fulfilling to me. I’m still working now. It’s been 46 years, and I wouldn’t be doing that if I didn’t still feel it was something really special. I’m going to have to [0:22:25] Jim: [0:22:35] Conrad Haber: [0:23:35] Jim: [0:23:45] Conrad Haber:  [0:24:53] Jim: [0:24:57] Conrad Haber: [0:24:57] Jim: [0:25:03] Conrad Haber: [END OF TRANSCRIPT] change that now, but I look back and it was a great ride. I really, really enjoyed, and I hope that the engineers that start now and I know that corporate environment's changed, there are still a lot of problems to solve out there. I hope they end up with the same experience that I had, because I couldn’t define it in a better way. Well, I know you to be one of the best systems engineers I’ve ever encountered. Thanks Jim. I hope your time here isn’t too short, yet, because you are critically needed about your job. Yeah I enjoy it. It’s good. The young people are incredible. These young folks coming out of college now are very talented guys. That’s encouraging, and it’s great working with them.
RCAemployee;Chip McGrogan;1937;2015;[START OF TRANSCRIPT] [0:07.5] McGrogan: I’m Chip McGrogan. I started in RCA in 1957 on the graduate study program. I was out of Drexel, graduated class of 57, second in my class. Drexel, of course, was a co-op school. It was about the only way I could really get to college. So after five years, I had five years of education that included two years of practical work experience. The last two years of co-op experience was at Boroughs where I worked as essentially the personal technician of a real transistor expert. That was before the transistor was widely known. That experience paid off when I got... I was looking for a place to go to graduate school. I want to take an assistantship and teach and make very little money but yet a master’s degree. And then RCA came along with a graduate study program which was new in 1957. It essentially offered you essentially a free tuition and books for two years into University of Pennsylvania, which was one of my favorite schools. And we got paid for essentially 80% of our time. They paid us like a dollar an hour for the time we’re in school. They paid us a regular salary for the rest of the time and that was after two years we'd have a master’s degree and two more years of work experience, so that really paid off and that was the deciding factor that brought me to RCA. I interviewed a number of places at RCA including they called the Home Instrument Division which is where these guys were breaking their neck and working all night to develop color TV. I was very impressed by that but I interviewed in Advanced Technology Labs in Camden which were doing somewhat the same kind of work I was doing as a co-op and met several people there. When I was doing co-op work, I picked up a book, the only book that existed on transistor electronics. It turned out the authors were all from RCA. I met some of them during my interview time. They hired me on the spot. I never had to co-op. I never had to basically rotate to another assignment. They wanted me there. So I spent the first few years of my career working with the... essentially, was the beginning of the transistor age taking all the old vacuum tube circuits and learning how to transistorize them, write a patent. I think I ended up in the first couple of years with about 13 patents doing that, which I don’t think they were ever worth anything but it looked good on a resume. And I worked in that. I did some work in Advanced Technology on which was called Neural Networks which were simulations of how the brain works with essentially threshold type logic. I wrote a paper on that, submitted it to National Electronics Conference in, I think, 1960. I won first prize for the best paper of the conference, $500 prize which that time was like a month's salary. It was the beginning of my work in Advanced Technology area but a few years into that, a job was awarded to the Advanced Technology labs which was a product development thing which was strange but it seemed the way the government wanted to do business. It was to develop a secured IFF, Identification Friend or Foe system that turned out to be the first application of integrated circuits. Now integrated circuits in those days were TO-5 CAN with two gates or flip flop or something like that. That was radical at the time. I mean more than everything was discreet devices and was in what they called the INFOSEC area was called COMSEC at that time, Communication Security, and that was a black art. There were no textbooks. There were no college courses. There were no courses that you could attend or seminars that you could attend to learn that. Everything was self-taught. Customers would come in, tell us what they wanted, tell us how to do it. We’d asked questions. We’d have very interesting lively exchanges with them and then we taught each other. That was part of that family spirit. We didn’t know anything. What we did know we passed on to our coworkers to make them just as expert... We needed experts and the only way we could find them was not to go out and hire them. We had to create them within our own organization. That bonded us as a team. The IFF system later had another spinoff project which was a Combat Net Radio security device, the KY 38, which was at that time the essential communications device at the Vietnam War. That’s where I met Eddie Mozzi who was running that project. We were using the same technology, sharing the same team efforts, sharing our knowledge with each other, co- developing, essentially similar but different functionality products. That started my career in INFOSEC. That was 1964. I remember that year very well because I think that’s the year the Phillies were 13 games ahead going in to September and then lost the Pennant. I don’t think any of us will ever... any of us local Philadelphia people will never forget that year. Morph or Gene Mauch was the manager at that time and that was the year I started in the INFOSEC area and that basically was almost the rest of my career. That evolved into other projects that were similar. In the late 1970’s, 1980, we won an award for a TRITAC Communication System which involved several devices one of which was a secure telephone called the DSVT. I saw one in the case coming in today out in the lobby, a field telephone that was secure. There was a teletype crypto device built from the same technology and this was a little bit more of an integrated circuit than the ones we had in the earlier equipment. This was basically a custom chip that we designed not complex by today’s standards but very advanced at the time. We were developing the technology to that design and developed these chips at the same time we were building them, not waiting for something to be developed and then use it. It was developing your tools at the same time you’re developing the products. The KG-84 was a teletype encryptor at that time using first real product using integrated circuits. They were CMOS which still is the technology of choice today even though the geometry is  slightly smaller now by orders of magnitude. The teletype encryptor replaced a device called the, I think it was the KW-7, which had a reputation that’s the only teletype encryptor in the military but it had a mean time between failure for about three or four days. So they needed something to replace it, the KG-84 was that device. We developed a prototype that we called a new model of that. We sent several of amounts to the military to try out. They loved it. They said it worked beautifully. The complaint was from their real complaint was from their maintainability people who could not test their maintainability concepts because the damn thing never failed. So we took that as a compliment but they didn’t. That was the beginning of Secure Voice. Secure Voice wherein in the several other products since then. One of them was the STU-III which was the first time we were really developing and working with other contractors to develop a similar product. We had three companies essentially developing the same product. We were not competing on the contract to develop it but we would be competing on the sale of the product. The other companies were Motorola and AT&T. I think John Rittenhouse was our vice president and he said how can you compete with a phone company. The two COMSEC contractors RCA and Motorola skunked AT&T. We built the best product, lowest price and AT&T was playing catch-up the whole time. They didn’t have the spirit of the COMSEC community where you cooperated during the development even though you were competitors. It’s something we learned the hard way. It’s in everybody’s interest. If you cooperate developing the specs and things, well AT&T commercial company always played things close to the best. They never socialized with us during the meetings we had together. All the other guys did know each other like brothers. They went back even to TRITAC days where we were not developing competing products but we’re developing things that had to inner operate with our products. It was a spirit an area that I think the COMSEC community was unique to them. You had people competing companies working together in the common interest and it paid off for everybody. We learned that and paid off. The STU-III sold hundreds of thousands of them. It was at the time when the cold war was at its peak. There were communication towers that were in major cities that were being read in real time by Soviet Intelligence Operations and we needed to secure our communications. The STU-III was the answer at that time. The predecessor equipment was the KY-3 which was like a couple of steamer trunks worth of equipment. I think when Reagan was shot, they showed him going into the hospital followed by these two gurneys of... of carrying these big cases of equipment. You can see on the lettering on it. It said KY-3. That was the secure communication device prior to STU-III. So that was the beginning. It was the first really. At that time, we were trying to develop a product that required digital signal processors where at the same time digital signal processors were being developed. So we were the guinea pig for that. We had to build voice encoders, modems, all digital using products that were being developed at the same time that we were trying to use  [15:12.3] Speaker 2: [15:30.7] McGrogan: [16:28.3] Speaker 2: [16:33.9] McGrogan: [16:59.7] Speaker 2: them. It took a while but we succeeded, developed essentially one of the best two wire echo cancelling modem that ever existed in this world. We had experienced where people would take them into remote outpost and things, embassies, and backward or countries and they say good luck with your secure modem there because we can’t even get a fax machine to work here. And they said it worked fine. It really compensated for all the odd-ball things that communication systems could do. It could live with them. That was one of our great successes. That led to other products which called the Secured Telephone Equipment which was an ISDN secure telephone and this was more advanced and things used newer technology but basically did the same function. As a matter of fact, they build an STU-III compatible mode because they had so many STU-III’s out there. They had still to talk to and they couldn’t replace them all. So that was the whole history of that. Again, we were working with other companies very similar, the same ones we did work with before, cooperating on a common specification that would work together. They had to inter-operate and we just had that community spirit not only within ourselves but within the community of interest which was small but very significant. The process of doing this work was still black art, no textbooks, no published papers to go on. The modems and things and the voice coders were pretty much open technology. The security aspects were still black art, worked with the customers, learned from the customers. Are you... were in a kind of in a unique position... you have basically become essentially a national asset. You’re the person who taught the other people as we came through the whole COMSEC area. That was really part of the joy of doing it is taking somebody raw to the business, teaching them. We had some of the most rigorous design review you ever saw. They were really bloody but nobody ... it wasn’t vicious. It was educational. People learned and we taught them and then they taught others. It was that close-knit group of people. We had our fights internally but nothing vicious. It was all friendly things. Things like you wouldn’t do today. We make ethnic jokes to other people in our team but today in this day in the world that’s not even allowed or permitted. But it was friendly. Nobody took it seriously and it was a form of bonding and friendship. As you were the younger engineer, did you feel like you had any mentors? A lot of the mentoring came from the customer. There was no real technical expertise to draw on but there was some good management and marketing expertise we had, we got a lot of business sole-source because of the personal relationships that were formed between our team and the customer’s team. And you were in the forefront of that.  [17:01.5] McGrogan: Yeah, we went with them, right? We would go to meeting. Marketing guy would take us. He would get us on the door. We’d sit down with counterparts and workout things and they liked us because they didn’t really know what they want and we didn’t know what they want. And it evolved over the course of the program but there was none of those let’s rewrite the contract every time they wanted to change something. We’re working together to solve the same problem, alright. Let’s work it together. You help us with our problems, will help you with yours. There was no employer sitting in the way of impeding progress. It was good natured. Let’s work. We’re a team. We’re teamed with our customer. We’re teamed even with our competitors. We’re all working at the same problem and it’s our common interest to solve the problem. And you had some significant competitors. Oh, yeah. How do you feel the customer looked at RCA? I think they liked us. We got a lot of sole source awards or at least two source or three source awards. We didn’t have to run out and compete with upstarts. As a matter of fact, it was hard for an up-start to get into this business because of the lure and the culture of not only working with this customer but the technology itself was essentially hush, hush. It wasn’t published. We taught each other. We taught our coworkers. And they learned from it and then they became the mentors to the next generation. And what about your supervisors? They never got in our way. That’s all I can say. I eventually became one of them for a while but then I didn’t really like that aspect of the job and went back and became a staff engineer. So you’re saying that just with that you do your work? As long as they were happy. I mean I had some tough supervisors that makes you ... Chalie Schmidt. I mentioned name, but a lot of people he hated and he was hated. But I got along with him fine because let me do my job. If I disagreed with him, he accepted my opinion rather than his own. Yeah, Charlie had a reputation as a very demanding person but the people who produced always seemed to like him. Oh, yeah and he threw some of the best Christmas parties ever. Won’t ask him how he finance them because it may not be legal but there was a lot of trips to Summerfield that paid for Christmas parties that nobody remembers ever going on. [18:02.6] Speaker 2: [18:05.8] McGrogan: [18:06.6] Speaker 2: [18:11.3] McGrogan: [18:51.6] Speaker 2: [18:55.0] McGrogan: [19:08.4] Speaker 2: [19:11.4] McGrogan: [19:36.9] Speaker 2: [19:46.2] McGrogan:  [20:10.5] Speaker 2: [20:25.0] McGrogan: So you’ve been through some very significant projects basically as a trailblazer. How do you think the RCA valued you as a part of this? Well, they let me keep working after I retired so... I think I retired the first time when the Lockheed Martin took over and I was 62 at that time so I could cash out my own RCA lump sum and keep working and go back to work the next day. Worked there three more years till I was 65 and retired again and then worked as essentially a full time consultant for a few more years and I think that really worked... I kind of phased into retirement gradually which was probably the best thing. I phased my way from full time to part time just call me when you need me sort of thing and that went on until about two years ago when I decided I’ve had enough and stopped coming into work. That was retirement. It wasn’t sudden. It was gradual and enjoyed every minute of it. Now, as an observer of what used to call or referred to you people as a cryptographers, there were some rather unusual people in your group, did you notice that? I was probably one of them. I didn’t think of them as unusual but everybody had their own personality and everybody accepted the way everybody else was and we could insult each other till we turned blue in the face and get together and work on solving a common problem the next day. It was just part of the team spirit. Okay. What would you say was the best thing about working for RCA? I think it was the fact that we wanted to be the best and we tried to be the best. Sometimes we succeeded, not always, but it was always a team effort. Everybody contributed and everybody got credit. You’ve heard some other people talk about the transitions from RCA into GE into Martin Marietta. How did that affect you? Well I think there was an era where I think they called like harvesting the seeds that we planted and that went on for a while, it didn’t result any growth and then all of a sudden we kind of find out what we were doing right in the beginning and then went back to it with some new opportunities. I remember my age 65 retirement was September of 1999. I retired on the day we submitted a proposal for something called ACTS that I had worked on that proposal. I was retired and taking a long vacation. I was over in Spain with my wife and we got a call that we won that program. That program went on. It started out, I think, maybe a hundred millions and it went on to hundreds of millions of dollars and I remember doing consulting by phone when I was away and working on that when I was here. It was one of the classic type programs. It was our roots. It was a replacement for the Mil Star system with secure communications basically from Mil Star. But it [21:30.7] Speaker 2: [21:47.9] McGrogan: [22:13.8] Speaker 2: [22:20.9] McGrogan: [22:40.4] Speaker 2: [22:53.1] McGrogan:  [24:34.8] Speaker 2: [24:43.4] McGrogan: [25:06.6] Speaker 2: [25:16.4] McGrogan: [25:58.3] Speaker 2: [26:05.8] McGrogan: [26:45.1] Speaker 2: [27:30.0] McGrogan: was one of the type programs that we done before and did better than anybody else. I think the customer loved it. I asked what was the best part about working for RCA? What was the worst part about working for RCA? I guess the Camden environment. It was never impressive. It didn’t bother me but it made it hard to get other people to come. We tried to hire somebody and they’d have to drive through Camden to get here and they said no thanks. It never bothered me. I mean I just got used to it I guess, developed a thick skin. Do you have any opinions on the assertion that RCA may have actually changed South Jersey? I think it was South Jersey. When I come up to... I mean nowhere you went. It was RCA. Go to a gas station, sign a credit card, receipt and they’d hand you an RCA pen. It was everywhere. Everybody had either knew somebody or had a family member. I mean at one time I worked with third generation RCA employees. It’s the mother. Grandfather started there during World War II and their children went there and they were the third generation all working at RCA. It was a way of life. So how would you sum up your career? Evidently, it was more than just a job. Oh yeah. It was something that I couldn’t ... it was hard to retire actually. Eventually got old enough that I like to sleep late in the morning but when I was working it felt nothing about getting up and coming in before seven o’clock in the morning and going home after six o’clock at night because I enjoyed every minute of it. It was getting something done and it was useful, enjoyable, and working with other people that I enjoyed. Well, Chip, I appreciate you coming in to do this and let me just say as just having been around here and having followed your career, you retired and then were asked to come back several times because they really felt you had knowledge that they simply couldn’t do without. You are genuinely one of the few national assets that we can talk about and what you have done with RCA is just phenomenal. So I appreciate you coming in. Part of it was I go back to my training and when I was in high school, somehow if you were in the first track of high school I went to, you were in the first track of everything. So if I was good in science and math, I also got into the first track with English and Literature and everything else. So in spite of the fact that there are a lot of people who were better writers than I back in when we were high school, when I got to college and work, I was the best writer among the people because of my training and communication was a skilled that very few engineers had which I had somehow manage to   [29:04.3] Speaker 2: [29:14.3] McGrogan: [END OF TRANSCRIPT] hone and teach. I had one coworker who will tell me to this day that I taught him to write in English. He was from South America originally and Poland and then South America and grew up in Brooklyn and never really learn to write clearly and he would give me something he had written and I bleed to death on reading, can give it back to him, and next time it’d read a lot better and it was communication skills that’s important as engineering skills or logic skills or anything else and writing proposals was much part of the business as performing on the job. We won’t mention his name but I can tell you that he did recognize you as one of his teachers. I think he actually appreciated it. Actually he ended up being a cowriter on a book. So that’s how far he came. So I feel good about some of the people I met who are now the leaders in this business.
RCAemployee;Carl Haslett;1958;2015;[START OF TRANSCRIPT] [0:00:07] Carl Haslett: [0:00:43] Male Speaker 2: [0:00:46] Carl Haslett: [0:00:47] Male Speaker 2: [0:00:50] Carl Haslett: My name is Carl Haslett. I started with RCA Broadcast 35 years ago. It was this month in 1980. And I worked for Broadcast up until the division was closed, just prior to a GE purchase. So, I worked for maybe a month or two as RCA recording systems on the government side, and then it was transferred to... or became GE at that point. Do you remember your first job assignment? Yes, I do. Could you talk to that a little bit? My first assignment was to... I came into the magnetic tape group of Broadcast, and they were getting the TR800 ready for... um, they had just unveiled it at the NAB show in Las Vegas, and it was a big hit. It was a very sophisticated tape recorder. A big advance in being able to do special effects right on the tape recorder itself. My first assignment was to draw a block diagram of that unit for the instruction books. Because, of course they did all the engineering, got that all out of the way. They’re ready to start producing them to give to customers, and they didn’t have instruction books. So, as a fresh out of college but with some broadcast background, they had me go around and talk to all the engineers, to get each of the individual pieces, so I could draw a single, block diagram for the whole unit. Um, did you have any kind of a mentor or anything when you started? Yes, I did. The guy I remember most was Walt Murdock. He was probably about my age now. He knew everybody in the plant. There was like, 4,000 people here then, in RCA and all the different parts of RCA. He seemed to know everything about the place, where everything was. As you go down the hall, there was nobody who didn’t give a wave to him and say “Hi.” Um, and he taught me a lot about getting... you know, where things were, and getting a good foothold on my career in the Broadcast group. And he was very knowledgeable on electrical circuits, things like that, too. And also, um, for more theoretical mentor was Bob [0:01:49] Male Speaker 2: [0:01:53] Carl Haslett: [0:02:55] Male Speaker 2: [0:03:03] Carl Haslett: Thomas. He was like the senior design video engineer, and I enjoyed working with him a lot. Okay, that’s great. Um, as far as major projects that you’ve worked on, what stands out? What do you remember? Well, the TR800, getting that into production and demo-ing it to different people. We were on the forefront of what everybody now thinks of as HDTV back then, and trying... even then, we knew that television needed to be improved. So, we embarked on a project to make, uh, what they call component recording. And we stunned the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers by showing up at a meeting that they were going to talk about doing equipment, and how they might do this. We stunned them by showing up with a recorder that actually did what they were thinking in theory. Nobody knew we were working on it. We did it under our advanced development work. So that was quite an accomplishment, and something that, you know, really kept us in the forefront for a couple of years. And also, when we eventually, were just doing a lot of camera work, it was the development of the first CCD cameras for electronic news gathering. Including a special shuttered one that allowed us to do freeze frames. For example, we shot some video at the racetrack, and did the equivalent of a photo finish using that camera. That was the first time, ‘cause normal television cameras in those days were all blurry if you tried to actually shoot something that was moving fast. Mm-hm, so how do you think RCA valued you as a part of the project? I think even right up to the end, at least in the broadcast division which is like where I was most of the time, um, very much so. Because we, um... I don’t... that’s part of the reason I’m still here with all through the following companies. Because, uh, some of the people that were involved then are still here, too. And it, uh, um... I mean, we had all kinds of other activities going on that were supported. Um, just... it was like a family. I mean, we had, uh... uh, first of all, we had a great relationship on being able to buy any RCA products. The “Family Store,” as it was called in those days. That kind of, uh, thing where they had, uh, things of value for the employees. Back when we had the 4,000 sum people here, we had two bowling leagues. Those were well supported by... By the company. We had softball games, we had, uh, Christmas parties for each of the individual sections, as well as an overall Christmas party. And I, um... There was recognition for us within our, um, uh, [0:04:38] Male Speaker 2: [0:04:43] Carl Haslett:  [0:06:20] Male Speaker 2: [0:06:31] Carl Haslett: technical community, too. Uh, you know, were either promotions or special on the spot award type things. So it was... It was very enjoyable to work for RCA. You used the term “family.” We’ve heard a lot about the RCA family. Um, what’s it mean to you? Well, um, when I came in, there was about six or seven of us that hired in within that year. And we... In addition to hanging around with some of the older employees, we kind of formed, I don’t know, I wouldn’t call it a clique. But, it was a group of us. You know, we did a lot of things outside of that. We’d go to, uh, happy hours for example on Fridays. A lot of us were on those bowling teams I mentioned. Uh, we had some other interests like scale model railroading, things like that, that we got together outside, and that’s why it was more than just a 9:00 to 5:00, or 8:00 to 5:00 type of job. I think that’s the best way to describe it. It was, um... uh, and like the older... And managers as well as engineers were pretty, um, like friendly and just interested in things that were going on besides what you were working on. For example, uh, this is kind of a funny story. I had... I guess it was about around 1985. I bought a boat off of Paul Morocco, who was by then the government communications recording manager. He had bought the boat from Charlie Rockfus, who was the mechanical, uh, manager for that group. And then I ended up selling the boat to another engineer in the group. So, there’s that kind of a thing. Where you knew so much about what other people did, and their outside activities, that you kind of shared experiences and things like that. So, um, that’s just the kind of thing that, you know, is like a family. Talk about your co-workers at work. Well, um, we were, uh... yeah, there was kind of two groups of us. There was the younger guys who had all come in right there in 1980, ‘cause they were staffing up for, uh, this push toward higher definition television, as well as digital recording. Um, we would go to lunch together all the time actually. Um, meaning we were younger, and all of us at that time were single. Uh, we would go to the...There were maybe six or seven lunch places right around here because of, again, 4,000-sum people plus Campbell Soup. One thing we rarely actually did was eat in the RCA cafeteria. We would tend to... And we had a little bit of free cash (chuckles), freer cash maybe than the older folks. And, uh, so we would go up the street to Shirley’s or George’s, or the New York Deli place. Uh, places like that to eat lunch. So, we actually eat lunch together almost all the time. Mm-hm. What was it like working with them? [0:08:38] Male Speaker 2: [0:08:44] Carl Haslett: [0:09:52] Male Speaker 2:  [0:09:56] Carl Haslett: Oh. Um, it was good. We were... We were all from the different schools. Like, you know, there was... I was from Lehigh University. Um, one of the other fellas was from Drexel. There was a young man I remember... This was especially interesting. He actually was one of the Vietnamese children airlifted out of Saigon, then went to school in Texas because his... His family, or he had family in Texas, was able to go there and become educated. And he spoke excellent English by the time he became an engineer. His name was P.T. Chung. And he was, uh, so interesting to be able to listen to some of his stories, but, he was a real hard worker. Uh, and just to understand, you know, somebody coming here under those circumstances, whereas the rest of us were, you know, Americans pretty much, that grew up and got the chance to go to college, and work for a corporation. Um, Doug Lidow was one of my roommates. Actually, he and I roomed together the first two years that I was here, because I knew him from Lehigh from, uh, before. Uh, I actually didn’t come here until I had my Master’s degree. So, he had a head start on me. Uh, but we got re-acquainted and, uh, we roomed together the first two years. Um, let’s see. Um, Jim Chamberlain is, uh, had come from the graduate school. Um, he was an expert in, uh, the beginnings of what you think of as video, um, movement on the screen. Things that everybody takes for granted today in the video games and stuff. He’s one of the people who developed that early on, and ended up coming here. Um, but it was a... Like I say it was... Everybody had, um, a wealth of background knowledge. That’s one thing that definitely, for RCA in general. Even a few of the, of the older engineers that I work with, and maybe didn’t have necessarily a college degree or an advanced degree, the wealth of knowledge that we had in constructing and building that equipment and solving problems. Uh, there’s so many times that we would just band together, and work to get something out to that National Association of Broadcast convention every year. To get new technology rolling and working. How did you stay up with the technology? Well in those days, uh, no internet of course. We had... First of all within broadcast, there was the Society of Motion Picture and television Engineers. So they published a journal. Uh, we had the I- EEE Journals on various topics, and technical magazines that have kind of gone by the wayside or had become web-based these days. I had already had, uh, my Master’s degree, but, a lot of RCA was very supportive of people going and getting advanced education at Drexel or Penn and so on. So, there were opportunities like that to [0:11:47] [0:12:33] Male Speaker 2: [0:12:36] Carl Haslett:  [0:13:44] Male Speaker 2: [0:13:47] Carl Haslett: stay abreast of the technology. And we were, uh... especially us younger guys were, um, taking along to all of these National Association of Broadcaster conventions, or the SYMTI conventions twice a year. Again, to see what the competitors are doing, and to keep up with, uh, the papers that were being presented. Talk about your supervisors. What were they like? Uh, my first supervisor was Ukah Hemmeweiman, who went on to, um, whenever RCA, uh, ceased to exist or at least the broadcast division did, he went on to be a manager at Panasonic. And uh, he was... He was from Finland, and he had a, uh, tremendous background in television. Um, he was great to work with. He always called us “fellas”. That’s again that family idea. It was always, “Fellas, fellas, we must get this research finished.” Or, “We must get this circuit board done by the week, end of the week.” Um, he was really good to work for. Um, Dick West was another manager that was very dedicated toward getting things accomplished and done. Uh, as I remember Lee Hedland was head of the entire group of the tape world, and he was a... He really was a pretty good iron hand, ‘cause we got caught a lot of times coming back from Friday lunches, taking two hours ‘cause we would ride over in a large nine-passenger station wagon to someplace in Philly that has lunch. And come back and, uh, he would be kind of looking and seeing us come down the hall. So we all had to stay, you know, 5:30-6:00 or whatever to be sure we had put in the time. How did they treat you? Uh, I would say certainly fairly. And uh, more than just a manager- employee kind of thing. They were... um, quite often we were... Well for example, uh, the bowling teams had a combination of managers and engineers. Um, so we socialized as well as, uh, working, uh, on the projects. They were, um, only demanding when... And it was a group kind of thing. We knew we needed to get things done and out the door. Um, but nobody... Rarely do we have any personal problems with any of the managers. Okay, now, RCA Broadcast basically closed rather abruptly? Yes, it did. Did that mean you got laid off, or what happened? Well, it was a... It was a real surprise. Um, I know for a couple of reasons that the abruptness came all the way from the top. Because [0:15:26] Male Speaker 2: [0:15:29] Carl Haslett: [0:16:16] Male Speaker 2: [0:16:23] Carl Haslett: [0:16:24] Male Speaker 2: [0:16:27] Carl Haslett:  [0:18:26] Male Speaker 2: [0:18:36] Carl Haslett: myself and a couple of other engineers were scheduled to take a camera up to one of the vendor locations. I mean, a very extensive trip. And I know there’s no way they would have planned that, and had that up to the last second if... If they had any inkling that, that was going to be closed, and that project would become cancelled. Um, what happened to... All of the engineers were either able... They either decided to go out on their own. But, the rest of RCA was still in a hiring mode in most places. So, I actually interviewed at Moorestown and ATL and, uh, the government side. And that’s like... Because I had known there was a large synergy between the government recoding group, and they were on the fifth floor and we were on the second floor in the old buildings. So myself, folks like Tim Orman, um, Matt Tige, and a number of other engineers, I guess, Tom Casney would be one who’s still here. Um, we were told, “If you just want to come up here and work, just come up here and work. You can interview the other places if that’s what you want to do, but, we have plenty of openings up here.” So, it turned out that it was just a very... Just worked out well for everybody that all the engineers ended up being placed, or if they had decided to go out on their own, they did. But, no one had ended up losing up a job, in the engineering world anyway, with the result of that closing. So, it just was very fortunate timing. We also talk about RCA changing South Jersey. Do you have any opinions on that? Well, um, up until recently I probably wouldn’t have thought that much until... I’ve been involved in, um, a lot of um, acoustic amateur music in the last several years. And it’s really rare if I don’t run into somebody who says, “Oh, my dad worked at RCA.” Or, they’re really aware of what it had meant at one time. Uh, so, it definitely had an impact because it such a large employer, I know long before I was here. And uh, as a result of that it definitely had influence, uh, certainly in the older days. We have a lot of photographs here still in our cafeteria about the... From the heyday, we realize how busy things were. But, yeah... Um, what is your view of RCA in the industry? What was their reputation? Um, how did they stack up against the other companies? Uh, in broadcast they were the premier supplier of equipment and maintainers, because of a well thought out approach to having the manufacturing. And uh, a service company that was available, something like 24, 48 hours on-site. A great customer support, that type of thing. [0:19:44] Male Speaker 2: [0:19:57] Carl Haslett:  [0:22:18] Male Speaker 2: [0:22:30] Carl Haslett: And in the government side, when I transferred over there, ‘cause we had maintained that or tried to maintain that reputation. Um, they were a... A premier government supplier for the aircraft tape recorders. Uh, Small ICBM, some other projects over the years that... Uh, the radar systems, I guess, GWEN, the Ground Wave Emergency Network. Um, I never went any place that they didn’t have a superior reputation like that. And I do have another little funny story. Uh, on one of the broadcast trips to, of all places, imagine this being a place you’d have to travel in the middle of winter. The SYMTE convention was at Disney World. So, we go to Disney World, and I was with one of the other managers on the way back. Um, we go in and we have... In those days, there was a company called Travel Co with an RCA, almost like, uh, the RCA pencil I have here with a logo on it. They had the RCA logo on our tickets. Of course, those days everything was tickets and the funky printing. So, we walk up to the counter and, uh, the guy at the airlines says, “Oh RCA, we love you guys ‘cause you do the Space Mountain and this, and then all the attractions. And you support all that stuff, so great.” (laughs). The manager says, “Well if you like us so well, why don’t you bump us up to first class?” And the guys goes, “Oh yeah, no problem.” Well, I assume he’s joking, right? We give the ticket, we’re ticketed in and we go in to the plane, we’re in first class. So, we definitely had, uh... You know, RCA really meant something to the world. Okay, Carl. Um, any other things you want us to talk about? Any, uh, other recollections? Any comments you want to make before we wrap this up? Um, just that uh, I’m glad to see that there are efforts to keep RCA alive, in a certain sense. Um, one of the things my father had, which is a cherished relic to me, I actually have not only an RCA small gramophone, but, I also have a wax recording disc. In other words, a record maker. It’s a lathe that you record a 78, and it’ll play on any 78 machine. To think of the legacy of all that kind of stuff not getting lost in the modern world of, uh, dot coms, and all the other things that are happening that... You know, I... I am glad to see efforts like that, and, uh, would hope that, that kind of thing continue, ‘cause that’s... Um, you now work for L-3. You’ve been through all the transitions. Um, is there any residual of the RCA family that you can still see or feel around here? Uh, a little bit. Um, uh, most of the folks in upper management right now were with RCA at some point. Um, and we still have softball [0:23:35] Male Speaker 2: [0:23:47] Carl Haslett:  [END OF TRANSCRIPT] games, we still have some, uh... Maybe once a year, we have a little picnic thing outside. Um, I guess it’s uh, it’s not completely been eliminated, but, I think that’ because the people are still... uh, a lot of us are still here. And uh, are interested in that kind of thing, softball tournament and things like that. Keeping that stuff going.
RCAemployee;Bryan Hodgson;1960;2015;[START OF TRANSCRIPT] [0:00:06] Bryan Hodgson: [0:00:16] Female Speaker: [0:00:20] Bryan Hodgson: [0:00:41] Female Speaker: [0:00:46] Bryan Hodgson: [0:00:48] Female Speaker: [0:00:50] Bryan Hodgson: [0:00:59] Female Speaker: [0:01:04] Bryan Hodgson: [0:01:14] Female Speaker: [0:01:22] Bryan Hodgson: [0:01:35] Female Speaker: [0:01:37] Bryan Hodgson: [0:01:38] Female Speaker: [0:01:42] Bryan Hodgson: I'm Bryan Hodgson. If you want to be formal, Dr. Bryan Hodgson. I worked in RCA Moorestown in the same building for about 20 years. Great. What was the first position you had with RCA? The first position was as a unit manager. The doctor, Dr. Bill Patton, brought me into the company. The original title was going to be air- born and electronic warfare antenna, but by the time I actually reached my desk that job had gone away and so I just went into an R&D function with the company. What was that like? Did you...What was it like being a brand new employee at RCA? Oh yes, brand new, yes. What was that like? It was the biggest company I had ever worked for, so it was a little daunting initially, but I got on fine with the rest of the people in the building, so I had no problem really. Did you have a mentor, somebody who led you through as a young... Mo Briezewas the manager I reported to and so he was very good, really. I found him very, very workable with...workable with. What kind of things did he do to sort of help you become a good...to inspire you or make you a better worker? I think the cooperation I got from him and just sorting out any problems I had and basically he was very approachable, which made it easier. Approachability. Speak up just a little more? Sure, no problem. How were your coworkers? Well, of course they were all engineers, so were all fine (laughter). An engineer is an engineer and usually they're very much, very similar in the way you can approach them and the assistance that you can get from them. They usually give you any assistance they can, so I got on quite well with them, yes. [0:02:03] Female Speaker: [0:02:06] Bryan Hodgson: [0:02:10] Female Speaker: [0:02:13] Bryan Hodgson: [0:02:33] Female Speaker: [0:02:35] Bryan Hodgson: [0:02:54] Female Speaker: [0:02:59] Bryan Hodgson: [0:03:22] Female Speaker: [0:03:26] Bryan Hodgson: [0:03:26] Female Speaker: [0:03:27] Bryan Hodgson: [0:03:27] Female Speaker: [0:03:28] Bryan Hodgson: [0:03:34] Female Speaker: [0:03:41] Bryan Hodgson: [0:03:42] Female Speaker: [0:03:43] Bryan Hodgson: So you feel like you worked like a team then? Certainly, certainly it was. Yes. What was the most significant project you worked on? Well of course, after about five years in that R&D function, they moved me into the program management office, which was AEGIS based and so I was working on the AEGIS arrays for about the last 12 years of my time there. Can you tell us about AEGIS? Well, as you know, it's an antenna. They put four of them on a ship so that it can see 360 degrees around and they weigh about six tons and they take about a year to build and the Navy seems to love them. What was your role in helping build them or develop them? It was hardware, between hardware and paperwork. I was involved in trying to work on many snags that arose during the manufacture and there was a significant amount of paperwork went into each array and basically it generated a three-inch thick file for each antenna and so I was involved in keeping that all straight. What was the biggest snag you ever encountered in doing all this? Time. Time. Time, yes. Trying to get everything done fast enough? Yes, that's right. Try to get...pull all the ends together, yes. How did your...so you, you...after about five years, you got started on AEGIS and how did your career progress from there? Well I... How many did you work on? When I came out to my unit. In 1988, GE took over and their philosophy was that every unit manager had to have about 10 or 12 people working for him. Well, I only had three people working for him, so my unit manager position went out the window and I became a senior engineer...in the program of organization.  [0:04:05] Female Speaker: [0:04:09] Bryan Hodgson: [0:04:12] Female Speaker: [0:04:15] Bryan Hodgson: [0:04:47] Female Speaker: [0:04:48] Bryan Hodgson: [0:04:50] Female Speaker: [0:04:55] Bryan Hodgson: [0:04:56] Female Speaker: [0:05:02] Bryan Hodgson: [0:05:03] Female Speaker: [0:05:05] Bryan Hodgson: [0:05:08] Female Speaker: [0:05:09] Bryan Hodgson: [0:05:13] Female Speaker: [0:05:13] Bryan Hodgson: [0:05:15] Female Speaker: [0:05:19] Bryan Hodgson: [0:05:52] Female Speaker: And how did that... did that change your job a lot? No, not really, no, no. Did you find it...how different was it working under GE for you? I don't know. They weren't there for long enough. Here...a small anecdote with RCA. You know that they had an RCA store in the building, okay. Well, they use to sell televisions, all that sort of stuff. Well, quite frequently at 11 o'clock in the morning, you will see factory people watching baseball games in the RCA store, okay. Well, GE came in and that stopped dead. That didn't go on anymore, so you can see GE was concerned about tightening up the ship quite a bit. A different culture. Very different, yes, yes. But you don't feel like in your day-to-day work that a different culture changed things too much? No, not that I saw. And did you continue on with L-3 then or did you retire before then? Sorry, did I continue on with? After GE left and L-3 came in? If I don't forget, then it became Martin Marietta. I'm sorry... Okay. Then finally it became Lockheed and I retired in '02. In '02? Mm-huh. What was the best thing working for RCA? I think the overall experience, I can't point to any one particular item, but I enjoyed my time with...in that building, okay, whichever name was on the front, I enjoyed my time there. I never thought that when I joined them in '82 that I would wind up retiring 20 years later. I never thought that the job would last that long, but the Navy would just keep on buying ships and I said, hey, you buy the ships and we'll stick antenna's on them, okay. What was the worst thing about working at RCA?  [0:05:58] Bryan Hodgson: [0:06:06] Female Speaker: [0:06:17] Bryan Hodgson: [0:06:18] Female Speaker: [0:06:20] Bryan Hodgson: [0:06:57] Female Speaker: [0:07:00] Bryan Hodgson: [0:07:14] Female Speaker: [0:07:17] Bryan Hodgson: [0:07:20] Female Speaker: [0:07:30] Bryan Hodgson: [0:07:44] Female Speaker: [0:07:46] Bryan Hodgson: [0:07:47] Female Speaker: [0:07:49] Bryan Hodgson: [0:07:50] Female Speaker: [0:07:51] Bryan Hodgson: [0:07:52] Female Speaker: I don't know that there was one. Nothing sticks in my mind as being a particular nuisance. No, I don't recall there being one. Yeah, great. How did you handle the changes of technology that happened in the 20-30 years that you were working for GE? Uh... Did they have to train you. Is there things that would change with... Yeah. One of the biggest changes that occurred on the arrays was a change in the style of coaxial cable that they started to use and that required an immense amount of mechanical effort, okay, but one of my parts of it was presenting what was happening inside the factory to all the Navy Brass and all the incoming RCA and GE people, so giving presentations was one of my great pleasures when I was there, I always used to enjoy that. So you get to explain what's going on to everyone else? Well, you see, I always used to introduce hardware or graphics or moving items and I could hold the audience quite well, and I got the compliment once where one of the people came up and said, well, I wish you had been my professor at college. Do you have good jokes? Not... not so much jokes as...it was graphics. It was good graphics, yes. Good graphics makes things interesting. Did you have a social life with your coworkers? Not so much. I have followed up with them since then, but no, I had a family of three sons. The three sons were all very active in swimming and so any social life was basically resolved around water. Yeah, living from pool to pool. Pool, pool, pool. Where did you live why you were...? We lived in Voorhees In Voorhees Yes. What was Voorhees like when you first moved there? Was it really different?  [0:07:55] Bryan Hodgson: [0:08:12] Female Speaker: [0:08:16] Bryan Hodgson: [0:08:19] Female Speaker: [0:08:27] Bryan Hodgson: [0:08:27] Female Speaker: [0:08:28] Bryan Hodgson: [0:08:29] Female Speaker: [0:08:32] Bryan Hodgson: [0:08:36] Female Speaker: [0:08:43] Bryan Hodgson: [0:09:05] Female Speaker: [0:09:11] Bryan Hodgson: [0:09:16] Female Speaker: [0:09:20] Bryan Hodgson: [0:09:28] Female Speaker: [0:09:34] Bryan Hodgson: Obviously there was a tremendous amount of construction going on there since, okay. We moved into a small subdivision, Acorn Hill, and it was good. It was convenient for Moorestown. I could get to Moorestown relatively easily. Mm-huh. And were other RCA employees near you? Not that I know of, no, not that I know. Like your kids school, their classmates weren't necessarily...their parents weren't RCA employees necessarily? No. Not very many of them? No. Cherry Hill was the big center for a lot of that I think. That's right. All of my guys went to Eastern, you know, went to Eastern. So, what did your kids think about your career at RCA? Did they know what you did or did you talk about it with them? They knew what I did, but it's not easy discussing some of the aspects of the job to them. It was not easy stuff to describe. They did go to one or two of the open houses and they saw where I worked on. I think they were suitably impressed. Good. And did you...could you share information about AEGIS with them or is that all classified? Well, some of the general stuff you could, but classified stuff I still don't say anything about. I can imagine for boys, that would be an interesting topic? Well, they knew dad had a secret clearance, but I mean, beyond that, they didn't know. So, there's this trend called the RCA family. What does that mean to you? It means that RCA was a very family oriented company when I joined them, which as I said GE put an end to a lot of that when they came in. So, in the open days and this sort of thing, it was family oriented. The fact that the company would bother to bring families in, like  [0:10:12] Female Speaker: [0:10:17] Bryan Hodgson: [0:10:47] Female Speaker: [0:10:52] Bryan Hodgson: [0:10:54] Female Speaker: [0:10:56] Bryan Hodgson: [0:11:06] Female Speaker: [0:11:15] Bryan Hodgson: every other year, I think it was. It meant that there was an interest in the company and keeping things running smoothly. So, how would you sum up your time at RCA? I guess the 20 years, I enjoyed it very much. I had a good career there. I enjoyed it. The work was always very innovative. You could introduce new ideas, where you thought they were worthwhile and I got on...I interacted a lot with a lot of Navy personal because we were selling something to the Navy, so I interacted with them. I got along fine with them and as you may guess sometimes the accent works wonders. How was it working with the government. So, you worked with the Navy a lot. Was it...was it? Yes, it's the...people that... Part of the snags... Were they... No, no. Very seldom. Occasionally I had to chase after them to get a final...final signature or something of that sort, but, no, I got along fine with them. Great. Well anything else you want to share about your experience at RCA? I don't know. I could tell you some of the stuff that we built. In that initial R&D period before GE came in it was all very much, a lot of R&D money lying around, and, so we would involved in developing different types of antenna radiating elements, different types of different frequency band radiating elements, and all this other stuff, and one of the things that was...was a very light weight antenna. We built a very light weight antenna, built out of carbon fiber, built out of carbon fiber and metal-foil. This thing was about 8 feet long, about the size of that cabinet back there. You could quite easily lift it up and carry it around. I think the ultimate intention was sort of put this in the belly of a drone or some sort of light airplane for looking down on the ground, though I never did hear how far it went. I never did hear if it was ever used. Thank you so much for your time. Very good. I enjoyed your... Nice talking. [0:12:14] Female Speaker: [0:12:16] Bryan Hodgson: [0:12:16] Female Speaker: [0:12:17] Bryan Hodgson:  [0:12:18] Female Speaker: [0:12:19] Bryan Hodgson: [0:12:37] Female Speaker: [0:12:40] Bryan Hodgson: [0:12:57] Female Speaker: [0:12:59] Bryan Hodgson: [0:13:18] Female Speaker: [0:13:21] Bryan Hodgson: [END OF TRANSCRIPT] Thank you. I'm very happy to be here. This is just like being home in my basement. I can see some of the pieces I brought in here. I can still recognize them and I have another nipper. He's halfway between that one and this one. He stands about this high, so he's got to come down here sometime, okay. Did you get it...at the RCA store? I forgot where he came from, but what I used to do when anybody retired or left, I use to go through their desk after they left and pull out all the RCA stuff, so which is why I got bookcases full of stuff and boxes full of stuff and nippers and radios and you name it, all sorts of stuff. You had a lot of things to keep. Yes. Because when we came over to the United States in '67, yeah, you couldn't really visualize where you were going to be, like 40 years later, but basically we were very fortunate. We were very fortunate. What we had to do was to learn to drive on the wrong side of the road and use their funny money, but basically it was a very good move. Thank you so much for your conversation with us today. My pleasure, thank you.
RCAemployee;Bob Thompson;1935;2015;[START OF TRANSCRIPT] [0:00:07] Bob Thompson:[0:01:06] Male Speaker 2: [0:01:12] Bob Thompson:I am Bob Thompson and I began in June of 1957. I was a Co-op student from Drexel Institute of Technology and continued all my Co-op assignments in Camden in the, um, what was the...become the communication systems division. And, ah, graduated in ’61 and after some assignments in Moorestown and Manhattan and Princeton, I finally got a permanent job in Camden. And then quickly ah, became an engineer in the applied research division in building ten on the eight floor, ah, doing designs for video recorders.Okay. So what was your first assignment and how did you feel about it?Well, ah, my first assignment was to... as a Co-op student was to, ah, help the engineers develop a better solid state digital component called a Flipflop. And in those days, ah, a Flipflop was a number of transistors, capacitors and resistors on a single plugg-in card. And, um, I had to test uh, new type transistors and new type capacitors, and, ah, it was a little bit difficult for a first-year electrical engineering student who hadn’t had any electronics background at all. But I was very fortunate to work in the laboratory with some very expert laboratory technicians who, uh, you know picked me up and carried me by my elbows.Okay. And then you, uh, came to RCA. What major projects did you work on?So, ah, I guess one of the most exciting projects was one with the National Security Agency. And, um, we’re pledged not to discuss exactly what we were doing with them except that it was well- known that we were building very exotic recording equipment for them in their activities overseas.Um, and then from there, where did you go?Well, ah, some of the more interesting assignments involved a video recording for the broadcast television industry. At that time almost every TV station and every facility that made programs for TV used an RCA television camera, especially after colored television became very popular. Uh, but there was always a host of video recording equipment to go with the TV cameras, and that was a split between the Ampex Corporation, a company that invented video recording and RCA, the company who licensed Ampex for all the television[0:02:15] Male Speaker 2: [0:02:21] Bob Thompson:[0:02:54] Male Speaker 2: [0:02:57] Bob Thompson:[0:05:04]circuits that were in the video recorders. And in an essence, we split the market with Ampex corporation. So there was for every time a network or a TV station wanted to buy recording equipment, there’d be a competition, and that was where the fun began.Then what that led to was some exciting new technology in video recording and the creation of standards for the videotapes so that, um, the company that made the program and put it on tape could send it to a studio and the studio had a compatible video recorder to play it back, and, ah, I became involved in the standards committees. And this was a combination of the manufacturers RCA and Ampex and others and Sony, and the networks CBS, NBC, ABC, which were the only networks at the time.And, ah, that led to some very interesting political, uh, maneuvering. One example is, um, when high definition was first exhibited in Japan, it became all the rage. And the standards committee for determining the number of lines per picture height and the number of picture elements per picture width and the frame rates, uh, were all very important issues that the Japanese wanted to solidify right around their development. But it didn’t make sense from the point of view of users. So it became important for committee members like myself to help, uh, guide the standard so that it would be maximally useful for the users, but also not such a burden that the manufacturers would have to redo everything they had done up to that time.And we had just come out with a new camera that, ah, we were trying to sell all around the world, and the head guy from the company in Japan called NHK, the, ah, television big deal in Japan said, “We will buy your first production run of cameras if you convince your standards committee to use our format exactly as it is right now.” And of course we couldn’t do that but then I thought it was a very interesting ploy on their part.Now, you, ah, donated a color TV camera to us. Um, they, ah, charge coupled device camera, um, what was that about?Well, ah, we, we had pioneered the use of computer-controlled cameras that use conventional tube pickups as the sensitive device that converts images into electronics. Um, and then one of the engineers said, “You know, that...those tubes require a lot of circuitry for high voltage and, um, control and complex computer, we could actually improve the imagery if we used a solid state device to replace the tubes.” So, ah, based on a lot of work done at the Sarnoff Princeton Laboratories, they decided that charge coupled devices would be very appropriate to replace the tubes in a[0:07:07] Male Speaker 2: [0:07:19] Bob Thompson:[0:08:53]television camera, and they developed a very impressive model at Princeton and then the engineers in Camden took that and actually made it into a camera, and took a model to the World Series and showed off one of the, ah, big advantage of the solid-state camera.And that was...you could see the scenes of the pitcher’s pitch as it came toward home play. And, ah, once that was shown at the World Series, almost every TV camera customer, ah, around the United States called in and wanted to buy one right away. Of course, they weren’t available for a number of years. But, um, as a result of that development, we did have a production run of those solid-state cameras. And in addition, we won an Emmy Award, a, ah, Emmy Award for engineering achievement, and that went right on the tail of a previous Emmy Award we had won for the first camera recorder. We made the tube type camera and a small video recorder into a single package that you could carry around on your shoulder including a battery.So as far as your work at RCA, how did your career progress? How was the experience?Well, um, when I graduated, ah, I became one of several thousand engineers that were here in Camden. I remember, ah, our first day as a Co-op student in the orientation. The, ah, the head person said, “You’re joining 16,000 people here in Camden.” And that wasn’t including the several thousand that were in Moorestown at that time. So, ah, being one of the several thousand engineers you always wondered what was going to happen. And, um, the, ah, the whole idea was to, ah, get your project done in a timely manner and get the circuit that you were working on as an electrical engineer, ah, to be completed in time to meet the program schedule. And then, another point was to work with the mechanical engineers who had a difficult job of, ah, putting these circuits on to circuit boards and into cabinets, ah, to make the project remain on schedule.Um, talk a little bit about your co-workers. How was it?Well, that was a very interesting thing. Ah, growing up in South Jersey, the only people I ever knew were people from the local area. But as soon as I became an engineer here, ah, the, uh, engineers around you were from New York State, Wisconsin, Virginia and, ah, it was, ah, exciting to meet people that you didn’t grow up with. The thing I remember most about...most of these new engineers I met was how smart they were. The, um, the portion of the company called College Relations made it a point to try and hire number one or number two in their graduating class of electrical engineers or[0:09:58] Male Speaker 2: [0:10:08] Bob Thompson:[0:11:40] Male Speaker 2: [0:11:43] Bob Thompson:[0:12:55] Male Speaker 2: [0:12:57] Bob Thompson:mechanical engineers, which were mainly the type of engineers we worked with on our projects.What about your supervisors?Well, ah, the one good thing that, ah, where we were very fortunate in the applied research group was that, ah, the supervisors were all comparatively young. And, ah, as soon as they reached 40, someone from one of the operating divisions would pluck them out into a bigger assignment either in Camden or Moorestown or maybe Indianapolis or Manhattan for a bigger job, and that always, ah, left room for a younger guy to become a supervisor and then the young supervisor to become a manager. So, ah, as a result, um, you got to rub shoulders with these brilliant engineers who were always working their way up, ah...You work with them two or three years and, boom, they’d get a promotion to another business.It sounds like there was a lot of hiring from within as far as the promotions spot.Oh, definitely. It, it was very unusual to see an assignment of a manager or a vice president that came from outside the company. Ah, I think the priority in the...We called it the personnel department at that time. I guess, ah, it might be called human resources by now. Ah, but personnel seemed to guide the presidents to hire from within.Um, in several of the interviews, the term “the RCA family” has come up, what does that mean to you?Yeah, that, that, ah, that term “the RCA family” has great meaning because even though it was used by the personnel department and, um, and it was a talking point, you really had the impression that it was true, that they considered you, ah, more than just an employee. And, um, even in meetings with your supervisor and in larger meetings were his supervisor would be present, ah, you had this feeling of a true family. Um, I remember, ah, once a week the head of applied research who was three levels up would have a meeting with all the engineers and technicians and he would give a little speech and he would give out a piggy bank to each of the new fathers that were in the room. And, ah, I think that was a, ah, a good example of how everybody bought into the family concept.What about socializing outside of work?Well, ah, one nice thing was, ah, every Friday we would get together and drive a couple of blocks down into South Camden and go to an Italian restaurant. And we always had an hour, a one hour lunch[0:14:07] Male Speaker 2: [0:14:12] Bob Thompson:[0:14:49] Male Speaker 2: [0:14:56] Bob Thompson:[0:16:22] Male Speaker 2: [0:16:26] Bob Thompson:[0:17:34] Male Speaker 2: [0:17:40] Bob Thompson:[0:18:09] Male Speaker 2: [0:18:22] Bob Thompson:[0:19:11] Male Speaker 2: [0:19:21] Bob Thompson:period, and on Fridays we might even extend it to one and a half hours. And, ah, there would always be a group of 12, 16, 20 people sitting around a big table at the Italian restaurant in South Camden. Um, and then, ah, more than once a month we would get together after work. Um, during the, um, layoff times, ah, when engineers would get better jobs elsewhere because they were on layoff, we would have these, ah, great going away parties for them, ah, and, um, they were always fun.Well, we’ve also heard about, um, Christmas Eve and Christmas parties and things like that. Do you have any...Well, ah, I was, ah, single for about 10 years after I started here. So those Christmas parties were always a joy for me because I was not obliged to go home, ah, right after work. And, ah, there was, ah, always quite a bit of celebrating going on in the Christmas parties.We’ve also had some suggestion that RCA had a significant influence on South Jersey. Do you have any, any input there?The one thing I remember is, ah, the, the influence on Camden, ah... On a Friday night, ah, which was pay day for many of the employees, it was, uh, difficult to walk along the sidewalk on, uh, Broadway or Federal Street because, ah, there were crowds out shopping, ah, in the heart of Camden. And, um, this extended for blocks and blocks and blocks, and I attributed...well, not only to RCA but to the other businesses in the city that included Campbell’s Soup.Um, how do you, uh, how would you rate RCA among the industries?Well, uh, since it’s the only place I ever worked, it’s hard to compare that, however, in comparing notes with customers and partners, ah... For example, we had a very important customer, the Lockheed Missile and Space Company in Sunnyvale, California. And, ah, we work closely with a number of their employees and we learned that, um, we were a lot better off, ah, than the average Lockheed employee. Um, one of the things, of course, was the, ah, the family... um, and the other was the way your, um, supervisor handled you, ah, which was, ah, more paternal than what you would learn in a business.What would you say was the best part working for RCA?The money. [laughter] Uh, RCA was not shy about, ah, giving you a raise if, ah, you warranted it. And, ah, when I became a supervisor, uh, I never felt constrained about giving any of my engineers a raise if everyone felt they deserved it.[0:20:27] Male Speaker 2: [0:20:33] Bob Thompson:[0:21:02] [0:21:05][0:21:32] [0:21:37][0:22:29] [0:22:37][0:23:55]Male Speaker 2: Bob Thompson:Male Speaker 2: Bob Thompson:Male Speaker 2: Bob Thompson:What was the worst thing about working for RCA?Well, of course, the worst was, um, when large government contracts would come to an end and there had to be layoffs. And you had to spend hours and hours and hours in meetings making determinations of which engineers to keep and which engineers to let go.So how would you sum up your time at RCA?I felt it was terrific. The, ah, one of the, ah, best things that ever happened to me was finally our, ah, television equipment business had to close, and, ah, the president of our company, Joe Volpe, ah, instead of looking for a new job, he stayed with the group and made sure every single person in his huge business had a job offer somewhere whether it was inside RCA or from another company, and he never gave up until each person had a job.That says a lot. Any stories you remember or anything that, uh, particularly stick out from...from your experience?Wow. [laughter] One of my favorite stories involves a $2 billion competition for five warships for the country of Norway and, uh, we had this, ah, brilliant engineer who would travel with us to Norway and, uh, the Norwegians were extremely technically oriented but they also had a budget. And, ah, the Norwegian engineers would ask these very, very difficult technical questions, and, ah, so, um, one thing I made sure I did as the leader of the team, uh, trying to win this competition was to make sure I had a, uh, a fairly smart engineer with me to handle the difficult questions.And, we came down to the final meeting where the Norwegians were going to decide between the ship builder and the combat system supplier, the ship builder being the Spanish shipyard Bathan and RCA the supplier of Aegis naval combat systems and a uh, German shipbuilder and, ah, the combat system supplier for that German shipbuilder and, ah...Our chief engineer, Lenny Woyton, got up in front of the Norwegians and, ah, he was trying to paint this, ah, picture of how, ah, we have all these exotic brand new computer programs and state of the art computers, and, that ah, presentation went over very well. Then we went back at night and we had to continue the presentation the next day. We got a phone call from home that said, ah, that US Navy will not let us, uh, use those exotic computers or programs for the Norwegians. They have to use a, ah, much older computer called ANUYK 43.[0:25:39][0:26:17] Male Speaker 2: [0:26:29] Bob Thompson:[END OF TRANSCRIPT]So the next morning, Lenny got up, he went in front of the group and he told them how he had this, uh, good idea overnight to save them some money and use this, uh, very tried and true ANUYK 43 computer to house the very mature computer programs that were in use all over the world. And he never got a question from the Norwegian engineers. They bought it and they gave us this $2 billion contract.That’s classic. I love it. Alright, well that’s good. Um, anything else that, ah, that I haven’t asked or that you have thought of that you want to add to the...The one..The one thing that, ah, I recall was, in the early days, there was so much activity in Camden that it was very hard to drive to work. The roads were clogged. Of course, everybody either came to work at 7:00, 7:30 or 8 o’clock. And, ah, a lot of people had bought homes up in Willingboro, ah, it might have been even called Levittown at that time, and the roads were so clogged that somebody bought a boat and he would take people from the dock here up to Willingboro on the Delaware River in his boat to avoid the traffic jams coming back and forth.
RCAemployee;Bob Reisse;1936;2015;[START OF TRANSCRIPT] [0:00:07] Bob: Yeah. My name is Bob Reisse. I’m from Cherry Hill, New Jersey. I started RCA not as out of college, I started at Bendix Aviation out of college, and I lasted there four months. It was such a boring job that, uh, it was hard to take, and the draft was on. And you, if you quit or drafted for a job, you got, uh, drafted into the Army. And I met a guy on the bus going out, I said, “How do you like your job?” He said, “This is garbage.” And I said, “What can we do?” And he says, “Well, you can join... we can join the navy, go to OCS, and it’s three years. So you lose an extra year, but you’re an officer. You’re getting more pay.” And so that’s what we did. We, uh, went down... we were in New York. We were in downtown New York, and signed up for the, uh, Navy, up in, uh, Newport and, uh, we went up there, and it was four or so months. And then, uh, after graduation, they sent me out to, uh, Treasure Island in California for six months of electronic study, which I learned more there than I did in college. It was, uh, five days a week, eight hours a day. No duties, so we had the weekends off. And we, uh, bought a car, and we used to travel around California, and all the, uh, parks, the national parks and everything, so it was great. And then I had to serve three years in the navy, and I got out in ‘48, I think. Or ‘53, ‘50, um, ‘58 I guess, and I started RCA. I came in, and I think in interviewed with... by Bye Pewitt. I think he was there, Sam, uh, Bye Pewitt, and he was very good. And he hired me, and that’s where I started. And, uh, I was there till GE came in, and GE bought up RCA. And they said... I was near retirement. I was within a year of retiring, and they said, “We’ll give you a year’s pay, and, uh, you could take your lump sum and leave.” And uh, that’s what I did... I [chuckle] it was great. I took the lump sum, and the one year’s pay, and left and uh, it was... it was a good deal. So you started at RCA around ‘58? Yeah. Okay. What was your first project? Oh boy. I... probably just the little amplifiers, and then, ah, then I got into...uh, multipliers started, and I was able to, uh, get a job, uh, in ATL because I said before that the fella I was working for, we built a radio this big, and then we’re gonna make a small box radio. And he [0:01:59] [0:02:44] Male Speaker: [0:02:47] Bob: [0:02:49] Male Speaker: [0:02:50] Bob: [0:04:50] [0:05:17] Male Speaker: [0:05:22] Bob: [0:05:46] Male Speaker: [0:05:49] Bob: called a meeting of... he had seven engineers sitting around and he said, “What color are we gonna make the knobs?”And I said, “I can’t, I can’t work for this guy. It’s gonna be a disaster.” So I was able to go up to Advanced Technology for Max Malchow, and, uh, Max went out to somewhere in the west, and came back, and knew all about multipliers which... varactor multipliers, which was a brand new thing at the time. And he taught us, he gave us the formulas, you look at the diode, you could look at the capacitor, the voltage breakdown, and you could tell how much power it would handle, you could tell the efficiency by the Q of the diode. You could tell everything that was going to come out. And he in the lab ... we spent a couple of months in the lab just building units, not for production, just for test purposes. So we built them, and you measure them, and you could tell that his formulas were correct. The efficiency came out, the power came out, everything was working. So, when I got a... then I got a call back to go back to my old group. And a good engineer, George Inishamore, was working on a multiplier. And he was working on it for about 15, 20 days, and he wasn’t getting anywhere. He was using voltage pump, which Max said you don’t use voltage pump. You got to use a current pump. Instead of putting the diode this way, you put it this way. So, uh, the group leader says, “How long will it take you to make a breadboard?” And I said, “About three hours.” So he says, “Go ahead,” because we... that’s what we were doing for months. We were just doing the same stuff. So I did, and that’s that started the multiplier, uh, game, that worked out. And, uh, then I was the multiplier man for a couple of years. It was very interesting. Do you have mentors? Did you have people looking after you when you first started here? Um, yeah, I’m sure there were. Uh, I think the group leader... I think Bye Pewitt was very good. He was very hands on, very instructional. So, I think he... the group leader usually provided the efforts, yeah. So, what project do you remember the best? Well, I think the , I worked on the TIROS. The first thing was this ... the TIROS Satellite. We put on a beacon transmitter that just... that could locate where it was. And then we went on to the one-man in space, which I think was Mercury. We made the communications or the PA for him. And then the two-man was Gemini. And then the  [0:06:34] Male Speaker: [0:06:38] Bob: [0:07:22] Male Speaker: [0:07:27] Bob: [0:07:38] Male Speaker: [0:07:46] Bob: [0:08:41] Male Speaker: [0:08:46] Bob: space station, I think, was the most interesting, because going to the moon and all this business was very interesting. So, uh, that was, I would say the most interesting job. And what did you do on the lunar projects? Well, the lunar would be the ... well it was all the transmitter. When the... they said when the man walked on the moon and said, “One small step,” we made the PA. And it was in the back of his helmet. And then in the beginning they were worried that the radiation might affect his brain and whatnot, but somehow they got over that. And uh, the PA was right behind his, his left ear, I believe. So he said, “One small step for mankind” and etcetera, and it was very exciting and interesting at the time. Did you have any association when Apollo 13 happened? Uh, no, just... just the news... uh, that was it. No, I had nothing, uh, nothing more than that. As far as your work at RCA, how do you feel the company saw your work? I think uh, I think I was treated very well. I think they, they were very fair. And uh, um, I really had no complaints about RCA. Uh, when GE came in, I... well they gave us the offer to leave, which was terrific. I was near... I was ready. All my kids were... I had six kids, and they were all, they were all through school. So I was ready to take it easy. And they gave us an offer, as I said of the one-year’s pay, and your lump sum you could take. And um, it was a great deal [laugh] so I... I took it, and no, no regrets. What about your colleagues, working with your colleagues? Uh, enjoyed it for the most part. There were a few... there was one fella who, Sam didn’t mention his name and I won’t either, but we used to watch him. He would leave at four o’clock, go to the bar across the street, and we’d look out the window and [chuckle] and watch him. And finally he, he was an electrical engineer. He got out to... they hired him out to Moorestown, and we were happy of that because he was really, uh, just, uh, a drag. And he used to go... at lunchtime, he’d sit at his desk, he’d put a kind of a cone-shaped thing over his head and go to sleep and hope nobody would wake him till five. But uh, he got out to Moorestown, and he, he left secret documents on a bar, and that kind of triggered his [chuckle] the end of his career. They [chuckle] they filed notice against him and they let him go, but um...  [0:09:48] Male Speaker: [0:09:50] Bob: [0:09:51] Male Speaker: [0:09:52] Bob: [0:10:21] Male Speaker: [0:10:25] Bob: [0:11:03] Male Speaker: [0:11:09] Bob: [0:11:37] Male Speaker: [0:11:41] Bob: [0:12:16] Male Speaker: [0:12:20] Bob: But that was one. That was one. What about the rest of your... No um, very, very good. I think they were... it was a good group. We had interesting times, and, uh, not so much outside. I don’t think outside, but at work, uh, pretty much. And they did have uh... well they had ski groups and, you know, they had other little exercises going on, but uh... it was, it was pretty nice, pretty nice. So what was the best thing about working for RCA? Well, what I liked was the 40 hours and not much overtime. Some... there were some groups that they did want all this overtime, and, uh, I didn’t like overtime. I didn’t like coming in Saturdays for four hours, and when you could work eight if you wanted, But, I really liked to keep it... I liked to keep it to the 40 hours straight, uh, so that was the... and they weren’t pushy. If you didn’t want to work overtime you... they let you off a little easier. What was the worst thing about working for RCA? Oh, I can’t think of a negative. Like Bendix Aviation, I could come up with a few of [chuckle] when I started at Bendix Aviation, but RCA was pretty good. They were flexible. If you, if you wanted to go to a, a different group you could, you know, and I was able to do that. And I have no complaints about RCA. I think it was a great, great company. What about RCA’s influence on South Jersey? [Sigh] I don’t know, I... there were a lot of people... there were certainly a lot of people working in Camden, and in Moorestown, and what not, but I think that was it, just providing pay and the benefits for the people. I don’t think they, I don’t think they went out of their way to influence South Jersey. They just wanted a place to build equipment and, uh, get engineers and other people there. So, I don’t think there was a... In your neighborhood, were there other people working for RCA? Uh, yes. I used to drive in with Sam. He was um, probably a half a mile, mile away from me. And I was the driver, but I had a diesel Rabbit. We used to go with the diesel Rabbit, and I’d pick him up, and we’d go into Camden, and because he had uh... Sam always had Lincolns. He liked them big cars [chuckle] but the, uh, economy was  [0:13:01] Male Speaker: [0:13:06] Bob: [0:13:23] Male Speaker: [0:13:28] Bob: [0:13:48] Male Speaker: [0:13:54] Bob: [0:14:30] Male Speaker: [0:14:33] Bob: [0:14:59] Male Speaker: [0:15:06] Bob: [0:15:28] Male Speaker: [0:15:33] Bob: in the [chuckle] diesel Rabbit. So, uh, it got good mileage and not much problems with it. So, you didn’t spend much time with your coworkers outside of work? Uh, I would say not, no, because by... you know when we got married, then we had six kids, and that keeps you pretty busy, uh, without getting into too much other... [chuckle] With reference to the RCA family, what’s that mean to you? Well, to me it was just the, the group you work with basically. That, that was it. The uh, the family was just the fellas or the group that you were mainly with. Uh, that’s to me, that’s what it was. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. So, how would you sum up your experience? I, uh, I enjoyed it. I, uh... the, the work was very interesting. The pay was good. The hours were good. Uh, the vacation time, I got... I ended up with four weeks at the... towards the end of my career. Four weeks was a good vacation time, and you were able to take it. They didn’t nitpick when you, you know, half a day here or half a day there. They let you take the time off so it was good, wonderful. How did your kids view your job at RCA? I think, I think they enjoyed that it was secure. I think they enjoyed that my wife kept them busy and, uh, fed, and all that [chuckle]. And, you, know were able to relax and have a good time. And we’d... swimming pool and all that business. So, I think they were happy. They still speak to us [chuckle]. So, would you sum this up by saying, well, this was just a job, or was this a good journey, or how would you... I think it was a very good job. It was interesting. Uh, that first job I had was boring at Bendix Aviation. That was boring and that’s a tough, that’s a tough way to go through a week with a boring job. This was always interesting, interesting work and, uh, good people, so it was great. Did you notice a change in environment with the GE takeover? Yes, I think the... GE came in, and the first thing they wanted to do was, uh, get rid of people. They came in, and they had their own engineering group doing similar work. So they bought... I think they bought, they bought RCA just to get the television part of RCA. They didn’t need the engineering part because they had it. So their big  [0:16:29] Male Speaker: [0:16:33] Bob: [0:17:02] Male Speaker: [0:17:04] Bob: [0:17:06] Male Speaker: [0:17:09] Bob: [0:17:11] Male Speaker: [0:17:14] Bob: thing, as soon as they came in, they wanted to shrink the engineering department and... uh, which turned out to be an opportunity because they... if you wanted to leave, they would give you a year’s pay and, um, if you were in the right position, you could go right into retirement, so... and I was in that position. So it was it was terrific [chuckle]. It worked out great. Anything you want to add to uh, the story, Bob? No, I, uh... the work was always interesting, and that’s the main thing. You’re going in there for 40 hours or so, and you want an interesting job, and it was... uh, the work was interesting and you could... if you wanted to switch positions, if you didn’t like what you were doing there, if it got boring, you could go down and you had to see the manager or the chief engineer, but you could go somewhere else and, uh, that was a good opportunity. This one small step for a man... Mm-hmm. You made that radio, the PA. I made the, the PA, yes. How did you feel when he, when he was doing it? Well, I think we were... [chuckle] we wanted to make sure it worked. He had, he had uh, I think, backups. He had, I think two backups beside the main one. So, we were kind of confident. The, the first thing though, uh, with NASA... maybe I told you, I think. They, uh, were so crazy in the beginning. They wanted to make sure all the parts were high reliable. They wanted to look at the sand before they made the transistors. They wanted to know everything. And we couldn’t get anything out the door because they had so many tests. None of the parts would last through the tests. You had all these tests that we couldn’t get any parts to use because everything failed. So finally NASA said, uh, “Forget that, give us your best shot.” And then we were able to make a radio. I mean, the parts were reliable, but if you’d put enough, uh, sanctions on them, enough tests, you can break anything. So, once they relaxed, and we had like, a couple of backups... they didn’t have just one radio, they had backups. So everything worked out, uh, fine. Uh, we didn’t have... I don’t believe we had a... we might’ve had one failure but not... it was nothing, uh, nothing big. Okay, very good. [0:18:40] Male Speaker:  [0:18:43] Bob: [0:18:46] Male Speaker: [0:18:52] Bob: [0:19:00] Male Speaker: [0:19:02] Bob: [0:19:06] Male Speaker: [0:19:08] Bob: Was an interesting time [chuckle]. Good. All right, Bob. Well, I appreciate you taking your time out for this. This is important to get all of the story down. Mm-hmm. Yeah, it was a good, a good company and uh, very interesting people too. We met some very interesting people. Yeah. I told you about Max Malchow [chuckle] that’s a... that’s my... You told them. Tell me. Yeah. Well, I um, when uh, the guy wanted me to... we were going to build a small box and uh, he wanted to know what color we were gonna make the knobs. I got out, and they put me up with Max. And Max was, he looked like a farmer, but he was the smartest guy I’ve ever met there. He taught us the multipliers, varactor multipliers. And I told you he gave us the formulas. How much power it could handle, how... what the efficiency would be, everything. So, then when I got back and built that first multiplier that went into production, it was, it was great and uh, he just... he gave you all the knowledge you needed, and that was a wonderful thing. But, he was a good man. [END OF TRANSCRIPT]
RCAemployee;Bob Paglee;1924;2015;Bob: I’m M. Robert Paglee. I don’t use my first name I like to be called just simply Bob. I was born in Europe in 1924, a good year. Both my parents were citizens and my mother brought me as a baby back to the U.S. I was her second child. First one was born Evinston, Illinois. I came along and was born in Europe and she brought me back when I was just a baby, two years old or so. Anyway, I joined RCA after I graduated from Purdue in October of 1944. I was one of those students that was on accelerated program so I got my degree in about 2 1⁄2 years. Of course, I’m practically blind in this eye from a childhood injury. I wasn't drafted and my RCA came along and interviewed me and offered a trip to the East Coast to take a look at the place. so I decided to join up. I was 20 years old at that time. Actually, my father had to sign for me my application to RCA because I was not of age, of legal age. [0:02:00] Anyway, I started in December of 1944 and down in Camden. It was with the Service Company who said they would send me around the world so I thought, “This is great. I could do my thing.” Indeed I did. It didn’t take long to put me into a program RCA was building a thing called a JT, which is a sonic listening device used on submarines to get data into, directional data, into the submarine target data computer which then sends a fish to its destination. The idea is that they listen to this cavitation noise caused by screws and this thing had- this was an RCA design with a synchronous detector so that they could have a meter that showed when it’s right on target. It was center scale but as you move you may work to handle to work the servo that rotated this thing. There was a big hydrophone above the submarine. To center the needle on this sound was a far more accurate system than its predecessor which was merely to get the maximum sound. To find the peak of a signal that’s wrong is difficult. If you can by having two hydrophones and doing the sum and differencing to find the null , they got a very accurate bearing on the compass. RCA sent me to submarine school in New London, Connecticut for I think it was a two week crash course. We had some trips on a yacht called the duck. It was actually Joe Penner’s yacht and Joe Penner is the guy that came up with that thing. If it looks like a duck and walks like a duck then it must be a duck. That was Joe Penner. We had some experience there off the coast of Connecticut in trying to learn how some of these things- anyway, it didn’t take long before the RCA put me in officer’s uniform and sent me to order to the submarine base on Midway Island, Gooney Bird heaven. There we took care of the submarines as they came in for refit or whatever problems they were having. It was very small. It’s not a big place, Midway Island. Actually, there’s two islands in the lagoon and the main submarine base was the one on what would be the western island. The East island was just a knoll. [0:09:45] Gwen: [0:09:47] Bob: What was his name? Famous humorist Anyway, they came. They crushed and there’s a thing there where a monument on the shore of the- I guess that would be the-I think that’s the Bearing Sea at that point. After that, I thought it would be interesting to get into other things. After we’ve started working for the as a sales representative for the RCA TV, and radio, transmitters, antennas, studio equipment came with all the stuff that went in to the TV station and I did sell one station in Memphis. The things were very difficult because the freeze was on. FCC was trying to decide how close together they could put these TV stations and not have co-channel interference, or adjacent channel interference. After some difficulties early on, they put a freeze on building more TV stations. That shut the whole activity and RCA was really hurt at that point with this broadcast division. At that point, I got sent on a contract with the State Department for instructing the European the countries in NATO on modern weapons and radar computers, aircraft artillery which most that was the only thing that was active for countermeasures. In the process, I started out in Belgium but it got so miserable up there with all rain in cold weather on lousy and so I Anyway, after the war ended, I was there when the war ended and the war in Japan ended and we had a little celebration on BOQ and had quite a time with a tour around the island in a commandeered weapons carrier. After that, I came back to New Jersey. Let’s see, I guess one of the next things RCA put me into was a trip to Point Barrow, Alaska. RCA had a contract to develop an underwater sonic transducer system what was like a mini radar system to measure the thickness of the ice in the arctic environment. This was in support of actually the navy and was Navy Petroleum Reserve at 4. They were doing exploratory work there with drilling wells, big wells, deep wells in order to try to find out what liquid black gold there was in Alaska for the navy. It’s a very complicated thing but from Point Barrow, they would organize what’s called a cat train. It was a big diesel caterpillar diesel that pulled a whole series of well cats then two or three. Each one had a couple sleds, the great big sleds. Sled as big as this room. Unless they may had oil, barrels and oil machinery and all kind of stuff that they had to take the forward location where they were drilling for oil. We had to measure the thickness of the ice. But the trouble is the ice was so flawed that it was impossible to get an accurate measurement. In a way the job turned out to be a lot of information about ice and not a system that would work. I think since they may have now of the new systems that do work in that fashion but in those days it was tough. I would go out on the ice with- I had a vehicle that had been rigged up with a power generator and stuff and we could do some testing. There were a couple of Navy guys that were assigned to work for me and we took a lot of data and we’re out and did a lot of interesting things in one weekend we took a trip to Wylie Post had come down with his Wylie post and-  [0:12:54] Gwen: [0:13:02] Bob: [0:13:54] Interviewer: [0:14:00] Gwen: asked for a transfer and got shipped to Rome. That was really great because that’s where I met Gwen. We were married there by a- Paulist priest, James Cunningham, Santa Suzanna American church for Americans living in Rome and it was quite a number of people there that went into that church. Father Cunningham fixed it so we could get married in Vatican City because to get married in Rome, which is part of Italy, is a very complicated affair, but to get married in Vatican City, was a breeze. Well, comparatively so. In fact, one of my buddies there got married at the city hall in Rome and Gwen and I were there for witnesses. That was a nightmare. In all the places we had to go to get them. Anyway, we got married in St. Peters. You don’t speak with an Italian accent. What were you doing over in Italy? I went over with a college friend and then her mother came over and we had an apartment in Rome. Her voice teacher was an American who, an Italian American, who would spend one year in New York and one year in Rome. This was the year to go to Rome. My family, I being an only an child, they said, “Okay, that’s all right if you go.” That’s how it happened and about two months later I met Bob Paglee at La Fiammetta, which was a movie theatre that showed American movies. It was a great place for romance. My parents didn’t meet him. I went home to get my truso. You young people don’t know what that is, but the wedding dress and all the new clothes that’s called a truso. We did it in three days at Marshal feild and company in Chicago. My parents and I sailed back on the Liberte, and that’s when they first met Pag. They didn’t know him until the week before the wedding and we’ve been married for 62 years. One of the reasons I didn’t come to the U.S. to meet the parents, it was a kind of weird thing. In those days, the U.S. was trying to entice people to go oversees and stay there and help the European economy whatever. They had a thing if you stayed for, I think it was 541 days, then come back, from that point on your income tax was forgiven. No income tax. That was a very- The incentive to stay there. For about five years. If I had come back even for one day, it would kill a thing and I’d have to start the 541 days over again. [0:15:18] Bob: [0:16:07] Gwen: [0:16:10] Bob:  [0:16:24] Gwen: [0:16:46] Bob: [0:16:46] Gwen: [0:16:49] Bob: [0:16:50] Gwen: Our daughter was born there three years later, and we came back to the states when she was a year old. I would also add that my husband speaks Italian like a true Roman. They thought he was a native. They thought, absolutely, his Italian is so excellent. Not really. Yes it is. It was. They thought I was a hillbilly. No, they didn’t. And our Ann, who is a graphic designer, and now lives in Portland, Oregon, she went back. She had a semester, she was at Temple, and she had a semester in Rome. She met, my husband is a hand radio operator, and he would speak every Sunday to this Italian dentist, Franco Angelone, every Sunday. We said to Franco, “Ann is coming. We hope you can meet her.” They adopted her. She’s their American daughter. She and her husband even went sailing on their honeymoon there. So Ann speaks Italian like a Roman. RCA. Anyway, we came back- Now, with the RCA story. Go ahead. Well, RCA is what really married us in a way. I married RCA, and then I married her on account of RCA. Anyway, we came back and I went to work in Moorestown for what was called Missile and Surface Radar. And what’s involved with mainly the precision tracking radars that we were building here in Moorestown. It was the ANFPS 16. There was a whole family of these things. The ANFPS 16, the ANFPQ6, TPQ18, et cetera. There was a whole series of these. These radars were fantastic. It was instrumentation radars that were as accurate as.... We advertised them to a tenth of a mil precision. Accuracy is something else. Accuracy depends on your alignment and on how you have it oriented. Precision was tenth of a mil which was exception on those days. What year was this that you came back to Moorestown? ‘58 No, ’56, 1956. I did a lot of the pioneering work with these radars. I wrote some of those things that I was showing you nomographs, and I wrote a couple of the articles for the RCA engineer. Maybe someday I’ll find where I hid the thing. I think I saved it somewhere. If I find it I’ll give it to you. Anyway, we put these radars all over the world because we were trying to support the nice man-in-space program. One of the radars that I was particularly interested in was the one on Kawaii. I actually sited the I picked site with the help of an instrument that came from Pearl Harbor with the [0:17:36] Bob: [0:17:40] Interviewer: [0:17:44] Bob: [0:19:07] Interviewer: [0:19:10] Gwen: [0:19:12] Bob:  [0:21:19] Interviewer: [0:21:26] Bob: operator, the fellow that knew how to- it was an altitude thing because Kawai was- we wanted to find the right spot to put that radar so that we would pick up the capsules that came around the world. We would have preferred, there was a spot that I would have preferred but they won’t let me pick that because the state, Kawai had its own smaller radar up there that was- It was like the contest between the federal government and the state government? The state government won and we didn’t put exactly where I would have preferred. We picked a good spot for it anyway. That was basically what I have been doing all the way up until recently in more recent until the time I retired I was the manager of the AEGIS signal processor design and development. The AEGIS system is a very complex affair that is the current of the modern U.S. Navy to be able to launch all kinds of rockets and anti aircraft type stuff and the missiles and now it’s been developed into anti ballistic missile system which is going to be very interesting. They are trying to put couple on over in Europe, but I’m not involved with that anymore. I’m retired and so I just try to keep up with what’s happening. We had an arranged tour of the Combat Engineering, CSED System Engineering Development site here in Moorestown for the IEEE bunch. This was about two or three months ago. Yeah, it was just this year. Let’s talk about RCA now. You didn’t mention any of your coworkers. What were they like? Great guys. The RCA family in fact we still are. I go once a month to a luncheon that we have for the signal processor group. Sometimes I go for the- there’s another one that’s the microwave group and the mechanical engineers are part of that. We still have a very tight retirement group and it’s- RCA was one of the most unusual , I thought friendly, and trying to bring engineers into a social environment as well as a technical environment, RCA had lots of opportunities for study. I had took a course at the Villanova, it’s a mathematics course. I also took a lot of afterhours courses right in our plant here in Moorestown that were given by engineering specialist to bring the rest of engineering community up to snuff in that particular discipline. So it’s very interesting. RCA is a fantastic, friendly kind of thing. You use the term that sounds almost like a slogan, the RCA family. What’s that mean to you? Family is like this: We are married together. I’m trying to describe it was such a tightly, knit, both technically and socially. I don’t mean that we had social events, the special stuff except the retirement suppers and every time I guess every five years you get another tie clip or sets of top pen and pencil. [0:23:26] Interviewer: [0:23:41] Bob: [0:25:36] Interviewer: [0:25:44] Bob:  [0:27:25] Interviewer: [0:27:34] Bob: [0:28:19] Interviewer: [0:28:28] Bob: [0:29:20] Gwen: 0:29:22] Bob: [0:29:33] interviewer: [0:29:37] Bob: It was never any big thing out of this. It was just being friendly. RCA had an environment that was, I thought, unique in that world. I've seen quite a few others in my various, because I’ve, RCA sent me a lot of different places and I see the world in a way. I have always thought RCA was absolutely unique in the way it treated its employee’s and particularly the professional people. Okay. It sounds to me like you felt like RCA valued you as a contributor and you were just an employee? Always amazingly friendly. It’s hard to describe. I guess I was 43 years up to the time I retired. That’s a long time to work for one company. People don’t do that today, hardly. But I think they still do it here in Moorestown. I see some of the guys who retire and come to these luncheons. They’re still very much a family here. What about the influence of RCA on South Jersey? Do you have any opinions on that? Well, I think it’s between the Camden Plant, the Moorestown Plant, and the Heightstown, Princeton. Well, there was a RCA lab at Princeton. In fact, that was another one- the RCA lab in Princeton donated to your competitor at TCNJ, The College of New Jersey. I had an IEEE tour earlier this year. It’s an interesting place. They have a lot of RCA- Memorabilia Memorabilia on a wall panel all around the big room. Have you ever been up there to the-? Yes, we did. We went up and visited that. One of the interesting things about the RCA groupings of point factors and enterprises in South Jersey at least in the engineering community, I’m not so sure about the factors with the hourly workers have quite that privileges. The engineering things we had opportunities. If the business in Moorestown fell off and the business in Camden was thriving, we would farm out engineers from this location to that location. As a manager, I had the unfortunate need to lay off people on occasion. I think it was only two occasions in all my experience that we had a problem where we had to lay off a few people and that’s a very heartbreaking activity. We managed to avoid a lot of that because of the interconnection of RCA Camden, RCA Moorestown, even the broadcast division. When that went out of business it was originally in Camden, I guess, then it went out to the Gibbsboro what they call the paint factory that they had turned into a modernized and turned into a factory which was a busy building stuff for the broadcast TV stations. That business went down hill when Japanese, we couldn’t compete with the Japanese on price. I wasn’t really involved in that  [0:33:01] Interviewer: [0:33:18] Bob: [0:34:35] Gwen: [0:34:40] Interviewer: [0:34:46] Gwen: [0:35:05] Bob: [0:35:06] Gwen: [0:35:10] Bob: [0:35:14] Gwen: [0:35:16] Bob: [0:35:24] Interviewer: [0:35:28] Bob: [0:36:09] Interviewer: [0:36:19] Bob: [0:36:24] Gwen: [0:36:27] Bob: [0:36:34] Interviewer: except for one thing. When that enterprise had to fold up, I was able to bring in some engineers from there and I placed them in jobs here at Moorestown where we needed more people. This happened quite- well, not terribly frequently, but frequently enough that it really made a difference. We didn’t have such a turnover of people. We tried to hang on to the talented people and professionals. So you were quite well travelled. What do you think of the assessment of the RCA standing in industry? How did other technical people view RCA? Oh, I think it was a- I remember a guy at Wallops Island one of the Wallops Island radars there on the beach and another one further inland. Anyway, one of the government engineers I was familiar with used to kid me about this. He said RCA is the, I forget now. An ad for whatever it was- doing hair or something. He thought RCA is you guys keep thinking that you are the tops, and we were. He would kid me about that. I can’t remember now the name of that. You never told me that story. I can’t help. As Bob’s wife, what was your impression of the RCA family? They were like family. He was home for lunch every day. Boy, you can’t get any better than that. In fact, at one point he brought all the engineers. Fortunately, I had fore knowledge about that. Only we have a patio out here who went- That was at the other house. That was on Edgemore Drive. We have it here too. We were very fortunate. We’ve lived in Moorestown since we came back from Europe in 1956. How about your supervisors, what was your impression of that? Always very helpful trying to help me improve. I never had any conflict. We all got along very well. I thought generally they went out of their way. Well I did too to try to make things as pleasant and as efficient as we could. Let’s step back and sum up your career at RCA, just a job? Not a job. It was a life. Its his calling. It was a life, and a wonderful one. Have we left out any stories?  [0:36:40] Gwen: [0:36:46] Bob: [0:36:50] Gwen: [0:36:52] Bob: [0:36:55] Gwen: [0:37:07] Bob: [0:37:42] Gwen: [0:37:45] Bob: [0:38:01] Gwen: [0:38:02] Bob: [0:38:03] Gwen: [0:38:04] Bob: [0:38:27] Gwen: [0:38:27] Bob: [0:39:13] Gwen: [0:39:15] Bob: [0:39:38] Gwen: [0:39:40] Bob: About in Rome when the Purdue GleeClub came. Yeah. Miss money Penny? Yes. Do you remember, what was her name? The actress in the James Bond movie, Miss Money Penny. She’s Canadian and she had moved in that very night right next door to us. We had two apartments on that floor. Our door was here, her door was there. This was at the end of a corridor. As the Purdue Glee Club was- well, I was involved with that back in the days when I was a tenor. They have a overseas thing for- A tour, singing. Well, at the UN food and agriculture affair there in Rome. I invited them to come and they said they would if they could and they did. After the concert. After the concert. Lois Maxwell. Lois Maxwell, yes. Anyway, they drove up to the front of this fancy apartment building where we were and actually they were condominiums but we were renting one. Then all these guys in white tux- very fancy dress. Plaid cumber buns. They all filed out of this bus and they tried as many could get into the elevator but the elevator were not that big so they went up four flights of stairs. They came running up the stairs, and they went running into our apartment. Dozens of these guys were entering the door. Lois Maxwell opened her door and said, “Shhh,” she must have thought these ... into a mad house. Then they started singing. Yeah. I had rented a piano. I was assigned to the embassy in Brussels and in Rome. We had access to all kinds of great things at very reasonable prices. At the PX. Well whatever... I got a couple of cases of beer, put them in the bathtub along with a couple bunches of ice. This was all ready for these guys. They were having a good big time singing.  [0:40:04] Gwen: [0:40:07] Bob: [0:40:37] Gwen: [0:40:38] Bob: [0:40:41] Gwen: [0:40:54] Bob: [0:41:09] Interviewer: [0:41:21] Bob: [0:41:26] Interviewer: [0:41:33] Bob: Tell them about the balcony. Yes. A bunch of them went to crowd. We had a cantilevered balcony. It wasn’t a big balcony. Just say from here to the wall. I was worried. There was all a bunch of guys on the balcony. I was worried about whether the darn thing would break off or. It didn’t. I shoo them off so that only a few of them could stay. It was memorable. Lois Maxwell, her first night in this apartment, right next door to us. You can imagine our feelings. All is racket, the music was piano pounding. I guess a bunch had been 50 voices singing and Gwen singing and it was quite an affair. Okay. What was the best thing about working for RCA? Being appreciated. I think that was the best. What was the worst thing about working for RCA? Disappointment. For instance, when we ... that ice measuring device that had me go to Alaska. This was a Navy contract. They designed it in Camden, and the Camden ice company, I don’t know if you are familiar with it. They would make this great big ice 500 pound ice. They would take these things into the lab in Camden and they would use this to test the device. Of course with this beautiful ice that came out of a ice factory, the thing worked perfectly. I thought, well, we better be sure I go all the way up to Alaska I want to see if we can test it in the real world here. So we went over. One of these just the other side of the river- it’s a fancy hotel on lake and the lake was frozen over and I said we would go and test this things on that lake so we did. Indeed, the problem was when we went out on the lake, it didn’t work. There were too many flaws in the ice. It was impossible in the real world to make it work. We also went into a boat house which was covered over. The ice was solid under there and we tested it there and it worked nicely but just the same as it worked in the lab. In a way, this was my biggest disappointment that we had developed this thing. I really was not in on the original design of it. I just was dragged into to do the testing. I thought this was not a viable product. I thought we should just cancel the contract and say, “Well, we tried.” Well RCA didn’t want to do that because I had a contract. They had money. The contract said you got to go test in Alaska. I told them, “Well, I’ll go but I think we shouldn’t because it’s expensive.” When I got there it was black. There was no sun. Around noon time there would be a little bit of yellow on the horizon like at night here but it was black. It was the 24 hour.  [0:45:33] Gwen: [0:45:35] Bob: [0:45:40] Gwen: [0:45:41] Bob: It was depressing. No, it was interesting. You like sun. I had fun with that. Actually, at one point we put our equipment including what do they call it. It was almost like a weasel tracked vehicle. I think it was a weasel maybe it was called. It had a cab on it which was warm. Of course it had the power generator. We put that on an airplane at Point Barrow and we flew it to Umiat. Umiat is like the end of the world. There was a Umiat had one time was a bustling place where they had drilled a deep well nearby. Now, there was nothing there but it was on a Caldwell river. This was another test that I had to do to find out how this measuring machine would work on a Caldwell river because that was a problem that they had to cope with when they would run these big cap trains up the river early now and then they find because the underwater, the rocks on water would cause the currents to eat away some of the ice. The ice might be three feet thick generally. In spots it might be just a few inches thick. Every now and then one of these great bulldozer caterpillar train things would break through and would have to rest and there was a big problem there on the Caldwell river in the middle of nowhere had to try to rescue the thing and get this thing out of there, the big heavy machine. I went down there to try it on the ice and I found the same thing, and it didn’t work there either. I got out of the cab of this weasel then I went up the hill, and I go into this oil well building. It was so cold. I guess they had to build a building around the derrick. There was this gigantic- the thing was as big as this house with a big derrick in the middle and a huge machine in the bottom and generators, all these stuff, all idle because the job was over. It was such a difficult place to get in and out of even though this was pretty expensive machinery, they had to abandon it there and out probably it still there.
RCAemployee;Bob Holston;1936;2015;[0:00:06] Bob Holston: I started at RCA in March of 1958. I had spent the previous year testing large liquid propelled rocket engines out in the Santa Susana Mountains in California, and I moved back to New Jersey and started at RCA. March of ’58 and I spent about 35 years there, all in Camden. Worked with the digital airborne, digital equipment design group and I was basically a mechanical engineer. Although I did go to graduate school at night and got two additional degrees, masters degrees, one in electrical engineering and one in aeronautical engineering. I retired in ’94 and continued to do all the things I like to do. Remodeling around the house, building train displays and taking great trips with my wife... Great... ... to various places in the world. What was the first project you worked on at RCA? It was a digital communications system for the 100 series fighter planes. I would provide direction to a target from the ground controller and I did the mechanical design. Back thenwe used small little packets of circuits which would hold two transistors and now you can put thousands of those on a chip, of course... Right. And, I worked on that. I did some of the system work on that, developing the test messages for the equipment. When you got your first assignment did they give you any sort of a mentor or anybody to oversee what you were doing? Not really, being a mechanical engineer in a group of electrical engineers is a unique experience. You run into three different kinds of people. You run into electrical engineers that don’t know anything about mechanical engineering. You run into some that know a lot about mechanical engineering and you run into some that think they know a lot about mechanical engineering. So once you get to learn to work with these folks, it all works out very well. We accomplished the purpose of the projects. Were there any particular instances you remember about these engineers dealing with the new guy on the block? [0:01:05] Speaker 1: [0:01:06] Bob Holston: [0:01:07] Speaker 1: [0:01:10] Bob Holston: [0:01:43] Speaker 1: [0:01:43] Bob Holston: [0:01:53] Speaker 1: [0:02:01] Bob Horton: [0:02:36] Speaker 1: [0:02:43] Bob Horton: [0:03:13] Speaker 1: [0:03:15] Bob Horton: [0:03:33] Speaker 1: [0:03:33] Bob Horton: Everybody was always very cooperative. Being at RCA was like a family. There was always somebody you could go to, ask them about something or “Hey, I heard so and so worked on something like that”, they’ll give him a call and that’s the way that information got passed around informally, for Information that you might need to develop the product that you were working on. Everybody was very cooperative and friendly. Ok. So, after that project, where did you go? I went with the ATL people on classified projects for several years and that all turned out good. That’s all we can talk about on that. That’s all you can say about it, right. The most exciting part was the stuff we did for the space program. They got a little group together that developed the communications systems for the lunar rover. We had an electronics package, we had to provide for that, the antenna, the camera and we could do voice, data and video from the buggy back down to the earth. That worked out well, of course. Princeton built a camera for us and Moorestown did the final detail design on the antenna, although we came up with the concepts, and then in Camden we developed the basic mechanical package which contained all the electronics and the thermal control systems on that. But, it was really great to work on the project and then go home someday and turn on your television and say: “Hey, there’s something that I just designed or I designed that two months ago. Very rewarding experience and, plus, we could talk about it. I imagine the environmental requirements were a lot more stringent than the other projects. Well, standard space requirements, you know, you’re working in a vacuum, and NASA was very cautious about what they required us to be able to perform in. We used to design equipment to harsh environments and some of the things had to be extended and it worked well. We even took one of our test chambers down in the environmental test lab in Camden and filled the whole floor with some custom made sand that NASA had specified for us. And then, we could put our equipment in there and start pouring bits of the sand over the intricate mechanisms of the antenna and everything else to make sure that stuff could work on the dusty moon surface. They were very thorough in what they wanted and we certainly followed through on it. [0:04:38] Speaker 1: [0:04:43] Bob Horton:  [0:05:45] Speaker 1: [0:05:48] Bob Horton: [0:06:34] Speaker 1: [0:06:40] Bob Horton: Okay. When you were working in what I imagine, in a pretty close- knit team at that point. Yes. We had our engineering leader was Mr. Jack Conley, and I had the mechanical engineer working with me. And then we had the guys from ATL help us with the thermal design, because they had some computer programs that could do some of that kind of analysis and it worked well. Of course, everybody got active participation. The program manager wanted all the engineers that were doing anything to stand up and present their story directly to the customer. So that really motivated people to do their job and to do it well, we appreciated that. Did you ever have to go down to any of the places where they were doing this. Yes, we went on a regular basis down to Houston for regular reviews, and did presentations, explained the status of the job, and so we had lots of viewgraphs. I had a good artist at RCA that did a lot of good illustrations of different movements and things like that by the astronauts to handle the equipment. That was Jim Burns. That turned out well because that helped communicate what the equipment was. And, of course, we had a mayor review down in Florida with the actual crew to make sure that they could handle everything, mount it, dismount it, operate doors and antennas and things like that. We worked directly with them. The two astronauts in that were Jim Irwin and David Scott. David Scott was the command pilot for the Apollo XV. What was that like? Well, NASA is very thorough. They had a very good quality control system. You’d take any piece of equipment into a facility or building, whether you were delivering it or not made no difference. It went in there, it got registered, it got put on a table and the quality people inspected it and gave you a report. Whether you were just bringing it down for in process show or not, it didn’t make any difference. Anything that walked in that facility got inspected. I think that works out in the long run, because It benefited everybody and the success of the program. What was the perception of RCA by these external people? Always got very good feelings from the NASA people. They had a lot of respect for our program manager. Sam Holt was the business area manager for that part of the business and he had a lot of [0:07:44] Speaker 1: [0:07:45] Bob Horton: [0:08:26] Speaker1: [0:08:32] Bob Horton:  [0:09:09] Speaker 1: [0:09:12] Bob Horton: previous experience with NASA. It was a good, solid relationship. There was never any kind of conflicts or problems. Were you involved at all with the Apollo XIII issue? Yes, I can tell you an interesting story about that. Actually, not the equipment itself or the event, but is so happened that when Apollo XIII was in the accident mode and they were trying to return to the Earth, we were having a meeting with our NASA people with regard to what we were going to do on Apollo XV for the lunar rover. I remember our meeting was interrupted and the NASA engineer said come on down the hall and into the recording room and you can listen to Houston talking to the two astronauts that were on their way back to the Earth, right? And everybody’s praying that they make it, which they did, of course. That was very exciting and it sends the chills up your back when you listen to these guys talking at this very sensitive time in the history of the flight. Of course, the other thing was, our boss was very demanding and we had to work late that night and we missed the big celebration party at the hotel for the safe landing of the astronauts. By the time we got back to the hotel, all this broken glasses and paper cups lying around, and it was very quiet. We missed the best party of the year, I think. But, we did our job. The reputation that we have uncovered so far is that the RCA people, they worked really hard and they also played pretty hard. Do you have anything to say about that? Not really. We were always busy working, because we had a very short schedule. In fact, I think that maybe initially NASA wasn’t quite sure they’d be able to get that system together to be able to fly it on Apollo XV, maybe just later. Because they only had two more... three flights, XV, XVI and XVII left. But we got it done to their schedule and it worked fine. We were very proud of that fact and I was fortunate that my supervisor put me in for an award, The Engineer of the Month Award, I received that. So, I was very happy about that. So what were your co-workers like? Co-workers were fine, just ordinary, good-natured folks doing their job. One guy, the number one program manager said one time, “You know, engineers are too honest.” Well, they are honest and that’s what makes them good engineers and there were never any problems associated with that. How did you feel about your career, about whether RCA appreciated you, your progression? [0:10:45] Speaker 1: [0:10:58] Bob Horton: [0:11:42] Speaker 1: [0:11:43] Bob Horton: [0:12:12] Speaker 1:  [0:12:23] Bob Horton: Well, we had reviews and when I got into, later on, into the program where we were developing the satellite terminals, the ground stations for the army, I didn’t like some of the mechanical things that they were doing, and I got to be a complainer, and my boss Bob Lawton , I think he was tired of hearing that and said, okay, you be the mechanical leader, because they really didn’t have a mechanical leader. So I said, okay, I’ll do that job. So, I appreciated that and I was supported by the management of what we were trying to do and accomplished things. Okay. There has also been some reference to people’s opinions that RCA actually changed South Jersey. Do you have any opinions on that? Not really. I know when I initially started there in Camden, there were something like 6,000 employees, because they were still doing some commercial television manufacturing and the studio equipment development at that time in 10 and 13 building. It was about over 6,000 employees. That’s a lot of people coming in and avail themselves to the service of the city as required, yes. What about the neighborhood, where there other RCA people living... Where I lived throughout South Jersey you could always find a couple of other RCA people in the neighborhood, absolutely. Definitely. So, as far as the environment of the workplace, was it a drudge, was it something that you got up in the morning and looked forward to? I always felt happy to go to work in the morning and I had a great carpool situation for about 15 years. I rode to work with John Pope and he and I both liked to get in early and we both left at a reasonable time after five o’clock. He enjoyed his work tremendously because he had to coordinate between manufacturing and engineering and get everybody to like him and to like each other. I got to go to work every morning with a diplomat and he would discuss his jobs and all that and he was filled with enthusiasm. A lot of that rubbed off on me. He had this big smile, when he got to the door and parked the car, he said, “let’s go and get them Bob!” And that’s what we did. It was a pleasure working with John. You mentioned that that you got some other degrees. Was RCA influential on that? [0:13:13] Speaker 1: [0:13:31] Bob Horton: [0:14:02] Speaker 1: [0:14:07] Bob Horton: [0:14:20] Speaker 1: [0:14:32] Bob Horton: [0:15:35] Speaker 1:  [0:15:46] Bob Horton: [0:16:12] Speaker 1: [0:16:16] Bob Horton: [0:16:51] Speaker 1: [0:16:52] Bob Horton: [0:17:04] Speaker 1: [0:17:11] Bob Horton: [0:17:45] Speaker 1 [0:17:52] Bob Horton: [0:18:27] Speaker 1: [0:18:30] Bob Horton: I was just interested in broadening my capability and so I took advantage of the program. They paid for the tuition, you went at night and that was that. I had a better understanding of what the electrical people were doing as a result of some of the educational experiences. Okay, good. So, what was the best about working for RCA? The best thing of working for RCA was the fact that I met my beautiful wife of 54 years at RCA. I was a widower with two small children and it turned out that she was a good friend of a fellow that was one of my fraternity brothers when I was in college, unbeknownst to me. She was sitting there, in the next room and she’s the greatest thing from RCA. She was working there also? Yes, she worked in visitor security, she worked with personnel, and things like that. We hear a lot of reference about the RCA family. What does that mean to you? Well, it’s the way people work with each other. It’s not a demographic per se, it’s how they cooperate with each other, how they treat each other, how they share information with each other as required. You always felt that you could find somebody that it they had something similar, that would talk to you and if it got to be too big a deal they would ask to charge your shop order for that time. It was a very cooperative environment. If I had to ask you about the worst thing about working for RCA, what would that be? I guess getting caught in the floods on Admiral Wilson Boulevard in the spring when the heavy rains came. You were always worried whether your engine exhaust is going to get under the water when you’re trying to get out onto Admiral Wilson to get home. And the parking lot was there but it was kind of messy. But that’s not the RCA itself, that’s the neighborhood. How would you sum up your career at RCA? I felt fulfilled and I'll point out why, I was a great science fiction reader back in the 40’s. My father was, too. And he encouraged me in scientific things and he also was interested in science fiction and he wrote a lot of science fiction. And I look back with the work I did on the moon project for the lunar rover, that was science fiction  [0:19:15] Speaker 1 [0:19:22] Bob Horton: [END OF TRANSCRIPT] back in the 40’s. It’s amazing I can look over at my career and say I went from science fiction to science reality. That gives you a very warm feeling, a sense of accomplishment. Are there any other stories or anything you can recall about either your work or the people or incidents that happened? Well, there were always the standard jokes, the elevators were always breaking down because the buildings were old, they were built in 1921, the ten and thirteen building. And so, it was always a good conversation piece. Like, if you’d get in the elevator in the morning and everybody would smile and say, well, I wonder if we’re going to get up there today. But we had a good crew of elevator repairmen, which kept those things going. That sort of thing was prominent.
RCAemployee;Bill Baney;1936;2015;[0:00:08] Bill Baney: Alright, my name is Bill Baney, I started with RCA in November of 1960 in Camden, New Jersey. I arrived on the scene at the bright age of 24, had a wife, new baby, and one on the way. And I was most impressed by RCA in the size of that location at the time. Which I think it’s between 17 and 18 thousand in employees. Huge. My position was in, then called the personnel department, now human resources as an interviewer. My... The location consisted then of RCA corporate offices. Some from personnel, then the law department, etcetera. The headquarters for government systems division, the headquarters for commercial electronics systems division, two operating systems in the government end, two operating systems in the commercial end, being broadcast communication systems, mobile communications. They were kind of all over the place. I was... I was in Camden for three years before I even got to the employee parking lot to give you some idea of the size of this. There were also, a lot of people might forget this, but the electronic data processing division was manufactured and the computers were built in Camden at that time. So it was a huge operation, and the HR department of course serviced all of them. So, that was a unique experience, and one just trying to figure out what was going on in terms of product etcetera, was a challenge in itself. But, it turned out, as far as I’m concerned, to be a unique opportunity. There was no formal training program. I would say in the HR department but the process they had could not have been better. Because you went through the each of the chairs that were required for anyone who was going to go anywhere in human resources. With time in it, they get measuring from people who really knew what they were talking about. So, it was great, a great and fortunate experience for me, I think. Okay, so, um, let’s talk about your supervisors when you started. Alright. I started, I was working for the manager of employment at the time, and it was large enough then with 18,000 employees that there were departments within. The employment activity that handled salaried employees, there was someone who handled technical employees. There was a whole engineering department, dedicated to recruiting, etcetera. So there was a supervisor of all employment, and my first three or four years doing recruiting etcetera I reported to one or two of those individuals. Very helpful. Again, no formal kind of training etcetera, but so much real life stuff that this is really how it works. It was much appreciated. [0:02:08] Speaker 2: [0:02:16] Bill Baney: [0:04:20] Speaker 2: [0:04:28] Bill Baney: [0:04:50] Speaker 2: [0:04:58] Bill Baney: [0:04:59] Speaker 2: [0:05:01] Bill Baney: And I moved from there, as you go through the seats as you will, from employment to what they called wage and salary. That’s now compensation today. Again, I had two supervisors there handling things like, uh, pricing or traveling, sending people to Japan out of the corporate offices, a great experience, which I had no idea how to do it at that time. But this was good, again, because we had I think about 8,000 hourly employees, about 4,000 engineers. So the compensation end of things was, was quite enlightening, etcetera. We also handled corporate incentive compensation. Really good, great experience. Moved through those chairs. I went from the wage and salary end of things into labor relations. Which when I studied in college that’s really the main thing I was interested in. And of course at that time there were seven bargaining units in Camden. So, all the labor relations you would ever want in a million years was there. Good tutoring, good advice, I really enjoyed the experience. I guess some of it was four or five years of that, and then I guess seven years I was moved in my first management role. And again, this is all no formal training etcetera, but just kind of the experience that is priceless, etcetera. So, I have my first management assignment as manager of that compensation department. Were you satisfied with your career progression? Did you feel like they recognized the value of your contribution? I’d say absolutely. I don’t think anyone... I don’t know where else you could have gone to get that kind of experience in that time frame. And I was compensated certainly fairly. I had no problem with that whatsoever, and I think the fact that they moved me from one assignment to the next was a pretty good indication that I was doing okay. And I thought... It could not have been more fair. Okay. In your position you dealt with a lot of RCA employees. Yes. Could you give us your general impression? Sure. I would think... Just this, the adage of the RCA family, we all talk about it, etcetera, it’s real as far as I’m concerned. I’m going to tell you firsthand. This was not something dreamed, and so this is the RCA family. All of the employees that I talked with and dealt with, and of course I’m interviewing new employees all the time, but there seemed to be an esprit de corps. A realization that there is things bigger than their individual assignment, etcetera. And I found that... I find this throughout. Kind of when I look back to it, it’s kind of almost hard to believe. I mean I... The bargaining units, etcetera, we all had our differences and arguments, etcetera. But, I think our bottom line was no matter what side of the table someone was on, there seemed to be an understanding that there’s one main cause. And if that  [0:06:17] Speaker 2: [0:06:22] Bill Baney: [0:06:46] Speaker 2: [0:06:49] Bill Baney: main cause doesn’t go, we’re all going to be in trouble. I think in general everyone seemed to be willing to work with one another, to help one another, and you know we went through some trying times, too. If you got out of that massive hiring, so whether the... We had some defense layoffs, etcetera, which were brutal. But, I think everybody acted like a professional, and I certainly was pleased. But that... It’s not just a word, “RCA Family”, it meant something and I lived it. Um, what were some of the downsides in RCA? Well, I’m going to get back to the sad part. The downside was because it was a defense citizen, we did have some major cutbacks, and that’s brutal. You never like to see people being let go or laid off, and I think from that perspective if I ever said what was the... Well... What was the worst part of it, no question that was it, just living through that. I can’t think. There might be some other incidentals, but that was the one thing that would stand out in my mind. Great. Could you talk about your co-workers? Yes. Co-workers, as I talked about how my supervisors may have helped me. And remember now, in these slots in HR, everybody is kind of in their own thing. There’s not two people really doing the same thing. But if someone has been there, I think the very first person who is... Who I replaced spent, I thought was a tremendous amount of time just getting me up to speed. And this... This was not unusual, because everyone was kind of moving through the seats at the same time. And always willing to help out, and say, “Hey, you don’t, if you got a problem, call.” Or whatever. So in the HR department, that... That team spirit if you will, was right on top. It could not have been more helpful. I really mean it. Did you spend time with co-workers outside of the working hours? Yes I did. We had a lot of time outside, and again it was a pretty big department. In those days there was probably a hundred of us in the HR department. We had... You know, we’d play softball together. We’d watch football games together. Parties at one another’s houses. Got to know a lot of them. Some no longer with us, unfortunately, but some became lifetime friends. And, yes, I would say I just carried this family idea on. And many of us, some were from the area. I was not from the area originally. So that... Being invited into that venue, if you will, was very helpful to my career. What about the influence of RCA on South Jersey itself? On the region? I’d say it would have to be huge. I may be a little prejudice, but not much. If you’re 17, 18 thousand people. If you look at Camden in 1960, Campbell’s soup was still pretty big in Camden right next to the RCA facility. But I don’t think they had more than maybe 3,000, which is a lot of people. New York [0:07:30] Speaker 2: [0:07:35] Bill Baney: [0:08:13] Speaker 2: [0:08:20] Bill Baney:  [0:09:51] Speaker 2: [0:10:00] Bill Bane: Ship down the road had probably over 20,000. So, the three huge companies had an immense impact on South Jersey. It really did. Almost anywhere you went, “Oh it’s RCA you work for.” The old timers used to say, “You worked for the RCA.” Uh, but it was RCA, and Campbell’s Soup, and New York Ship, but they went down pretty quickly. But the impact, almost everywhere that you went when you volunteered for things... And by the way, let me just say now, RCA as into helping out the United Way in an incredible way. The corporation matched whatever those 18,000 employees did, and then some. Almost the second year I was there, I was encouraged to help out with things like the chamber of commerce. I ended up later on for 25 years being the... On the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, the co-director of that. All RCA’s said, “Do it.” They want you to do this. This is in the community, and these are the kinds of things you ought to be doing. So that’s your... I think was there, and was supported right to the top of the house at RCA. Wow. What about over time, did you notice the development in South Jersey? Well I did. Uh, and I remember now, this... The time that I was there, I was in Camden for 15 years and then left for another 15 years to go to another RCA facility and GE facility, etcetera. But there was a lot of development. Unfortunately, the cutbacks didn’t help us. Because things were going downhill. RCA was, you know, on the cusp of the technical world. There was not much question about that. As far as what was going on in the community, now again we continue to support even though the numbers were going down we helped with United Way with volunteers and with money. I... I think the development wouldn’t have been much better if we did not have the cutbacks, but, you know, it was there. And they were always in the community, and they were always in the forefront of what was ever going on. How did your environment change over time? The work environment itself I think, uh, computers were a major change in the HR department. Maybe not as much as engineering has had there, but certainly it changed an enormous... How the work was done, and how it was processed, etcetera. The... I guess the other major change... We always had... We always had to have the tools and the people to get things done. Benefits became a major issue. When I was first hired that was nothing. I don’t mean nothing, but no one paid for benefits. It was just an expense that was incurred by the company, etcetera. It didn’t really need top notch professionals to run. It was kind of an administrative issue. Over the years, that became an enormous problem for everything. You better get your top notch people in the benefits. So from that perspective that really changed. Again, I think labor relations became a less of a significant event, but it did [0:10:45] Speaker 2: [0:10:49] Bill Bane:  [0:12:14] Speaker 2: [0:12:26] Bill Baney: [0:12:55] Speaker 2: [0:12:58] Bill Baney: [0:13:19] Speaker 2: [0:13:24] Bill Baney: [0:13:43] Speaker 2: [0:13:50] Bill Baney: before that because it was less people. Compensation became more complex. And we went through a lot of... We went through wage freezes. That will do something for your wage and salary department, and then it was catch up all the time in the hiring new graduates, etcetera. As inflation hit that, it was like, “Wow.” You jump sevenfold from one year to the next. So there were a lot of things then in the environment that made us change. We were right with it. People talk about family members working for RCA. I had heard several time, “My father worked there.” “My grandfather worked there.” Can you comment on that? Did you observe any of that? Absolutely. There was no question about it. There was... You know, I don’t want to call nepotism because that’s what we get in many, many of our great employees. But yes, there was no question. It was not uncommon to have, three, four, or five members of the same family working at RCA. And they could be in different fields, etcetera. I mean, engineer, you got somebody on the bench, but yes. I think an incredible number of people. And that’s a good sign. If you want your kids to work there, that’s terrific. Good, great place to work. What about husbands meeting wives? Uh, yeah, I did see. I did witness that. Not myself, but I witness a number of people, and this department that I worked in within three years were married. Secretaries or two professionals, or whatever. Not uncommon at all. And I guess our department would be very small compared to the others. So if it was big there, it had to be bigger in the larger departments. How did your children view your work at RCA? I think they recognized the fact that the old man was pretty dedicated, because sometimes they didn’t see him for a while. But there is no question in my mind that the three children that I have, know the kind of respect that I have for RCA and the companies that follow. No question about it. Now as you looked around your neighborhoods, did you observe other RCA employees in the same area? Sure, yeah. I was in a relatively new housing development, and I think the first two years I commuted with three other engineers. Three engineers and myself, and then they switched and went somewhere else. Which was not uncommon, moving within RCA. It wasn’t just Camden. I mean, you could move. You could move anywhere in the country. As I did later on. Not in the country, but yes, a lot of them from that. And that was a brand new community, so there were lots of that going on.  [0:14:18] Speaker 2: [0:14:27] Bill Baney: So if I asked you to just sum up, your career, your company, and all the rest about RCA, what would you say? Well, let me tell you where the career went. I told you I started in Camden, I was there for 15 years. I left as manager of then, combined labor relations and wage and salary it was called. I was given an opportunity at that time to go to either Meadowlands, Pennsylvania or East Windsor Heightstown, New Jersey as the HR director. I chose Heightstown. I liked the space business, so the career was I went from Camden to Astro in Heightstown. Where we were in the midst of having... They just finished a downsizing, so were hiring. We were building a Nimbus, and I forget the other... Oh, satellites. Very exciting business. And it was a different community all together. It was... There were no bargaining units there, but we were bringing in people very quickly. I got a chance to learn and go to see space shots etcetera that I would have never dreamed of going on. I think I was accepted by that management team very graciously, and I think I brought something to the table, and I think I learned an awful lot from there. Just quickly I was there. For four years, uh, five years. Moved from there, to take over the HR director at Moorestown, New Jersey. That was when Ad70 or what we now know as Aegis was all about. Bill Goodwin and company was one filing that next year’s. So this was a huge boom. I was there for two years. I went from there back to Cherry Hill, where the headquarters of the government systems division had moved. Where I was given a responsibility for... For compensation and organization and development, and employment for the whole government systems division. And then we’re about 12,000 employees. That would be Camden, Burlington, Massachusetts, Moorestown, New Jersey, and Astro. And we were given some commercial credits, because then we picked up Meadowlands and some of the broadcast plants. And I was there until ’86, when a merger occurred with GE. And from there I moved to take over the HR director’s spot at the whole Astro-space division that was East Windsor and Valley Forge. And putting those two together from an HR perspective may have taken two or three of hairs that used to be on my head up here. But that was a unique experience, two kind of different companies. Great companies, etcetera. I think there were... I sense more formality in GE then there was in RCA, but they were great companies. And you can look back and say, “Oh that screwed up my career.” It actually provided some more opportunities, if you think about it. Maybe there were fewer spots at the top, but there was certainly was a lot more very significant roles for HR people in the areas. And it opened up, you know, broader spaces. So, I moved from that role to take over all of the technology with Jim Feller. I guess it was Aerospace Technology. We had ATL in Camden. We had E-labs [0:16:26]  [0:18:14] [0:18:42] Speaker 2: [0:18:50] Bill Baney: up in Syracuse. I forget where... Oh there was... There was still some of the people in Valley Forge, but I moved my office from Valley Forge to Moorestown again. I was there for three or four years, and Martin Marietta came along and took GE. And then when you looked at the facility there, and decided, “Gee, maybe we can make the...” ATL was in Moorestown at the time. We said, “Maybe we can move into Camden and save some... Some rent.” If you will. And we did. We moved back, I think 1996. So I was in Camden for 15 years, left for 15 years, and came back, ironically. For more than 15 years. And then in 1990... ’90... When did L-3 come about? ’96? Okay, ’96. I was asked by then HR director, Mike Riley, to consider joining L- 3 after it spun off. So, I retired from Lockheed Martin. I think I moved my office three offices down the aisle, and then joined L-3. And spent, believe it or not, 15 years there and retired after 52 years with the whole enchilada. Great career as far as I was concerned. Now, along this time you encountered a man named John Mastran. Can you explain where you encountered him? Yeah, John Mastran was a corporate maven. And I believe his main thrust was in organization development. I met John, seems to be a lot of years ago, and I guess it was. You know, you would go to corporate staff then and say, “Oh this is this. This is that. This is the top of the heap, etcetera.” He and I were certainly not bosom buddies at all, but I knew who he was, and I think he probably who I was, because I was moving up the ranks okay. But it was great... In fact corporate staff was a very talented and professional group of people, and John was right on top of them. I was always impressed by the whole. The whole group at 30 Rock was what we used to call it anyway. And I had an opportunity to join that, and was not interested in going to sunny, downtown New York. So I passed up on that. Okay. Is there anything else that you would like to add to the interview? No. I guess I don’t want to get mushy, but you know, 52 years was a big chunk. I didn’t think I would ever live for 52. I’ll tell you a funny experience. When they first... I first was hired, they say, “Well, you have to retire at 65.” I said, “Well, that’s really not a problem. No one in my family has lived to be 65.” So, we went through that. I have to tell you that I don’t think you have to write to get the experiences that I had there. A lot of great people. Did I not get some of the things maybe I thought I did get? Yeah. That’s sure. Like all of us. But, there were not really any major disappointments that I didn’t handle. And, I... If we hadn’t had some cutbacks, I think I might still be there. The last couple of years with L-3, unfortunately we started to cut back, and that’s... If you’ve ever been in HR that’s no fun at all. Believe me. And, so I decided to try some volunteer stuff. But no, it was a challenge. It was a satisfying experience, and I don’t think I’d trade it in for anything. [0:19:39] Speaker 2: [0:19:44] Bill Baney:  [END OF TRANSCRIPT]
RCAemployee;Art Simons;1944;2015;[0:00:00] Art Simons: [0:00:37] Male Speaker: [0:00:41] Art Simons: [0:01:17] Male Speaker: [0:01:25] Art Simons: [0:02:04] Male Speaker: [0:02:10] Art Simons: My name is Art Simons and I started in RCA Camden in 1966 immediately after graduating from the University of Pennsylvania. Uh, I worked in Camden for a few summers while I was going to graduate school and also at RCA Morristown and then I came back full time in 1971 to RCA Morristown. I worked there for a few years, came down to Camden on loan in 1975 and never left, retired in 2008. And when you started, what was your first job assignment? Uh, I worked, ah...I guess my first significant job assignment, ah, was AEGIS uh, it started... was called the MFAR in the early days probably pre...pre-proposal, uh, but I had some very interesting summertime assignments working on AEGIS and then, uh, after I came back and worked fulltime, I did some analytical work in support of AEGIS and a few other radar programs, I think one was called BATS and uh, then I went down into Camden and worked on secure communications. Um-huh. Uh, when you started work, did you have any mentors or senior engineers or anything? Actually, uh, that was one of the hallmarks of my entire 42-year career at RCA, is that there was also somebody who was willing to help, anxious to help, and more than capable of helping. Uh, so in the early days, uh, in Morristown, my mentors were Tom Bulger and Maurice TImken, and John Dodson, and of course Jimmy Sullivan and Frank Capaso was my boss during those summer jobs and he...he was fantastic as well. And then, I had...I was fortunate I had mentors throughout my entire career. Um-huh. Um, talk about some major projects that you did work on? Uh, well I guess some of the more significant ones were the, uh, KY- 57 and KY-58 secure communications gear. Uh, that was my... really my first assignment when I went...went to Camden. And then from there, I moved, uh, to Maroon Archer, which was a very large job in the intelligence community. In fact, that was a significant point of my career because, uh, we create a business area, uh, out of the Maroon Archer program and many of us from Morristown who were [0:03:53] Male Speaker: [0:03:53] Art Simons: [0:03:55] Male Speaker: [0:04:01] Art Simons: on loan to Camden ended up, uh, transferring to Camden fulltime because of that business and frankly, uh, it kept me in the business in...ah...in the engineering business for the rest of my career. I found it fascinating. Another major job that I worked on that I...ah...really enjoyed was the DINDI program which we did for the government of Israel and it was not only a fascinating job, uh, technically, but it was also an interesting job sociologically because condition of the contract was that we had to have, uh, Israeli engineers as part of our team and to see the interaction between the RCA engineers and the Israeli engineers was very, very interesting. We even had a Hebrew class and I always found it amusing that the, uh, 60-year-old sec...Irish secretaries were taking Hebrew lessons after work. Uh, and another, uh, program that I worked on that I, ah, really enjoyed, that was a great program with great engineers was NERVETRUNK, which I worked on, ah, in the 1990s in Camden. Um-huh. And of course there were many others. A lot of proposals. And you worked your way pretty much up the engineering ladder. How did that go? Well, ah, it was a hallmark of the engineering community back then that if you did well in engineering, they tended to promote you within the engineering community, but they were always on the lookout for management which was a two-sided coin because the best engineers don't always necessarily make the best managers and so for a long time I really resisted going into management because I really felt that I was, ah, technical and there were better technical people than me. But eventually I matured and I realized that I could manage well and I agreed to do it and then in 1979 I went into management, uh, first as a leader and then as a...ah, a department manager. Eventually I ended...ended up as the director of systems engineering. Ah, and throughout my entire career I was encouraged and supported by, ah, a host of people at RCA, which I thought was, ah, really one of the things I look back on as one of the most significant aspects of my career at RCA, is that there was always somebody there to help. Um-huh. Talk about your co-workers through your career? Well, I always thought it was kind of unusual and I...I really can't speak for other companies cause RCA is...and its descendants were the only companies that I ever worked for. But I...I always had the [0:05:09] Male Speaker: [0:05:13] Art Simons:  [0:06:08] Male Speaker: [0:06:13] Art Simons: [0:06:28] Male Speaker: [0:06:33] Art Simons: [0:07:03] Male Speaker: [0:07:06] Art Simons: feeling that RCA was very, very unique, uh, it was really more of a family than a job. I...I really enjoyed the people I worked with. I had a great deal of respect for their engineering ability and their intellect and, ah, they were always there to help you out and, uh, I think it's one of the major reasons why I enjoyed myself so much. It's...for me personally it's not only important to have challenging work, which there always was, and, interesting work, ah, and ah, a great work environment, but the people that we worked with were exceptional. And that was important to me and, ah, I appreciated that. It's interesting, the term RCA family has come up in almost every one of our interviews. I'm not, I'm not surprised. In fact, ah, I still get together with RCA people of various ages in three different lunch groups and a fourth group that's mostly RCA people. Uh, we...we were close when we worked together and were close in retirement. Um-huh. What about, ah, outside of work? Uh, outside of work, ah, of course family was the most important to me. I...have a wife and two wonderful children and now I have three grandchildren. Ah, I was always participating in various sports. I played a lot of softball, a lot of basketball, and, ah, played a little bit of bridge when I first started at RCA at lunch, ah, didn't really play a lot for years, but now that I'm retired, ah, I...I play serious bridge often. Go to tournaments and I really enjoy it. Do you recall any of the RCA parties? [Laughter] Some of them are hard to blot out. Ah, yes I do. I recall...recall them very well. We had great Christmas parties, ah, and we also had a lot of fun completion parties when jobs were over and we were really thrilled to deliver a system. We had some, ah, really wonderful completion parties with the customer that were a...were a lot of fun. But I think I enjoyed most of all was the...were the Christmas parties, ah, because you know I...I could bring my wife and she got to meet, ah, other people that I worked with and their spouses so, that...that was fun. Um-huh. What was the best thing about working for RCA? I think the best thing about it was that it kept me intellectually engaged. About a week before I retired, a young fellow stopped me in the hallway and said to me, well you're retiring and I said yes and [0:07:43] Male Speaker: [0:07:49] Art Simons:  [0:08:36] Male Speaker: [0:08:38] Art Simons: he said, well what about the work, what about the work? So I said to him...I said, well I have to tell you that the work was always very challenging. It was always very, very interesting. It was often patriotic and that was enough to sustain me for 42 years. Uh, I toyed with the idea of becoming a lawyer. Uh, before I went to, ah, graduate school in engineering and even in the early days when I worked at RCA when we, ah, unfortunately had a series of layoffs, I thought a lot about becoming a lawyer, but the work also kept me there and I have no regrets whatsoever. What was the worst thing about working for RCA? The layoffs. Yea, absolutely, the layoffs. I, ah, I started working at RCA in 1966 and I was going back and forth to...to graduate school and the...they were having a series of layoffs during that period of time in the late '60s. And I came back in August of '71 and they had the last layoff in, ah, December, right before Christmas of 1971 and it was...it was horrible. It really was and I think psychologically that's one of the reasons why I, ah, resisted becoming a manager, just the thought of having to lay somebody off was just, ah, really unthinkable to me. People have speculated that RCA changed South Jersey. Have you anything to say on that? Well, I think RCA was a...a significant part of South Jersey. Uh, my father-in-law, ah, well my in-laws got married in 1944 and they immediately moved from New York to South Jersey. My father-in- law worked for RCA for many, many years in material standards and you couldn't go anywhere in South Jersey and not run into somebody who either worked at RCA, whose spouse worked at RCA, whose uncle worked at RCA, everybody worked at RCA. There were a lot of people who worked in Camden and, ah, I think it...it is part and parcel of the fabric of South Jersey. If you're talking about South Jersey, you know, you have to consider the impact of RCA. You mentioned that the work was challenging. Did you feel that the work was valued by your supervisors? I always felt like...that they appreciated what I did. I...I really...I don't think I ever in 42 years, ever had a supervisor who didn't appreciate what I did and what...and what my co-workers did. And just to extend that a little bit, very often we would have visitors from the government, very high level people, ah, both in the military and in the government come and thank us for what we did and tell us that [0:09:22] Male Speaker: [0:09:29] Art Simons: [0:10:15] Male Speaker: [0:10:23] Art Simons:  [0:10:54] Male Speaker: [0:11:06] Art Simons: we were saving lives and, ah, you know, you can be a cool customer, but when someone tells you that it's really meaningful. Yea. Um, how do you think RCA was looked at in the customer community and in the rest of industry? I think with a great deal of respect. Uh, I don't think we were ever the cheapest, ah, in our proposals. We had a lot of competitors...I think who were capable of underbidding us. I'm not sure exactly the reasons for it. Maybe the high price talent like myself, I'm not sure, but we had...we won a lot of programs because the government knew that we delivered really fine systems that worked and if you mentioned the fact in government hallways that you worked for RCA, it definitely had an impact. So, I...I was always proud to work for RCA. So how would you sum up your career? Just a job, a good journey, how would you sum it up? Definitely not just a job. It was, ah, it was an important part of helping me raise my family successfully. We...we've had a wonderful life because of RCA. I enjoyed every minute I spent there. Ah, as I said, it was intellectually challenging and that was important to me and I meet a lot of people that I really, really care for. So, ah, I couldn't have been happier with my decision and we're thankful that RCA hired me in '66 and when I...for a summer job, and when I told them I was going to graduate school they said, we don't care, go to graduate school, you can come back every summer and, ah, that's when the magic started. Oh, um, so I'm seeing a lot of pride come out. Uh, pride in the work, ah, talk about also the effect of the work on our country? Well, as I mentioned earlier, uh, for, ah, 30 plus years, I worked in the intelligence community and obviously you can't go into a lot of detail about that, but, ah, I tended to be, ah, politically more liberal than most of my co-workers and people who were...who thought like I did, didn’t necessarily work for places like RCA. But I was not only, you know, liberal in my political thinking, but I was...I think a practical person and I...I certainly didn't believe in unilateral disarmament and I really believed that what we did in the intelligence community was... what a smart country interested in doing good both here and around the world should be doing and so, ah, I think that what we did had a major impact in the country. I felt [0:11:44] Male Speaker: [0:11:51] Art Simons: [0:12:34] Male Speaker: [0:12:50] Art Simons:  [END OF TRANSCRIPT] proud to be part of it and I still think that it's an important component of keeping us safe.