repository;interviewee;datebirth;dateinterview;text
Ironworkers;"Henry ""Hank"" Lichte ";1935;2011;"00:01 Introduction, Background information, Entering the Trade [I am here at Ironworkers Union Hall Local #63 and am doing an interview. Please tell me your name.] Hank Lichte. [Tell me what year you were born, Hank.] I was born 1935. [And were you born here in Chicago?] Yes. [What neighborhood did you grow up in?] I grew up at Lincoln Park area: Armitage and Larrabee Street, it was called. [Oh yeah, I know where that is.] I lived there until I got married in 1955. [Now, were your parents German?] Yes. [Did you speak German as a kid?] They did in the house, but when I went to school, they said no more German to me because I have to speak English and they didn’t want to be talking German in the house no more. They would talk amongst themselves. Yet I can’t talk German now. I can understand a little bit but I can’t talk it. [And how did you get into ironworking? Did you come out of high school and go through an apprentice program or...?] Yeah, went through an apprentice program. I had a friend of mine that was an ironworker and he got me into the apprentice program in 1955. [Did you go to Washburn?] Yes. The old Washburn Trade School. Yeah. 1:25 [Tell me about your first job and where it was and what you were doing as an ironworker.] Oh. First job as an ironworker was in Barrington, Illinois. And it was snowing out, a very light snow. The building was only about 5 stories high. We were going to go work up on the iron and I figured, well, it’s snowing today, we can’t work up there. So I asked the foreman, “What we’re going to do today, are we going to work? He says, “Yeah, you’re going to work up there.” I said, “How are we going to work with all the snow on the beams?” He says, “It won’t be there when you get done wiping it off with this gunny sack. Get up there and get that snow off.” I wasn’t going to walk up there. I put the gunny sack down on the beam, sat on it, and just went like a snow plow, across the beam, pushing all the snow off while I’m sitting on it. That was my first job. [Did you have any safety stuff on at all?] No, no, of course not. We didn’t have anything like that. [And what kind of work were you doing? Were you welding or just doing labor work or what?] We were welding. We were putting in railings and they had to be what we call pipe insert put on the beam so when they pour the concrete, the pipe would be sticking out. Then the railings would fit into that pipe because they were removable. It was a little exciting the first day. [Yeah, did it take a little while for you to get used to that?] Yeah but not very long because you’re concentrating more on what you’re doing. You’re trying to stay safe and it’s impossible to stay dry. It worked out. The first day was fine and after that, no problem. [So after that job which was out in Barrington, did you start working more in the Chicago area or...?] Yeah, all over, all over the Chicago area. We worked on... The company I was with, I served my apprenticeship with them because I was what they called an indentured apprentice. That means you have to sign a contract with these people and they had to honor the contract also. I couldn’t quit and they couldn’t lay me off. So they had me work 40 hours a week. If there was no work, I had to go in to the shop, so that I would get my time in. You couldn’t make any extra money. It was right down to the penny. I think when I started I made $1.55/hour. They wouldn’t give you a raise until your year was up. Then you’d go...to the next stage, 50%, 60%,  and... In my 4th year, I became a foreman for the company because I had been with them for so long. They had to pay me foreman scale, but that was the first time I ever made any real money with them. [What was the name of the company?] David Architectural Metals. They’re still in business by the way. But they don’t do any erection any more. I think they have a contractor that does some erection, but they still have a shop on the South Side of Chicago. 4:45 [Did you work on any... You showed me some photographs from a job site at 2801. Now that looked like that was a taller building there.] At that time on the north side it was. It was 29 or 30 stories up. See those old pictures with two guys on that cage on the outside? You see the aluminum. There was a special aluminum that fit on the corners which these guys were getting ready to install. And after it was up, the building was up, these corners were leaking water. So we had to go back and they set up a pole off the roof. All it was was a six by six timber with some sand bags on. They put a block out there and we had an electric hoist on the bottom, similar to what you see here but smaller. We ran a cable up through to the shiv on top in the roof of the building and down in a boun's chair. [Also ""boatswain's chair,"" a device to suspend a person from a rope, a harness common to work on ships and now used to suspend people from high buildings.] Naturally, me being the apprentice, it was my job to go up in the bosun's chair and the guy on the bottom would run the machine. I would just signal him to stop and then I could caulk where the leak was and we knew on every place, every floor the exact spot where the leak was. Well, I probably got about 16 of the 24 and I’m signaling to the guy and he didn’t stop. And this chair keeps going up and up and up and the next think I know, I see him running. And I go up and he’s leaving that machine. What’s happening here? So I had a belt around me that, to hold me to the bosun's chair. I took the belt off and I stood up on the seat and held on to the cable because we were getting up to 22 or 23. I figured when we get up to the top, I’m getting off in a hurry because it was going to pull everything up there down. [Down. Yeah.] Finally we got maybe three-fourth from the top and it stopped. I told them to take me down because I passed everything already that we were supposed to caulk. All he could do is release the, there was an electric brake and he had to release the brake by hand and I would go down real slow. What happened was the points in the contact in the motor fused together and he couldn’t shut it off. He had to run inside the fuse box and pull the, no plugs natural, go directly into the fuse box and he couldn’t unplug it so he ran over there and yanked the cord right out of the fuse box and it stopped just in time. That was interesting on that job. 7:35 [Did you have a lot of close calls like that over the years?] Oh you have ‘em you know. Everybody can tell you close calls that they have. I was working in the, we were working in the brewery and there was an explosion. We were putting stairs up and we were using block and tackles in them days. And I was up about 4-5 floors and there was an explosion. And the people... It was a working brewery and people in there hollered, “Ammonia, get out!” So I was up on higher floors and the block and tackle was hanging down in the middle of the stairway opening. So I jumped for the rope to slide down the rope on the block and tackles. And just before I went for it, somebody on the floor below did and knocked it out of my way. It just so  happened that it didn’t go that far because I was free falling then. And then when it swung back, I caught it. I burned my hands, I only stopped about maybe a floor and half before I hit the bottom, but I burned all the skin off my hands when I stopped. I slowed myself down enough that I didn’t, I didn’t get hurt. So that was kind of close. And...oh... I don’t know. We were working on the Powerhouse and I had to go change a snatch block and the hoist only went on certain levels. So I went up above, slid down to where I was going to change the snatch block. That’s a... We put a cable in for hoisting. And I changed that and I was going to slide down the column to the next level so I could walk back the beam to the hoist. And unbeknown to me, the painters had painted the columns before I got down there. I grabbed the column and slid right down on that wet paint. I went sliding down and I hit the beam just below and it was also painted. But there was one off to the side that they hadn’t painted yet. So I was all full of paint in the front and I was able to get over to the other beam and walk back on the dry ones. I never noticed, you know you’re not thinking sometimes when you’re doing stuff. But its stuff like that. We were working on Marina City, I don’t know if you... [Oh yeah, sure.] Well, we were working there and putting all the railings around the outside of it. And I don’t know where we were 23 or 24, something like that. The plasterers, the laborers were used to carry the planks out in the balcony, they’d hit our railing and bump, and they knew they couldn’t go any further. Then they could swing over to the other room inside the apartment to set up the scaffold for the plasterers. Well, they got one floor ahead of us and this laborer backed out into the plank and there was no railing there for him to bump and went right over. It’s... Stuff like that happens all the time. 10:45 [Did you see a lot of safety changes from the time you started to the time you retired?] Oh, all the time. [What year did you retire?] I retired in 2004. [So you saw a lot of those changes take place then.] Oh yeah. I worked 25 years on the outside and then I worked 25 years for the Chicago Park District. I invested as an ironworker for my pension and my business agent at the time told me, he says, “There aren't a lot guys that live in the city. A lot of ironworkers move to the suburbs.” He says, “The Chicago Park District is looking to put someone on. Why don’t you go down there and I’ll give you a letter to take it down there. Take an interview, maybe start yourself another pension.” So I went down there and they says, “Yeah, we’ll hire you.” It wasn’t nothing political or anything. So I just went down and worked for them. And then when I retired from the park district, they said I should come back and work one more year on the outside here or I had to get 1000 hours, so that’s six months. I went back to work and they sent me downtown on a high rise downtown. I hadn’t been on a high rise, so they give me a safety harness to put on. I had never even seen one of these. So the kids are telling me, “Here, we’ll help you get it on.” And its got the hooks on the back and everything. And I told them I said, “The last time I put something like this on,” I says, “I jumped out of a good airplane over Normandy.” [LAUGHTER] These kids believed me. [LAUGHTER] Like you say, safety stuff, we never had any of that kind of stuff. Now there’s a scaffolds, if you're on a scaffold, there’s cables hanging down, you have belts on connected to the safety cables. I never knew what that was.  12:54 [When you started, were there a lot of Germans or ethnic groups within the union you were in, the ironworkers?] No, not really. [It wasn’t like some unions that used to be Italians, like the tile guys or anything...] Yeah, like cement fitters? [Yeah.] No, this was pretty... They were quite a few Germans in there but it was all mixed up. Some of these guys in the pictures here are Irish and Polish and what have you. It was all mixed up and all good guys. There wasn’t... We didn’t have a very good local at that time, and I don’t think there were 400-500 members then. Which we’re not that big now either. I think we’re about 1200 I think. It was all pretty...look out for each other and try to find work for each other. They were good to me. 13:48 [Did you guys play jokes on each other, especially with the new workers? Was that something you used to do?] No, I don’t... [Any practical jokes?] Well, they might have done some stuff once in a while but, we didn’t play around too much in the jobs. The guys are pretty serious about what they were doing. You’re up in the air working, sometimes you don’t want to play around too much. I don’t remember anything. [Did you guys have any... I know sometimes for a really tall building, probably did it at Marina Towers, topped it off. Are there any other kinds of things like when you finished a job or whatever, any rituals that you had?] Yeah, they’d have topping off parties. In fact, the one, this 2801 here. It was an aluminum building and we had a lot of aluminum scrap left over. So they scrapped the aluminum, took the money, and this one guy, Danny Gundlock, a big brute guy that you see looking out from below... [Oh yeah, that picture.] Yeah. He lived out along O’Hare Field. He got a big house with a lot of property. So they had a barbecue out by his house and everybody’s talking and drinking beer. Talking about stories and telling stories and is wife, a little tiny woman, she says, “He came home from a union meeting one night,” she said, “He’s all drunk and its 3 o’clock in the morning and he wakes me up,” she says. I don’t think this woman's even 5 feet tall. “And he wanted breakfast,” she said. “So I’m in the kitchen cooking eggs and he’s in the shower to wake up. That’s when I woke up. I got the bacon and eggs. What am I doing here?” She walked into the shower and laid a hot frying pan on his ass with the bacon in it. [LAUGHTER] That woke him up, she said, and he didn’t deny it. [LAUGHTER] There are a lot of stories like that. 16:01 [Did you ever have to go on strike with any of the job sites you were in?] No. [You were pretty lucky here in Chicago it seems like.] Yeah, we didn’t have any strikes all the time I was there. Because I was... They had some of the bigger jobs, but the contractors always was with, some of the bigger jobs went on strike but some of the smaller contractors, whatever they settled for, we’ll settled. So don’t go on strike with us. So we didn’t. I never went on strike. [Did you feel that most of the time in your career that the contractors and the union got along pretty well here in Chicago?] Very well. They really did because... It’s a shame that you see the unions going down now because we worked so hard for what we did, especially safety wise. And now you go and see these people working on scaffolds with no safety lines. No nothing. [He mean's non-union ironworkers] And we worked hard to get to that point and now it’s nothing. In fact, in  my neighborhood, they’re doing a lot of home building where I live and you see guys that are working Saturdays, Sundays. You know they’re not getting overtime. [What neighborhood is that?] I live at what they call the North Center. I’m on the north side of Irving Park, Lincoln Avenue and Damen. [I know where that is.] I’ve lived there for 47 years. It’s a nice neighborhood, but its not up and coming because it’s already up, but they keep tearing down them down and building new ones. I’ve watched these guys working. I could never work like that. They would never let us. [Yeah, I live over on Sheridan, not that far from you, and I see these job sites and see guys working with tennis shoes on and t-shirts...] That’s exactly right. Yeah. And how can they do it? It almost seems like the government wants this...because I just heard that...tradesmen from Poland and people from Poland, they don’t have to have visas no more, they’re just bringing them in because they said we need construction workers here. We don’t need construction workers. We have plenty. But they’re going to flood it so they can do all of this. What they’re doing is union busting is what they want to do. Bust the unions right down. And then they got a good foothold. I’m out of it, but my son is still an ironworker. [Is he in #63?] Yes. [What does he do?] Well, right now he’s laid off. He’s not working right now. But he’s alright. He's single and put his money away. He’s got a two flat building, so he’s collecting the rent. He’s not hurting. I’ve got it made right now since I’ve retired. I have a home in Arizona and I go there in the winter time and come back here in the summertime. What more can you ask for? 19:30 [Well, I asked the questions I needed to ask. Is there anything else you’d like to talk about, the union or the work you’ve done? I’d be happy to hear what you have to say, if you want to add anything else.] I think we’ve pretty much covered it. I haven’t been around much like most of these guys here. A lot of them work for a contractor one month or a week or a day. I’ve been very fortunate. I’ve worked for the company that I served my apprenticeship with. I worked for them for 12 years. I worked for another company doing over head door works, steel doors and fire doors. I worked for that company for 11 years and just a couple in between before I went to the Park District. I don’t think that I’ve worked for 15 contractors in 50 years. You don’t hear that. [Yeah, you’ve had pretty steady employment the whole time.] I did. Yeah. I’ve been very fortunate...to have a... Of course once you get to doing doors, once you get a name that you do doors and that’s your specialty, you work pretty steady. [Was that one of those heavy iron doors?] Yeah. You see them in loading docks, the big steel ones that roll up. [Oh yeah.] And O’Hare, the hanger doors. [Oh, those great big ones.] Yeah. In fact, when I came back from retirement with the Park District, the first place I worked at was O’Hare. We had to re-cable them big doors, the same ones that I worked on years ago. [How do they put those in because those are really high. That’s got to be what, 3-4 stories high at least.] Oh yeah. It all comes in sections and then you bolt it all together. But when we re-cabled it, everything is just there. Interesting though. 21:33 [What did you do for the Park District? I didn’t ask that.] We did mostly the docks and the harbors. All summer long, in the docks and the harbors. In the winter time, there’s always  stuff to do at the zoo. All kinds of work in the zoo. [With the animal cages and everything?] Exactly right. We kept a crew there constantly. Sometimes you’d get a call in the middle of the night. Something would happen. They called me one night that a lion was broken through a door, but it was only going to get him to another cage but they said they couldn’t have him wandering back and forth. I don’t know, they called me around midnight. I get down there and get over there in my truck and the lion was over there and there was a small passage door, steel sliding door. And its bouncing back and forth. It’s him and I can see the claw coming up. And I said, “What do you want me to do?” I says, “I can’t get in there with this...his foot came out.” So they went and got a fire hose and forced it to the other side of the cage. I was able to get in there and weld something on there, put some angles on it and I welded it so that at least it would hold until they could get him transferred somewhere else. Then I went took care of both sides of the doors. That was very interesting. They had in the reptile house, the alligators, they had a swing gate down there. And they would swing the gate and keep the alligators on one side while they cleaned the other side. Then they would open the gate and push them to the other side with the hose. They would go to the other side, swing the gate again, and clean the other side. Well the gate was rotted out from so many years. So they called us down there and they said, “Ok, we’ll hold them over here – there’s only a little hole to climb through.” And they said, “We’ll hold them over here and you guys take the gate off.” I said, “What do you mean, you’re going to hold ‘em.” They had a broomstick. And they said, “If they come and poke ‘em back.” And I said, “They ain’t coming on me.” I went in there with a torch. And if your alligator comes toward me, I’m going to burn him with this torch. I’m going to shove this right down his mouth.” They said, “We can’t have that.” “Then that gate ain’t getting fixed.” [LAUGHTER] So they finally got... They got some of the gators transferred to another, just the meaner ones, to another cage. And the ones that were a little more docile, they were held to the side and the carpenters come in there, and built like a plywood wall. And we were able to take the gate off because it took us a week to build a new one. 24:37 [A lot of the work, like when you did that stuff, and when I talk to ironworkers, it seems like they have ato have a really good knowledge. It’s not like you take a pre-fab thing. You’ve got to build that from scratch and do all that.] Yes. Everything in the Park District was from scratch because everything was so old. You had to build everything. In the reptile house one time I had to work that cage. There was powder all over the floor. I went into the back and said, “What’s this?” And they put baking soda on the floor when a snake escapes. They can tell where its at over night. If it runs around, they can follow the marks and they know where the snake is. I says, “So there’s a loose snake in here?” “Yeah, but he made too many marks. We can’t find him again.” “See you later.” [LAUGHTER] [What about the stuff you did along the water front. Was that like in the slips and stuff?] Exactly. We re-built the slips. Everything rots out below the water or above the water, and the boats hit them. All summer long. I would go there, I would start in, I tried to start in March. There is a lot of stuff you can do because you’ve got to take things out of the water and some of them are called floating stars. [Oh yeah, I know exactly because I live out by Montrose so I go over there.] Okay. We had to take those stars out  of the water. Sometimes dismantle them. We’d put them on shore and we could work on shore at that time of the year. In fact, they asked me... They wanted to build... “We need something to maneuver those stars when we take them apart. You seen the fingers on the stars. Sometimes we could take the fingers off and bring them back to shore and then with a crane would lift them off but I can lift them with my truck because I have a crane on my truck. But we had no way to keep them from out there because they would tip over. They would flip upside down. So they would ask me if I could design a boat or a barge. And I did. I did it at my kitchen table. I made drawings. I had no knowledge of this but I knew what I wanted to work with. And I designed a barge and they bought the two pontoons and they asked me where they should get them. I says, “Chicago Boiler would make us that.” I went to Chicago Boiler and told them what I wanted. They made them. And I made the platform, and built the barge, and put two outboard motors on and tool boxes. Welder on there, a torch. All the tools you needed were now on the barge. And I put a boom on the front, a little crane on the front so it would stick out. The finger would go in between these two pontoons and we would hook the other in onto the finger and lift it right up out of the water and take it right to shore. It worked perfect. [So you basically... Did you weld that barge together yourself?] Yeah, all I had was the two pontoons. I made it all myself. I have a whole roledex of pictures of the progress that we did. It really came out nice. [You say you drove your truck there. Was that for a contractor? Did you work for a contractor then or directly for the Park District.] Directly for the Park District. I drove a truck with a crane on it. [Did you have a crew go with you then? Or was it you and...] I would have usually myself, one ironworker, sometimes in the summertime when it got business, we’d have four. And I would have carpenters. I think three carpenters and maybe a laborer. That was our crew. And I would work all the way up to almost Christmas. In fact, they had a new, what they call a district engineer who is in charge of the construction section that I was working at. But I came in at Christmas, just before Christmas one year...the first year he was there. He asked my foreman, “Who is that guy?” He’d never seen me. All summer long. [So you were gone all the time.] I was gone all the time. If I needed something, I’d call it in and they’d send a truck out. And I would just leave my truck on the job site inside Belmont Harbor inside the building. [Oh yeah. Did you have to cover all the territory from Evanston and up there in Howard Street all the way to the South Side, doing stuff?] We’d break at the river. We’d do the north. The South Side and Main Street, they worked out of...they took everything south of the river. [Was that an interesting job because there was change all the time, you did different things?] Yeah. It was really interesting. [And that was the stuff at the zoo, was tied in with all of that, it was all part of being with the Park District] Oh yeah. You’d get out and into the city parks. You’d have to do playgrounds, fences and guard rails. You name it. Tennis courts. There’s no end to it. [And you had to figure it out yourself.] Yeah. [The fences and...] Yeah. Whatever you had to do. Buckingham Foundation. That was ours. Billy McClean [see interview with McClean] and I... You’ll probably talk to him. We had to go and work inside one of those sea horses that shoot the water. Billy scratched his initials inside of him. And Billy’s father? His father was the one, when they had the valves that made the fountain go... His father was an engineer and he did it manually. [Wow.] Billy’s father. He made all those...the timing and all that stuff. His Dad  would stay down there and it’s a little house that you can look out and the windows aren’t very high so you wouldn’t obstruct anyone’s vision. He could watch the fountain and he would do all the controls by hand. Now it’s all automatic. [Yeah, I remember hearing there’s some computer in Atlanta or something that controls it.] Yeah, Minneapolis. [Oh, Minneapolis. Ok.] They control all that. But Billy’s Dad did it all. And you’ll probably interview Billy. [I’ll make a point of it.] He’ll tell you all about it. [Well, its really been a pleasure talking with you.] My pleasure. [Thanks so much.] ok. END 31:29 "
Ironworkers;Walter “Wally” Ritch;1944;2011;00:01     [Tell me your name and where you were born.] I’m Wally Ritch. I was born in Chicago. [What year were you born?] 1944. [Tell me a little bit about how you got into ironwork. Did you have a job before that? Where did you go to school?] Well, I went to school at, high school at St. Pat- rick’s. And my one friend who I grew up with, he got in when he was 18 because his brother was in. He was an ironworker and I worked just different jobs. Then he says, “Why don’t you try to get in?” And I was 25. And I took the test and I got right in through another ironworker. I had to go through the test and went to school and stuff. It wasn’t just getting a book. [What was your first job as an ironworker? Do you remember?] My first job... As a matter of fact, the gentleman is in the other room. It was at a railing outfit. We did railings and stairs. It was American Ornamental Railing. I worked there through my whole apprenticeship. As a matter of fact, I was an indentured apprentice for the first three years. Then they quit the indentureship because they were having too much problems. [What was the indentured? What was different about that?] Well, when you’re indentured, the union signs, the company signs, and you sign like a contract that you will stay with the company for your full four years. You can’t quit and go to a different outfit. That’s what was happening. Guys would work for a year or so with an outfit, then learn all the stuff and then some other outfit would give them an extra buck and then they’d quit and just go to the other outfit. This way you weren’t stuck with the company but you had to stay with the company for your apprenticeship. But they guaranteed you, or were suppose to guarantee you forty hours. [A week...during that period...] Right. [What kind of work did you do for them?] I’d... We’d put in railings and stairs, and then when it was a little slow, you worked in the shop. You’d cut shims and you’d help them weld stuff. [Was there a lot of weld- ing involved in that job?] Yes. And I went to Washburn Trade School. [I know where that was. It’s out of business now I think, right?] Yeah. But that was where our union had our apprentice- ship, at Washburn. Then, went there for the four years. That’s where you learned your trade.     2:48 [And then after you left that job, what kind of work did you do over the years?] Well, basi- cally after that, I basically did, like, windows and curtain walls. [That sounds like the high rises, the stuff you hang on the outside.] Yes, that or you’re putting in windows basically. The outfit I was with for, oh, maybe 10-12 years in the architectural. That’s what I did, just put in windows. [Did you work on some of the real tall buildings down town? You probably worked on every- thing, right?] Yeah. Most of them at that time, and I’m talking about like in the 80s. Most of the buildings going up were like 40-50 stories. And it was a lot of punch out windows, but they made money. And that’s the bottom line. The company was making money. And then after that, I worked with just different outfits. I worked at Navy Pier. [When they were re-modeling everything out there?] Yes. I worked Navy Pier. Trump Tower. [Did you work on the win- dows in Trump Tower?] Yes. The curtain wall at Trump Towe. Another big one was Soldiers Field. [And how does that current wall... I’m vaguely familiar with the process, but do they bring in all sections on the cranes and then put them on or...] No, its... Its... There’s so many different ways. You’ve got your mullions. You put in your mullions first and then the windows. The glass goes into the mullions. Now a days, its different is that they put clips out onto the edge and everything sits on the clips and it just keeps going up, like... Trump Towers was like that. [That speeds up the process a lot.] Definitely.     4:49 [Now were there other unions that there were sometimes jurisdictional things... Like how to separate you from... Was it the glazers that...] Glazers... Well, you know... It’s been... They are our more mortal enemies. [LAUGHTER] It’s just. I’m being honest. [Yeah, I un- derstand.] Before, it used to be that you put in all the metal and then the glazers came by and put in all the glass. But then they started putting the glass into the frames. That’s how we claimed everything. [The manufacturers did that...] Right. [Yeah.] Then you’re just setting the frames. When it came to Soldiers Field, we did all the glass. The glazers... I don’t know why... I hope I don’t get anyone into trouble, but we did everything. The interior. They just... I don’t know if they didn’t want it because it was tough. It was tough. A lot of work, a lot of heavy work. And at Soldiers Field, we dealt with Gartner who was from Germany. A lot of their prints were in German. They were metric and it made for difficulty in installation. It did. But, like Navy Pier, like, I’m going back, that was like ‘91. I don’t know if you’ve ever been there... [Many times.] ...but all the bones, all up in the ceilings and then the glass went into that and all the frames and stuff. [Is that all at the very end, what you’re talking about? Or are you talking about...?] It’s all the ceiling. [Oh right, ok.] And all that inside... It just, there was a lot of work. A ton of work. But I can’t complain about my life as an ironworker. It just... It’s a nice life, if you keep it in perspective. The way I always looked at it, the company’s got to make money. It’s not you making money, it’s the company’s got to make it. Because if the company doesn’t make money, you’re out of a job. And that’s what and a why people should start looking at it, is that the com- pany’s got to make money. If they don’t, you’re out of a job. [It seems like the unions and the companies kind of get that in Chicago, not just the ironworkers. You know.] Yes. [What do you think it is about Chicago that makes it different than so many cities where there is such a hostile climate between...] Well... [Is it the history of the city and they had to work it out a long time ago and its working?] I just think that long time ago, everybody knows is that scabs couldn’t come into the city for the longest time, because everybody was watching out for them, the non-union. And that’s what kept this city strong, was the unions. As long as you kept them out, that’s why it stayed strong. It’s basically keeping the non-union out.     8:06 [Did you get involved with any strike activity? Did you have to go out?] You know, knock on wood, I’ve missed a few days because of a strike. Not in this city, no. I’ve been off because of lack of work, but not like it is today. Years ago, I think the last time...this city was in trouble with the union. Not trouble but... It was like 91-92 it was real slow. There was like 350 guys off. So for one year, I maybe worked a week here and a week there. But before that, we just kept busy.     8:55 [What do you think was the biggest change in the work from the time you started until now. You were talking about safety...] I would say the biggest is safety is because I don’t know if nobody realized it but I always tell the apprentices today. When we used to do windows, and you were on the 40th floor, you’d put up two benches and a plank to walk across and you did your headers for your windows. You had no safety belt on. There was nothing in front of you. That’s how you worked back then. Today’s day and age, you can’t be within 6 feet of the edge without a belt. That’s the biggest change to me in ironworker safety. [When did you see that change start to take place? Was it in the 70s with OSHA?] No, no... It was after that. It was way after that. It was way after that. Then OSHA started stepping in and seeing people working by the edge with nothing on, no harness or nothing, or even a belt. At first it was just, you had a belt and a line attached to it. But then as it went on, it got more and more... You got the har- nesses and everything like that. In today’s day and age... You know...I mean it’s totally differ- ent. [You seem to think that was a good change. I know one of the other guys was more nostal- gic or...for the past. What’s your perspective on that?] My perspective is... It’s for the good. Because I would have had 4-5 guys that would be dead today if they didn’t have their belt on be- cause it happens. It happens. You make the slightest mistake and adios. [Were you ever seri- ously injured on the job at all? Or were you lucky?] Well, no, there was a couple of times when it was close. I... One time a louver fell on me and knocked me off the truck. I hurt my leg real bad. [And what’s a louver?] That’s where air goes through, those slat things on the sides of buildings. We were working there on a job down town. How we were picking it up, the louver tipped and knocked me off. Luckily that’s all that happened. I just got a bruised up leg, but I was off for a couple of weeks because it swelled up and stuff like that.     11:44 Another time, this happened just before I retired. I was going up a lift. What do you call them? The scaffold lift that bricklayers use, the power one. [Yup.] We were running a job and it was like five stories up because we were working in an alley. [Wally left to take a phone call] So that time that I almost was closest to being killed is I was going up the scaffold and I think at that time, I was 60. And as I’m going up, I’m going up holding on with two hands, taking steps just to be safe. A laborer was coming down. Luckily I had both hands on it and he stuck right on me. Luckily, I had two hands on it because if I only had one, I wouldn’t be here today. So that’s.... But it happens. He was a young kid who didn’t look. Because I was up 4 – 4 1⁄2 sto- ries. Anyway...luckily I was with two hands.     13:10 [When you started, was/were there different ethnic groups within the union that you re- member? Or was that already breaking down by then?] No, that was... We didn’t have nothing like that. I don’t remember it. I don’t remember it at all. There was times in the 80s that we had to take certain ethnic groups on the jobs but you made do. [And now you have this apprentice program here that seems to recruit all kinds of different people.] Right, right. Well, back then, we had all kinds too. [Oh you did.] Oh Yeah.     13:52 [Did you ever work in other job markets or were you lucky with real steady work here in Chicago. I talked to Rich, he was booming out to different parts of the country.] I was lucky here. I was lucky here. Then that ‘91-’92, my one nephew, his buddy owned... He was a build- er. Believe it or not, I built porches and whatever this guy wanted to supplement working until the union got me another job. Back then you were 300 on a list, you knew you were going to be off for a while. I stayed here. I did a couple of times travel for this company, the Inland I was talking about. I traveled to the east coast, Philadelphia and New York. But that was just over- seeing. I was a boss and we were slow here, so my boss says, “You want to go to Philadelphia for a couple of weeks?” And I said sure. And I just helped on that job. I didn’t do any work, just watched the guys and show ‘em our system and...you know. I never really was a boomer boomer.     15:15 [Were there any customs that you guys had? I know there’s topping off... I know Local #1does a lot of that because you’re way up on the top. Are there any customs that you guys had or rituals in your trade?] Yeah, well, it depends on what the job was like. I remember one job, we had one of the guys died. He didn’t get killed on the job, but he died. So up in one of the corners, we put our names on one of the beams that was in already. That was about it. There wasn’t, nah I don’t think... Back then the customs was maybe going to the bar at lunch. [Yeah.] But that was not okay back then, but we did it. [Rich talked about the drinking too, that there was a program now to kind of limit that more. Kind of educate guys. Did you see a big shift in that?] Without a doubt. Back in the 80s, that was common. Now it’s rare because the compa- nies... [Liability.] ...liability, plus the contractors. Believe it or not, some of the contractors, for a while, were following the guys at lunch to see where they go. If they see you going in the bars, when you come out, they go to the owner and say, “Hey, your guys are going to the bar. We can’t have this.” Which you can’t blame them. It’s different today. Very different.     17:17 [Anything like clothes that were distinctive about ironworkers or their...?] Just that, well, with us #63, we always had our helmets on backwards. That was us. [Did you have a certain kind of helmet?] No, no, but every one was backwards. And I guess today its not the same, be- cause you can’t do it anymore. [Oh, ok.] On your high rise jobs with the insurance companies, everything has to got to be just so. And years ago, you didn’t have to wear safety glasses. Now, today, they are automatic on the job.     18:00 [Did you do welding at home or develop a hobby with welding? Like the signs out here and some other stuff...] No, not really. No. I did most of my welding when I first got in but... [Then you did more of the glass stuff...] But then towards... Today, it’s more the glass and then they would always have certain guys who were just welders, welding the clips, or weld the beams or stuff like that. But way back then, I just did what I did because it was the job. There was no, no hobby about it. It was just part of the job.     18:41 [What year did you retire in?] I retired six years ago. [2005?] Yeah, I think it was. I think it was 2005...yeah, cause . . . End of 2004 or beginning of 2005. [And now are you the official president of the retire club or...?] Yeah, well, they call me chairman. But its... I just try to help the guys. Try to coordinate stuff. [So you have a monthly gathering here?] Yes. [And how many people are involved in the retirees club?] Usually we get between, I would say 30-40 on the average, I’d say. And then sometimes we’d get more, like in the wintertime, a lot of the guys go to Florida for the winter, so they don’t show up. Its basically... Then this past year, we had five guys die. Some of the old-old timers. This guy, Steve, who was always here – he was 92. Eddy Root, he was 91. Our Ex BA, he just died. Don Holt. I don’t know how old he was but he was up there. So, you loose guys...and now with things being slow, we got more guys retiring. [Taking early retirement?] Right. Yeah.     20:14 [Well, you’ve answered all of my questions. Is there something you want to talk about connected to your work or the union.] It’s a nice life if you got it in your head that it’s a job job to where you have to get up and go do it. You’ve got to want to. Like when I was at Soldiers Field, we worked 7/12s. And it was tough at the end because I was one of the bosses. It was tough. But you’ve got to want to do it. Just... And the kids today, they’re hard to talk to be- cause--‘cause I’m being honest. For a while there, drugs played an important part and it still does in today’s... Some of these kids were on it. You didn’t want to get them in trouble, but they would screw up the job. So you sort of, you try to tell them, “Hey, this is your life. Don’t screw it up.” “Yeah, yeah, yeah.” You got to like what you do. If you don’t like it, find some- thing else. That’s with anything in life. You could be making $150,000, but if you can find something you like and make $100,000, forget that $50,000. Do what you like to do. Get up and want to do something. Other than that, I love being retired. [LAUGHTER]     END: 22:00
Ironworkers;David Olby;1949;2011;0:01 Testing equipment. Announcement, initial question–when and where born, how you got into ironworkers trade? 1:08 Well, I was born in 1949 and actually I was born in a Model-T on White River Hill. Never made it to the hospital but... Born at a very young age [chuckles]. Well, I grew up south of Sanborn, on a little farm. And we farmed for quite a few years. Milking thirteen cows at the most, by hand, my younger sister and my older brother and I. And at that time Dad was gone all week, and then he’d come home on the weekends. He was gone on different ironworking jobs. And so we’d have a list of chores to do throughout the week. And when he come home on the weekend things had better be pretty well done. And back then you did what your parents told you. And if you didn’t there was–we had a lot of willow growing up around the place. So we’d get to choose whichever stick we wanted. Luckily that didn’t happen very often, but whenever it did we deserved it. So we did that. We did the farming for a number of years, through our teen years. Kept us off the street, kept us busy. And I think that was dad’s main goal. For the most part it was a good life, and we grew up that way, raising our own meat, and started deer hunting when we were 12. And Dad wouldn’t buy us a new rifle, he bought us used ones so they were broke in and knew that they were good quality. So we, my brother and I, started in with 30/30 Winchesters. And I’m probably missing a lot of things in-between here, but time is short. 3:28 So we did that and our first hunting experience was being dropped off at the edge of the woods, and picked up in the evening. We could go hunt and do whatever we wanted to do. We did have training, home training, before we were dropped off. And Dad always told us that during the winter when we have nothing to do to take our rifles down and snap in with them. Make sure they were empty, and on safe and everything...and just snap in with them and...get used to them. Probably one of the biggest bucks I ever got in my life was on account of that training. This is after I had been in the Marine Corps and went through all of their training. I had this nice buck standing in front of me and we were taught in the Marine Corps, BRASS... Breath, relax, aim, sites, squeeze. And I did all of that. Squeezed off the shot. The buck stood there. And in my mind, I’m just going crazy, trying to figure out what I did wrong. And I knew I had to make a quick decision so I just upped and snapped and shot and down he went. And...so that was...Dad’s training. 4:55 [Gets choked up thinking about his dad. Leary talks a little about his late father: [I thought a lot about my Dad on the way up here. He died two years ago. Every day I think about him...than something happens and it reminds me of something he told me. I was cleaning the storm windows yesterday with my brother. We were putting them on the old home place. The old man would have... He would have been out there cracking the whip on us. LAUGHS] 5:39 So that was probably one of the best experiences I had. In that year, Dad had been fighting cancer for two years and that was the last...that was the last...time he hunted with us. We started dragging the buck out of the woods. We had about a mile and a half to drag it. And it was a real dry, crisp year and no snow on the ground. And Dad had walked into his favorite pine tree and that was about as far as he could get. And he was sitting there when we came dragging that buck out. [Wow.] And...I had a grin on my face probably like a jack o’lantern. Buttons already to pop off my shirt and Dad says, “It’s a keeper.” LAUGHS So we had to kind of laugh because when we got the deer out to the car, and went to load it up, one side was bare. It didn’t have any hair left on it I guess because the ground was so dry. LAUGHS I’m going to jump  ahead a little bit here on this story. Thirty years later, my daughter married a taxidermist and I was telling them the whole story about this particular deer. And he asked me all about which way it was facing and what his face looked like and if it had a lot of grey on it. And whereabouts the grey was and things like that. And...I thought he was being just curious. Well, thirty years later, for Christmas, I get a shoulder mount...of that deer. [David gets a little choked up.] I don’t know how you would say it but that brought that dead deer back to life. [Wow.] Even though it was still dead. But more than that, it about the memory back to life. He did such a good job on it and, right to this day, we have it hanging in the living room with a guarantee that...he would fix it if anything was wrong with it. So it don’t get any better than that. [Very cool.] 9:04 So that’s just a little bit about growing up. In my senior year, well, all through this--the whole time--Dad is doing his, he always was a great lover of country music and Dad always said, “There’s--my two favorite kinds of music are country, and western.” LAUGHS And that was always interwoven throughout our childhoods and it was quite a bond. And in the earlier years, Mom and Dad made sure we got to Sunday school. And we always had a neighbor, Augie Moss, who would come down and have coffee with Mom and Dad on Sunday mornings. And his mother was very old at that time and he would take her to church. Then he would come down and gab with Mom and Dad. And that was pretty regular. That was like every Sunday. So we had a pretty good Christian upbringing. And I think later on, having that woven into our family held us together when things started to go, health-wise, started to go upside down. That was a very valuable part of our bringing up too. 10:50 In my senior year in high school, I asked Dad if I could--at Christmas break--if I could go with him on one of his jobs. And he said. “Sure.” So I had two weeks of hanging with the guys. And my brother already was working for Dad. And I think the job I went with on Dad, the first one was, I never even got to the job site. I ended up being the chief cook and bottle washer while he was at work. So that was kind of a letdown, but I got to be by the guys anyway so that was ok. But then in the spring, when school was done, then I went on the first job with him. And it was kind of a crude awakening. We’re standing, looking at this framework, this red iron and Dad says, “Are you going to be a ground man or are you going to be an ironworker?” And I said, “Well, I’ll be an ironworker.” He says, “Well, get up there.” I looked around for a ladder and there was no ladder. And I said, “Well, how am I gonna get up there?” And he showed me one time how to grab the column and walk up the column until you get to the, to the purlins and climb up there and walk the web up on the bent and upper beam. And that’s what I did. And I was amazed that I could do that. And from that point on, we just got better at working together, my brother and I. Not too bad for a couple of guys who fought like cats and dogs when we were farming but we learned to rely on each other because... 13:06 My brother Larry and I, we could walk right on top of the steel and carry the next, carry the next purlin up and lay it in place. And in order to do that, you had to have a good teammate. ‘Cause if one of you slipped, you had to know exactly what to do so you wouldn’t drag each  other into the hole or take a fall. I think back on it now and we did have a few close calls. I think everybody does. You do things that get you in trouble without even realizing you’re heading that way. I was up on top of a scaffolding, this was in White Pine, Michigan. We were working on the wheelhouse for the big bucket that went down the mine shaft. And they would fill it and bring it to the surface. So we were working on the wheelhouse which had a 60 foot eave height. And I climbed up off of the scaffolding onto the roof. We had the sheet steel on already. And it was early in the morning and I was walking kind of at a diagonal over to the ridge into the gable end at the same time, kind of side-stepping. And I stepped off of the dry part of the roof and got into the morning moisture and frost. And before I realized it, I’m sliding backwards. So I laid down flat and grabbed the ribs on the steel with both of my hands and was trying to get a foot stuck on the screw heads, just off the sliding end. Ever so slowly, I just kept sliding--and I got down to the edge of the eave and the lower part of my legs were hanging over already. And I looked over my shoulder and all I could see down below was frozen ground and I figured, either I’m dead or broke up really bad. And about the time I come to that conclusion, this big ol’ arm reaches up [David gets choked up a little], reached across off of the scaffolding and that was on the gable end. And he yanked me over there. And--before I could even take a breath, I got my butt chewed big time. And that was Dad. And he said, “What were you thinking?” And I says, “Dad, I guess I wasn’t.” So he just let it go at that. And... 16:29 One other time we were working on an airplane hangar which wasn’t very high. Just the way things happen, you’ve got to be thinking all the time, every minute of the day because you’re working high in the air and--stupid mistakes get people killed. We were laying the sheet steel and, as we were doing that, we would lay the insulation and staple it together and then lay the next sheet steel on top of that. And so on and so forth. And, ahead of the insulation, we always had a plank that you could walk on while you were stapling the insulation together. And at that time--I think I was chewing tobacco, or had a cold, I don’t remember which one. But I just took a spit over my right shoulder and thought nothing of it. Got up to move and I stepped from the sheet steel onto the plank and that’s where the spit had landed. And it had froze. My foot hit that and both feet went out from under me, but luckily I straddled the plank. Dad and the owner of the hangar were walking below--good timing--right at the same time. And Dad hollered, “Headache.” That’s usually what they holler when somebody drops something from up above. Well, here it was me, I was dropping. But luckily, like I said, I straddled the plank and Dad hollered “Headache!” And I said, “BS.” And I said, “Butt ache.” LAUGHTER He looked up at me and just shook his head. But that was was lucky. If, you know, if I wouldn’t have straddled the plank, I would have been on the concrete. And that was probably the two scariest things that ever happened to me working on the steel. And sometimes I wonder why the good Lord was picking on me, but I think he was trying to train me. LAUGHS [So where was that, with the hangar, where you were working there?] I think that was in Marquette. 19:03 We were worked Marquette, Ishpeming, Peshtigo. No, I take it back. It was Peshtigo because we were crisscrossing the Wisconsin border in that little tip. Yeah, it was Peshtigo. But  the other one, like I said, was at White Pine. We worked out of Ontonagon. We stayed in Bergland, Michigan, when we were working White Pine. But in a year’s time, as far as I can remember, we probably had six different jobs. We subcontracted out of Iron Mountain through W.B. Thompson Company. And we built a electrical--I forget the name of it now but it was a building. In fact, I’ve seen a truck with that name on it, here, not too long ago. So that electric company is still in business in Iron Mountain. I’m just, I’m not bringing up the name right now but--that was one of the buildings we did. [This is likely M.J. Electric, headquartered in Iron Mountain, Michigan.] 20:26 We had some crazy guys working with us—it was just amazing. A lot of the boys were right from this area that we knew, or knew their families. And that worked out real well. We made a good team. Everybody was looking out for each other all the time. I worked for, maybe a year and a half, I don’t remember exactly now, but I remember thinking, you know--they always say if you decide what you’re going to do for the rest of your life, look at the fruit on the tree before you decide to go that way. And I remember thinking--when my hands were numb and I couldn’t pick up a screw, couldn’t pick up a drill, a lot of work you had to do without gloves on because you couldn’t, like screwing the sheeting down, you couldn’t hardly hold the screws with gloves on--I remember being that cold and, at the age of18, between 18 and 19, having hemorrhoids from sitting on the steel. And I’m thinking, this is the fruit on the tree. And I more or less right then decided I’m going in some other direction. LAUGHS And there’s ironworkers that have been doing this all of their lives, so I kind of wimped out. From that point on, I did the next best thing in my life. I joined the Marine Corps. LAUGHS Another rude awakening. 22:20 [You said you worked with some crazy guys...guys around here. Can you tell about some of them?] Well, one of them was Happy Hudak. And his family hailed right from Ashland. And--hmm...just a fun guy to be around. And he was a short, little, dark haired guy and he could climb steel like he was born to do it. And a good guy to get along with. Very reliable. And another fellow was Dave Tapani. And I know my dad and his dad worked together for a lot of years. And that’s the thing, once you’re in that venue, you run on to people repeatedly depending on where the job is and who was hired for. But you’d run into your old friends repeatedly. And I seen that trend going on there. Well, and Dave’s dad was Rudy and they lived over on Highway 13 about five miles south of Ashland. Another one was Jack Hudak, er, Jack Shubat. Now these are the guys who were on the crew in that year, year and a half that I worked there. He lived just up--south of Ashland on 112. Still lives out here. And all of these guys were probably 5-8 years older than me at that time so they’re pretty old now. Some of them started young. [Would you spell that?] Shubat. [Spelling confirmed through White Pages for Jack J. Shubat.] I don’t know. All I remember at that time was he had a great sense of humor and--the guys were always trying to get me lined up with girls. I was just 18, between 18 and 19 then and wasn’t much interested. But they were, I do remember one thing though—we, at night we liked to go out and have a few brewskies. And after working hard all day, a lot of times out  in the cold, two brewskies and I’d be gone. That would be enough for me as soon as that warm air hit me, especially after eating supper. And, you know, a lot of times we’d go out and eat steak. We ate real well. We had to because you burned it up the next day. I remember one time we went from--we were staying in Bergland, working at White Pine--and we drove back to Wakefield because we heard there was a wedding dance going on. Still don’t know whose it was. But we crashed it, got three sheets to the wind. We’re on the way back to Bergland and we were riding in Happy Hudak’s--it was a Ford that had the electronic trunk and the electronic convertible and pure white, just a beautiful car--and we got about half way back and got a flat tire. Well, it’s darker than the inside of a cat outside and everybody’s pretty gassed up. So we slept there until daybreak and got up woke up, and got the trunk open, and got the tire changed. We got back to Bergland for breakfast. And we walked into the little restaurant that we went to every morning. Dad was already finished eating and--we had just pounding headaches—and Dad got up and he said, “Anybody isn’t on the roof when the whistle blows can head ‘er down the road.” And he looks at my brother Larry and I and says, “Boys, you’ll be the first ones to go.” And we skipped breakfast that morning. We were on the roof when the whistle blew. And talk about a long day. It wasn’t worth the party. LAUGHTER That was one of Dad’s sayings too, that “If you can’t do it, you can’t stay.” 27:47 And I did see him have to fire a couple of guys and it wasn’t, it wasn’t a nice thing to see but they just couldn’t hack it. Hmm. One feller was given--well, he was new on the job--and he was given the simple job of cutting out gusset plates with a propane torch, or acetylene torch rather. And he was doing that next to the work shack and, Dad came back from the job site, and here the guy had the acetylene torch set wrong so it was smoking black. And he was kinda cutting half way through it and he was trying to beat the, the gusset plates with the back of the torch. And there were flames coming out of the torch all over the place. Gosh! Dad give him a warning, “You know, there’s a $300 torch head shot.” The next job he gave him was going over to the job site with a wire brush and a spud wrench that would fit the anchor bolts. And the job was to take away the brush and clean the cement residue out of the threads out of the anchor bolts. And run the nuts on and run them back off to make sure that they were ready to go, so that when the red iron got there, we were ready to stand it up, that there was no hold up with a crane sitting there. And we went to set the first, the first bent, which is the column on each side and... then a joist, two joist which make a bent, and two bents to a bay. So we’re setting up the first bent and we couldn’t get the lug nut, we couldn’t get the anchor bolts on. Well, it actually--one anchor bolt was twisted off and one the nut wouldn’t go on, so we had to quick brush that and get it anchored down. Well, that fella there got his walking papers because what he was doing was just running the nut on and taking that wrench and putting the pipe on it and trying to run the anchor bolts down and it was twisting them off. And it just caused a, it cost a lot of dollars to have that crane sitting there. Not only that, it was dangerous for the guys working it too. Everything was kind of in turmoil. So, yeah, he got his walking papers and--it ain’t a good thing to see. You can’t keep somebody on that can’t listen, because down the line somebody will get hurt or get killed.  31:10 [When you mentioned red iron... What does that mean?] That’s your structural steel. That’s just the framework. I’m forgetting my nomenclature on the stuff, but two columns and two joists make one frame. And that’s called a bent. Two of those make a bay. So if you’ve got four bays in a building, you’re going to have--eight or nine bents? Two, four, six, eight... [But the term red iron just refers to a girder or the length of....] Any of your frame steel, which would be a girder, which would be purlin, any of that stuff that ties all the frame together. It’s all painted with Rust-Oleum paint, which is mostly reddish brown. 32:23 [So when you were picking up the trade, was there any apprenticeship or you just sort of jumped in there?] Yeah [LAUGHS] you just jumped in. It was definitely on-the-job training and baptism by fire mostly. [Did you have a card then? Did you work out of a local?] I had a tinnerman’s card [i.e. a member of the Sheet Metal Worker’s International Association, a.k.a. “tinman” or “tin basher”]. I couldn’t get a ironworkers card until I did an apprenticeship. But they could get me in under a sheet metal men’s permit--and that’s how I got started, which is kinda crazy but it got me in there. We had--well, let’s see--from there we went, we went to the Marine Corps. Dad had asked me why I wanted to join the Marine Corps, and I was speaking out of no knowledge. I was speaking just from my heart. And at that time the Vietnam War was in full bloom. And I never gave it that much thought. There was so much controversy and bad information coming back to the United States--if any information or lack of. And Dad said, “Why the Marine Corps?” And I said, “Well, Dad, if I’m going to go into any service, I’m going into the best.” Not realizing that the best also puts you right in the front. I guess I didn’t think that far ahead. He says, “Yeah but why, why do you even want to do this?” And I said, “Dad”-- and this was on a road trip coming back home. And I knew, I knew he wanted my brother and I to be ironworkers. And carry on the family--I don’t know if it even a tradition--but carry on what he had taught us. And--I had made up my mind then--I’m not spending the rest of my life doing the steel construction, but I was very proud of, to have been involved in it and be able to do it. That was kind of a--you know, you’re up in the air and looking down at little people walking down below and--it gives you a sense of pride that you can do that kind of thing and be part of a good team and have them, have your team members, trust you. That was the other good thing about that. But as far as going into the Marine Corps, I told Dad, “Dad, I’ve had a good life and it’s time to just pay back some.” And being a country guy, he could understand that. Dad was always very patriotic. 36:17 [Let’s talk about your Dad a little bit. Do you know where your ancestors came from or how they got here to Northern Wisconsin? Could we even start further back?] Well, my Grandfather, Odin, lived at White River Hill. Even farther back than that, his Dad was Gottfried and they came from Norway, of course. They were Norwegian. And I didn’t know much about Great Grandpa, but Granddad Odin lived on White River Hill on Highway 112. Had a little, he was a Pentecostal minister and he had a congregation with a lot of local people. Some of the names that pop into my head were Hegstroms and Andersons and-- Rita, can you remember any more? [Asks his wife. She say, “What was that”?] The people involved in White River  Church? Well, there was a lot of them anyways throughout the years. And that was my very early childhood. I can remember that. I went to one service that sticks out in my mind in that little white church. We had a Black minister that particular Sunday. And the stage in that church was, like, one step up was just a six inch rise and then it had the old piano on it, and the pulpit. This Black minister had everybody just praising the Lord and actually it was kinda scary. A lot of folks crying and weeping and--they were making noise. They were making noise unto the Lord. But being just a little kid, it was kind of neat at the same time but it was kinda scary too. I thought to myself. Some of these people are really suffering here. And that’s about all I can remember about that. But we still have the paperwork and stuff from the church and--the Church is long gone now. I did salvage some of the ceiling tile and wall tile and some of the things out of it to do my addition here on the place. 40:02 That one time, Rita and I had it in our minds to make the church property a family reunion place. And by that time, the church was already sinking into the ground. The wooden floor was rotted away but it could still be salvaged but it would take some money and some time. Well, back in our early years of marriage, we didn’t have any money. We had kids. We had diapers. No money. And so my sister Jody sent letters to all of our relatives and we sent out about 40 letters and got not one response back. So that kind of squashed that whole idea. So eventually, the old church went, got sold to a guy for the cost of the taxes and the property was such a small piece of property that you couldn’t build on it. The guy that bought it was burning brush one day and it burned the church down. LAUGHS And that ended the church. 41:27 Then getting back to our heritage, then my mom’s folks hailed from down around Greenwood and Thorpe, Wisconsin. Grandpa was a horse trader, horse farmer. And a big burly barrel-chested guy. Had a great big bushy eyebrows and I always thought that was pretty cool until I grew ‘em. LAUGHS And Grandma was a stout farm lady. Had a big, she had a big ol’ bulge on her right arm, on the backside of her bicep where she had been bitten by a horse. Back in the day, you got whatever treatment there was and apparently there wasn’t much. And it just grew into a big lump on her arm but I remember that about her. And she was ambidextrous. LAUGHS If you were being bad, she could really smack you with either hand just as well. LAUGHS And a lot of times she would, she would feint with a right and give you a left, but she was a kind hearted person. But stern. And Grandpa was stern. Both had very good senses of humor. [What were their names?] Grandpa’s name was Fred, Francis, and Grandma was Charlotte. Years later--well they lived in a house that had no electricity and I can still smell the kerosene lamps, and the wood stove--and we were there in the wintertime, getting close to Christmas, I remember looking in their windowsill and I thought it was so cool. I was probably...maybe 6 or 7 at that time. They had these little Christmas tree ornaments in the window that were kind of like a fuller brush texture to ‘em with little dots of glue at the ends of the branches and they looked so real to me that I thought that was really neat. And I heard from out in the kitchen, “Don’t touch those.” So they were still neat but had to look at them from a distance. LAUGHS I think a year or so later, my folks decided that Grandma and Gramps had  to let the farm go. They were totally destitute and the house had, other than wood heat, had no heat. So they came to live with us. And that was great. That was great having them there. And we just moved over and made room for ‘em. It was good having ‘em in our house. And then a couple of years later, one of my aunts from Oregon decided they needed a warmer climate so they moved them to Oregon after much turmoil and sadness. Well, that’s where they ended up dying, was out there. So eleven years later, my brother and I talked my folks into giving us airfare to go out there. And eleven years later, we went to visit Grandpa. Grandma had already passed on. Grandpa was in a nursing home in Medford, Oregon. So my brother and I ended up out there, found the nursing home. We stayed with the same aunt and uncle that took them out there. And we went to see Grandpa and here we are, 17-18 years old and Grandpa recognizes us as soon as we walk in. While he was in the nursing home, he had cancer on one leg and they amputated that. But we got to have lunch with him and had a great visit. And my brother came back home and, well, . . . 46:35 We knocked around Oregon for a little while and we were running short on money so I got a job working for Edward Hines Lumber Company. And earned enough money to ship Larry back home, my older brother, and I stayed on until almost Christmastime. And that was a good experience, working in that huge lumbar company. And like our lumber companies around here, they’ll have a big log out in the front with their name on it or some logo on it or something. And I thought ours were pretty big logs. They were like four foot through the middle. But the one they had in front of Edward Hines Lumber Company, it was more like 16 feet through the middle. I stood on the end of it and held my hand as high as I could with my fingers touching the heart of the log. That’s--it was just tremendous. And see these big logs come and start spinning on the lathe. They would spin and throw cold air throughout the whole building, they would fan so much. And it was tremendous just watching that happening. I don’t know how many thousands of feet they would get off of one log but it was a lot. And I remember one time- -I got along with the foreman pretty well. I was doing all of the back breaking scrub work that nobody else would do, which was ok. I was used to that. He put me in one room where all of the conveyor belts converged and it was, it was like 6 feet deep with saw dust. And it smelled like a calf pen. I mean it was, it had been in there for a long time. And he sent me in there to clean it up. I looked at it and I thought, “This ain’t so bad.” There were conveyors running every which way. All you gotta do is put it on a conveyor and it’s gone. It’s not like you have to load it and haul it and take it someplace. By the end of my shift that night, I was sweeping the floor in there. And the foreman came in and just shook his head. And he said, “I have put I don’t know how many guys in this room and you are the first one that ever stayed and did it. All the rest of ‘em said ‘I’m outa here.’ That’s amazing.” He said, “Where do you want to be placed?” And I said, “I want to work on the green chain.” And up until that point, I had cleaned under the green chain, pulling all the bark and slabs and everything that falls underneath it-- which was a mean job because it was too low to stand up under and it was too high to, it was just high enough that everything you did was on your hands and knees were just kind of half bent so it was hard on the back. But I got that done. Well, he put me on the green chain. And at that  time, I was chewing tobacco. Well, on the green chain, you’re pulling veneer and you’ll have sometimes one size that you pull on each side, like a 36 inch piece or a, sometimes two sizes. You’ll have 18 on one side and a 36 on the other side. And you’d have a cart on each side of you and that’s your job, is to pull your size veneer when it comes down the conveyor. That was gravy work as far as I was concerned. I loved it. But I had one bad thing. I was chewing tobacco and I never, never could swallow tobacco and I would salivate so bad. And--but working on a green chain, you can spit wherever you want to. Well, I was spitting on veneer as it went by. And the foreman came over to me one night and he says, “You know, that knotter is really, really punching out more knots than it should be. This stuff doesn’t have that many knots. You’re going to have to quit spitting on that veneer.” LAUGHTER And what it would do it would chop out every place I spit and put a plug in there. Well then it would downgrade the quality of the veneer. And so I had to quit chewing tobacco. So that was the end of my tobacco habit. LAUGHS [In other words the punch on the knotter was hooked to a photosensitive device that mistook the dark tobacco stain for a knot in the wood.] 51:15 [Can up tell...hmm...when you moved here and your Dad... Could you tell when and where he was born and how he got into the trade or what you know about him as an ironworker?] Dad was born on White River Hill again in 1925. And Grandpa had a little farm going there, too, so he could kinda see the trend. And Grandpa also built his own or made his own cement blocks and built his dairy barn. Probably one of the first ones in the area that actually had a cement foundation. By the time I was old enough to recollect anything, that barn was long gone so I never did get to see it. But I did get to see Grandpa making cement blocks and that carried on into Dad making cement blocks too. And the place we’re on right now, still has a few of the blocks around here. Actually the addition on the back of the garage is cement blocks. The whole garage is cinder blocks but the, the addition in the back is cement blocks and that’s some of the ones that Dad and Grandpa had made. And Dad bought this place. Well, to get back to... After Dad became old enough to get out on his own, he hitchhiked out to the West Coast and went to work as a welder in the ship yards. And jumping way ahead, that ultimately led to Dad’s death with asbestos poisoning. All those years, he carried asbestos in his body and eventually it caused cancer and took him out of the picture. After he came back from the ship yard work out there . . . 54:02 Another name popped into my head too. Willy Butler was another guy that did Dad did steel with. Ross Watson was another one, but that was some of the older guys that--I worked with Ross one time at one of the jobs. But those two fellas, Dad worked American Bridge with and they worked the grain elevators up in Superior. Now Ross was on a job, I don’t remember if it was in Michigan, but I wasn’t in the construction then, but he was injured on the job. A crane operator had, through miscommunication on the walkies or radios or whatever they used then, he had two-blocked his pulley on the crane and snapped it. And it came down and clubbed Ross in the shoulder, broke his shoulder. And a little bit over it would have just smashed him, but  anyway it was kind of a glancing blow but it broke his shoulder. [The block came down? That’s what came down?] The pulley came down. [The pulley...yeah.] The pulley. Yup. And that-- eventually when Ross was on the mending stage, he ended up getting cancer--and that took him out of the picture. But I do remember Dad going and sitting with him and, you know, just being by him. That’s all you can do when somebody is dying with cancer. That’s all you can do is be with them. Even if you don’t say anything, just be there. And that’s probably one of the hardest things there is to do. [I did it with my Mom for a long time.] Yeah. You can’t talk about the future because there isn’t any. You can talk about the past but it’s bittersweet. So you just sit there. Cribbage comes in real handy. LAUGHS 56:48 Well, Dad worked in the American Bridge Union for a number of years. Now this was before. This was before us kids were old enough to really know too much about that. And, you know, he’d tell us about it in retrospect, but climbing very, very high steel and doing that, you know? But I think that was, if not the way he got started in steelwork, it was part of it. It just moved on to doing his own, doing his own business. I remember Dad hiring a tax man, L. Peterson, to help him figure out his taxes when he started our own company, the Olby Erection Company. When Dad came home on the weekends from one of the job sites, he would spend the whole weekend in the little office out here doing taxes, figuring out how to do taxes. And I think that was harder on him than, than actually doing the work or being the boss. Figuring out the taxes and coming out at the end of the year. And I know just from what I seen at this place that we didn’t get rich doing that. 58:26 [When he worked in the ship yards, do you know where that was?] It was in California some place. [I know they had them in San Francisco, ship yards.] I never knew much about that. He never talked about any of it. [I have an old friend who started in the ship yards in San Francisco in the late 30s and he lived with asbestos.] Yeah, it was a common thing. All the pipes are wrapped with it. And now if they find one pipe with it, they call in the clean up team and, you know. They’ll have special suits and special masks and probably air tanks on them and everything else. And find one ceiling tile in a high school or something that has it. LAUGHS 59:18 [What can you tell me about this song here, “Ironworker Blues”?] Well, you know--and after you and I talked a number of times, I got looking in our closet. There’s a book. Dad had written more songs than I even knew. Unfortunately, they don’t have any music with them but there’s like 20 some songs in there that. This particular one I got to be part of, whether I wanted to or not. That’s the way we did things. LAUGHS Back to the old, “If you can’t do it you can’t stay.” LAUGHS So Dad had a little band here, well, over the years, he probably had two or three different ones as people would join and then as life went on, something would take them away. But it was amazing how many people would come out of the closet that were talented that played different instruments or had great voices and just giving them an opportunity to be part of this. They would just show up. I remember one guy came here had a, he was playing a French horn and he was good on it. But Dad said, “Well, we’re kind of doing the country western theme and a French horn just doesn’t quite get it.” LAUGHS “But can you sing?” And he said, “No,  I don’t sing.” And Dad says, “I’m sorry but you’re welcome to stay and you’re welcome to come back anytime you want to but we just don’t have a place for a French horn.” LAUGHS Let him down pretty easy. We had a lot of people like that that would show up and some of them would claim they could sing and some of them couldn’t. But every once in a while, they’d come along and be great on the piano or great on the guitar or do all of them. [Accordion too?] A little bit on the accordion, yeah. Dad made me learn two songs on the accordion and...my heart wasn’t in it. You can’t play any instrument or sing if your heart wasn’t it in. Mine wasn’t. So I struggled through two songs. Back then I was looking at all the accordion players I knew were either doing the oompa-pa polkas or schottisches or--and non-stop. And I’m watching these little old guys up on the stage, pumping that according, and going for 4-5 hours straight... I thought, that’s no place for me. I don’t want to do that. LAUGHS And like I said, my heart wasn’t in it so I just let go of it. I practiced enough to learn two songs and enough to keep Dad off my back and that was about it. And I let that go. But I did the drums a little bit and learned to play harmonica... So I had my little niche in there. 1:02:48 But getting back to this song, we did this right in the garage on this place. And we had 4-5 people in the group then that [Asks his wife: Do you remember who was in the group when we did that? DOG BARKING] Brian’s here, he’s excited [David’s son-in-law and daughter arrive, exciting the dog]. Rita, was Butch and Junior still in then? R: I believe so. D: Yeah, because Butch was doing the rhythm guitar and I think his brother, Junior, was still alive. Junior sang like Johnny Horton. Had a great, great voice. And I think he was only like 56 or something when he was working out in Oregon or California. And dropped dead right at work. Heart attack. Way to go. It was like bam, down he went and that was it. But at that time, I’m thinking that Butch Green, his real name was Alvin, he played rhythm bass and Junior, which was Frank Green, played lead guitar and sang like Johnny Horton. I mean, he did “Whispering Pines” and “The Mansion You Stole” and all those songs, right to a T. We went out and did shows for the fair and different occasions. He was a big hit. He did real well. And Butch mastered the Johnny Cash type rhythm on his guitar so whenever we did some of Johnny Cash’s stuff, like “Folsom Prison” or any of those, Butch could just knock that right out. He was great. 1:05:36 But getting back to this song--and there was probably two or three other people involved that my old memory ain’t bringing it up right now--but right in the garage, repeatedly, repeatedly, repeatedly, we did this song over and over and over again until Dad thought it was good enough. And I think this particular song, he only had like 125 copies made. And one other one he did was “Beyond those City Lights” and “Go Then” was the flip side of it. And he only had like 25 of those made. And we’ve lost them someplace. I know he got a lot away. All the taverns around this area had them on their jukeboxes and that was pretty novel. But somehow or another, we ended up with not one copy of that one that I can find. But this one here, actually I can say I was honored to live part of this, and suffered through some of it. And I had a feeling, you know, [begins to read lyrics from “Iron Worker Blues”] “You sit way up there in the sky and you watch birds go flying by,” and all of that’s true. You do. And sometimes you wonder why  things have turned out the way they are and why you’re there. And if you ponder on it when your hands are cold and shivering, yeah, you can get the blues pretty easy. End of the day, you’re about froze to death: “You wait for the boss to say come down” and [reads but doesn’t speak the next line: “You wait for a job that’s on the ground.”] 1:07:19 Once in a while you do get a job that’s on the ground. We had a job, in between jobs I guess you could say, it was a wintertime job and they needed to replace the—now this was back in White Pine--in the wheel house that we built, they had these big cable drums that would wind up the cable that brought the bucket up out of the mine shaft. And on each cable drum—I mean these things were huge--on each cable drum there was a sleeve that went on ‘em that was grooved. So they would start the cable out in the grooves and it would make the cable travel and follow itself over so it would wind evenly. And we had—I think the millwrights were on strike so we kind of snuck in there and got this job. It paid very well but, boy, we ruined a lot of clothes with that millwright oil. Oh man that stuff would stink. Drill oil. And that was our one on the ground job that I can remember that paid real well. It wasn’t that bad of a job. It was warm. Mostly cutting torching, getting the old sleeves off and getting ready for the new ones. And that was probably a three week job and that was--we had a deadline on that one--so it was kinda under the gun. We had to move on it. 1:09:03 Like any place, you get paid every two weeks. “You wait for pay day to roll around.” And by that time you’re, by the time you pay everything off, you’re pretty broke. But back then, my brother and I were making $5.10 an hour, and we were making good money. [I was making a buck and a quarter an hour then.] Yup. And like down at the mill in Mellon, it was $1.33 after you were there a year. But back then, gas was like 32 cents a gallon. You didn’t need a big pile of money to make ends meet either so $5.10 an hour was pretty nice. And then we had to pay our union dues out of that and constantly wearing out clothes and trying to buy a better grade of tools and paying off the bar bill and food expenses and--lucky we had Mom home here to take care of our clothes. Unfortunately, looking back at it, I don’t think I ever left any change in my pocket even but she always took care of us. Anyway, that was waiting “for pay day to roll around.” So it hasn’t changed much. 1:10:33 “You hook a choker around the beam” is the start of the next verse here. And that’s to swing them into place. A choker is a cable with a loop on each end. One loop hooks to the hook on the crane, the headache ball on the crane. And basically all you’re going to do is putting a slip knot on the beam. If you don’t get it right in the center and the crane starts to lift the beam and it will slide to one side or the other and possibly drop out. And that’s what the next verse here, “The choker slips and the pusher screams.” The pusher is the guy on the ground, usually highballing the crane operator. So the crane operator has to set it back down and he goes to center the choker again and re-lift it. And having someone barking at you could make you mean, or just having to re-do things--that gets at you after a while. [This refers to the lyric “It’s sure enough to make you mean.”] “You put your spud wrench in the hole.” Now your spud wrench is a long wrench with like a rat tail end on it so you can align the red iron and put a bolt through  it. Because most of this, all the red iron is prefabricated and a lot of times it doesn’t line up and you, you know, when you’re stretching this building, sometimes the whole framework to make that one hole fit, that helps square the building up a lot of the times. Sometimes the hole is just in the wrong place and then you gotta bring a torch up and make your own hole. But that’s what the spud wrench is. You stick it in the hole and pry the two holes together and then the next hole over, you stick a bolt in it and tighten it down. So you’re doing all of this with two hands, so you’re holding the spud wrench with your shoulder, holding it in place, and you stick a bolt in the hole. And for some reason or another, the nut doesn’t want to spin on ‘er like it should so you holler for somebody to “hold the roll.” And that’s what that means. And he holds that bolt from rolling while you’re running the nut on. And usually that . . . 1:13:14 . . . Well, going back to my first duty, on my first job, was to sit outside the work shack. I had a bag of bolts on one side and a bag of nuts on the other side. And I would thread nuts and bolts together. Thread nuts and bolts together. Thread nuts and bolts together and throw them in another bucket. And that’s the ones you’d take up in your work apron so you’d have both parts together. And I did that like for two days. I was ready to go crazy but I made it through that tough test. 01:13:56 Now we’re talking about, “You put your spud wrench in the hole.” Ok. That’s what we did. Someone hollers, “Hold the roll.” Stop that bolt from spinning. Tighten it up. So you’re doing all of this with your shoulder and two hands and you still need help. Luckily, there’s somebody close to you that can skid ‘er over and give you a hand with that, while you’re hanging there. And the next verse here, “You take the rod wrench from your hip.” Now you’re doing a different kind of steel construction here. You’re rod tying. You’re tying rod together, reinforcing rod. And to get this to stay in place while they’re pouring concrete over it, you gotta wire-tie it. I got fairly decent at it so I could get it done. There was guys that were just totally on fire on this. They could tie four times faster than me. And what you would do is you had a roll of wire in a carrier on your hip. And your rod wrench was your side cutter pliers. And you’d cut a strand of wire, wrap it around the intersection of the two reinforcing rods and you’d give it a couple of wraps and then you would twist it so it would stay in place. And as you’re twisting it, to keep one side of the twist from breaking, you always had to pull up on it and twist, pull up on it and twist. And what he’s talking about here is if your rod wrench slips while you’re pulling up on that, you’re pulling it up hard and it would come up and whack yourself in the chin. And “It’s enough to make you quit.” LAUGHS So you just keep doing it with your lip smarting. LAUGHS Or you drop that wrench down the hole too and that’s a goner because you can’t get through the reinforcing rod to get down and get it. It’s gone. So you try not to drop that one. “Seems like you can’t never gain. It’s either got to snow or rain. Where you get so cold you feel no pain. And you get them ironworkers blues.” Got that cold. Lived it, did it. Part of the reason I joined the Marine Corps. LAUGHS 01:16:30 “They let you work eight hours a day.” See, there’s guys that would work longer than that. But, belonging to the union, you’ve got to watch ‘er. So sometimes it feels like you’re  limited to where you have a little bit of energy you want to burn up yet and you’re getting to a point in the job where you want to finish what you’re doing, move on to something the next day. But you still have to punch out when the whistle blows. So then here you are. “But you’re so darn broke you gotta stay.” On and on we go. “On Friday night you’re on your way, with dirty clothes and only half your pay. You know darn well what Ma’s gonna say.” Yup. I had ‘em. I had them ironworkers’ blues. I was only there for a year and a half. LAUGHS [It’s a fantastic song and you did a really great job. LAUGHTER ] “Ironworkers Lament” too...I tell you what. [Yeah, that was another great song.] That was great. [That’s another thing. That’s a good song. I haven’t yet found out who this guy is. I’ve got a couple of angles I need to pursue.] Well, I tell you what, that guy would have fit into that group here, right now. He had a great voice. He had a great voice. [A little bantering ensues as David’s daughter and son-in-law are leaving.] 1:18:20 [Well, the last thing I wanted to know is... You told me that you were one of the performers in that...] Oh yeah, I was the guy, if I belonged to an orchestra, I don’t know what instrument would make that noise--or a band. LAUGHS In this case it was the acetylene tank or the oxygen tank on the acetylene torches. Dad wanted a sound that sounded like somebody pounding on a beam, driving a wedge, or driving it into place but he didn’t want it in synch with the rhythm of the song. He wanted it to sound natural. Probably the only time in my life I kept falling into rhythm and he was getting so mad at me. LAUGHS “No, we don’t want it in rhythm,” he would say. All right, all right, all right. So they would start the whole thing over again because Dave was screwing up, you know? And I had to concentrate on, you know, on not going in rhythm. This is kind of funny because all the time Dad’s performing and running the little band. He’s always going, snapping his fingers or doing something to snap his wrists to keep us in rhythm and then all of a sudden [LAUGHS] he wants to go the other way and don’t get in rhythm. It was a struggle. It was just funny. That was so many good years and so many faces and people that have, jump into my mind, intermittently, and a lot of them I can’t remember the names anymore. There were so, so many. And a lot of them were just neighbor people through the Mason, Ashland, Bayfield County area that would just come to the barn dances and, you know, after you’ve had a couple of sarsaparilla sometimes they’d get enough courage to get up on the stage and they’d blow us away. It was amazing what they could do. Like all these little band members searching for a band. They’d come out of the woodwork and it was totally amazing. [I think I have what I needed which was great storytelling. Love the detail.]
Ironworkers;William C. “Bill” Tanneberg;1939;2011;0:05 Announcement, initial question–when and where born, how you got into ironworkers trade? 0:40 I was born and raised in Ashland, Wisconsin. And when the powder plant down here started [on Highway 12 in Sauk County, north of Sauk City and south of Baraboo], my dad come down here to work down here at the powder plant. I lived here practically all my life. Have lived in Ashland for awhile. I lived up on the Iron Range [MN] for awhile. I was working in a, working iron up there. So I know all about the mines. And I worked the Great Lakes on the ore carriers carrying the iron ore down to the steel mills. So I’m pretty well acquainted with the process of steel. And then I got in the ironworking trade mid-sixties (1960s) and I’ve worked in it ever since. I’ve been to the east coast and the west coast, San Francisco, all over working. I’ve been on the ground, and I’ve been 1400 feet in the air on TV towers. In fact the one tower outfit wanted me to travel with them. But I didn’t. Pretty well acquainted with all facets of the trade. Then I went to a [metal] fabricator’s show about 13-14 years ago. Out in New Mexico. We went on a tour from there to a blacksmithing shop, and I fell in love with the blacksmith trade. Been doing it ever since. I’ve just really, really grown. Matter of fact, the guy that introduced me to it–I seen him up at La Crosse in “02–he said I’m doing a heck of a job. Just keep it up. 3:34 [Year born?] 1939. [What was your Dad’s name?] Same as mine. [Was it after WWII they moved to southern WI?] Yeah. 1942. [What years did you work up on the Iron Range?] Early 70s. [How did you happen to get up there on the Range?] There was no work down here then so... The Iron Range started boom like heck so, yeah... So I went up there. [What were you doing when you were on the Range? Were you constructing...] Yeah, constructing and expanding plants. [How did you happen to get into it? How did you find out about the ironworkers trade?] I knew a lot of ironworkers. I was a laborer for a couple of years in. I ran around with guys who knew what it was and I had a chance to getting in the trade. [Can you remember some of the guys...or who did you start out working with?] JP Cullen and Jimmy Pintz, Buell Cuff, those guys. [What kind of work did you do starting out as an ironworker?] Re-rod. [Welding?] Right, right. [How did you pick up some of those particular skills...?] Just started doing it. 6:15 [Did anyone give you tips?] Oh yeah. [Can you tell me a little bit about that?] Let me think about that. I was working for Cullen...I pushed a lot of work for them, especially re-rodding. Jimmy Pintz said, “The office wants to talk to you. And I said, “Should I talk to them?” And he said, “Well, we want you to go down...to this job in Michigan. We want you to run that for us.” So I went down there. Monday morning, this guy said, “Well, I’m the foreman.” “Well, the office sent me down here and I’m supposed to take over.” So he quit and the guy working with him quit. So here I am all by myself. Big strapping laborer says, “I’ll help you out, Shorty.” So I called the Milwaukee Hall and they said, “You can’t put him to work. Ask if he wants an apprenticeship.” And he said “yup”... So I put him to work and signed him up. We finished that job up, you know. Then I went down to Rockford. There was a high rise down there. I was pretty well set up with Cullen. [Were they good to work with?] Oh yes they were. [How many years did you work with Cullen?] Probably eight years steady. [And was it places like Michigan, Northern Illinois...] Yup. [Were you in Wisconsin too?] Oh yeah. Ashland, Rochester, MN, for Cullen. Traveled quite a bit for them. [What were they building?] Elderly housing. High rises. [How many years did you work before you became a foreman?] Hmm... Probably 4 years at the most. [You mentioned working in San Francisco. Did you boom out to those places?] Yeah, yeah. I worked quite a bit down in Rockford too, at the Chevrolet plant. They needed help down there. The B.A. down there always gave me a call. “Come on down, Shorty. We need you down here.” I went down there right away. [How did you get out to San Francisco?] There was no work around here so I called out there and yup, we got work. I worked out there for two years. [Bridge work or high rise work?] Well, it was high rise work. That was in the 70s. 11:06 [Did you meet any of those old timers like Al Zampa and others who worked on the Golden Gate bridge?] I don’t remember. 11:23 [Shorty, that’s what they called you?] Yeah. [Did other guys have nicknames on the job?]  Most of them usually do. [Can you think of some of them?] Most of them usually do. PAUSE Buffalo Bob. LAUGHS Yeah... [Was he a character...?] PAUSE Always bragging what he could do and stuff like that. We called him “buffalo” because he always buffaloed his way through stuff. LAUGHS [When I was a kid in the 50s...there was the Howdy Doody Show with Buffalo Bob. He was a big bullshitter.] Yup. [At what point did you work at the Great Lakes?] Well, when I was 18-21. [You said that it would have been between Duluth and Gary, Indiana or where did you go?] The whole Great Lakes. Duluth, Superior, Taconite Harbor, Cleveland, Toledo, Buffalo, New York, Ashtabula. [Did you work with Fins on a boat?] I don’t remember. I was in the engine room, running the engine. I had got certified papers to run the engines, maintain them. [Probably noisy, eh?] Yeah, noisy. I remember one time we were anchored out from Port Huron in the river... Captain rings back, we’re taking off. Daniel Morrell was ahead of us. She pulled anchor, she’s going. So we followed her out. An hour later, he tells us that we’re going to the river. Daniel Morrell just sunk. [Whoa... That was in Lake Superior?] Lake Huron. [Oh... It was rough weather then?] Oh yeah. [I have some friends who live in Rogers City...right on the...] Yup. I know where its at. [Note: Daniel J. Morrell, Great Lakes freighter ... sunk on Lake Huron on 29 November 1966, taking with it 28 of its 29 crewmen.] 15:26 [Did you have any close calls as an ironworker?] No, not really. [Any accidents?] No. [Did you see a few?] Not really. Guys I worked with were pretty safe. 15:55 [So what part of the trade did you like the most?] Rigging and erecting. [You had to have a pretty good gang to have things run smoothly.] Yup. [Did you have any particular good guys you worked with who were really skilled...your ground men or connectors...or what have you?] Well...most of them were pretty good. [Good operating engineers?] Oh yeah. Oh yeah. I did have one accident. Out at Truax, we picking some heavy stuff up. It was such big sheeting on this one building. Like I told the foreman, “It’s not very safe doing it this way.” “Oh yeah, we’ll do it.” And a whole piece broke loose. Hit my left foot. Almost took my toes off. The operator baled out of his rig right away and came over to me. Even he said it was unsafe the way they were doing it. 18:08 [Wet weather was pretty tough too then.] Wet and cold. [Did you work all times of the year?] Oh yeah, oh yeah. [Any memories of particular cold or hot or... Did you experience with extreme weather?] Not really. PAUSE 19:00 [Sometimes the iron workers have conflicts with other trades. Did you ever get into it with the carpenters or...?] No, no. PAUSE No, not really. 19:25 [You mentioned that one place in New Mexico... When was that?] In 1997 I think. [And what kind of work did you do with the blacksmiths?] Well...all kinds of stuff. I started with railings. I like making headboards for beds and stuff. Some pretty fancy stuff. [Is there some connection between the ornamental part of the ironworkers trade and what you’re doing now?] Well, in a way, yeah. [Could you say a little more about that?] In ornamental work the stairwells and railings were done by the fabricating shop and installed by ironworkers, where a blacksmith uses a forge and power hammers and stuff. Shape all the stuff that way. You build jigs up to be able to bend stuff.  21:30 [When you were active as an ironworker, did you ever make or modify some of the tools? Spud wrench or a sleemer bar or...] No, not really. I think some guys have done different things.] I suppose, yeah. [...get their hands...] Yeah. [Some guys would use the stuff, maybe some rolled piece, and put their names on it.] Oh yeah. [Did you do anything like that?] Oh yeah. You usually mark all your own tools. [So do you have any of those around so you could show me at some point? Some of your old tools that are marked with your symbol?] I don’t know. Not really, I don’t think. No. The blacksmith, you know, you’ve got... They’ve got a stamp, called a touch mark. You hammer that into your metal. Mine is two Christmas trees on a hill, which means Christmas Hill, that’s what my last name means in German. [Oh yeah, oh tannebaum...] Yeah. And “berg” is hill. [Yeah. That’s the name of your street here too, right?] Yeah, right. [I saw that coming in. I hadn’t thought of that. That’s cool.] 23:32 [So the blacksmith work... Do you have any particular customers...people you worked for or do things for now?] Oh, there’s one famous...blacksmith and teacher... He’s dead now. He always said, “The forge is for the general, not the general public.” LAUGHTER Because the general public wants the stuff for nothing. These candle holders, I’m making now, there’s some in the house. One woman said, “Well, they’re worth $25 aren’t they?” For three hours labor? Please...please. Insult. [Did you find a few generals around or do you end up making them mostly for yourself?] I’m still looking. It’s coming. It’s coming. I sold the headboards I got. The cheapest one I got was for $4,000. Some of these headboards take 100-200 hours just to make them. And all my work. They are original. I didn’t copy nobody. [And this is steel?] Oh yeah, steel, copper, brass...and in the winter time when it’s too cold to work out here, I’m getting started at forging gold and silver which... Copper now...when you forge that, you heat this stuff up in the forge, throw it in cold water, whereas iron, I’ll heat it up and throw in cold water. Iron heated up throwing cold water in, it hardens the stuff. With copper, it softens it. So as you hammer it, it gets hard again. [Interesting stuff. I remember about iron in a foundry... would be more brittle.] Right, right right. [And also we had ladles as you heated it up. And the guys working it... The ladles had to warmed up] Wow... [Guy didn’t warm the ladles and the steel bounced and hit me right in the eyes. I thought I was going to go blind.] I bet. [But I came out of it alright.] Yeah. Well... The iron, if you heat it up...you put it in vermiculite until it cools off. Then it’s pliable as heck. [Really.] 27:27 [So where do you get your... metals? ] All over. Different suppliers. [Some of it is scrap too?] Some of it is, yeah. I sold pop cans at a junk yard down in Madison, walked in the scale house to weigh the cans. There were two four foot by six foot sheets of quarter inch copper...that was about 8 years ago. I snapped them up immediately. They were worth about 5 times what I paid for them. What someone else’s scrap is not scrap. [That’s right.] 28:35 [You said that you started as an ironworker in the 60s. At what point did you retire from the trade?] I retired June 5, 2008. My wife says, “Retire and stay home with me. Two days later she died. Two days later. I sure miss that lady. We did everything together. Everything. [That’s really hard.] It’s a bitch. [So the iron keeps you busy.] Yeah. [Leary offers sympathy about being on your own.] Yeah. 30:18 [So do you get together with old ironworkers now and then?] At the meetings and stuff, yeah... I go to quite a few. Lots of blacksmith conventions. I have a lot of friends there, an  awful lot of friends. [That’s cool. Leary talks about a blacksmith in Brill, WI, and also about another one who worked in Waunakee and lived on the east side of Madison.] Damascus. [Damascus.] Yeah. Pound and weld, pound and weld. Oh... That was... That’s the oldest type of welding there is, done by a blacksmith using Damascus steel. Six layers of steel, at different times... You put borax on it, heat it up and where it starts running, pound it. After it’s pounded, you split it in half and do the same thing. So you when you’re through, before you know it, you have 600 layers of steel, all pounded together, before its welded. [Strong stuff.] Yup. People think the price of this stuff is already high. Damascus...many hours pounded that stuff together. 33:16 [So when you look at that, what do you think of the trade of the ironworker? What would you like to say about it?] Its one of the best there is. Yup. [What did you like about it?] Variation of work. Always keep busy. [You did a little bit of everything?] Oh yeah...yeah... Y up. 34:00 [I think you mentioned rigging as one of your favorite things?] Yup. [What was it about that? Was it rigging cables on crane or...?] Taking heavy equipment and stuff up. Real heavy machinery. [So...could you describe it with a particular job that you had to do riggings that were challenges or... I haven’t really seen it in action so I have to imagine it.] These taconite mills, a lot of the stuff there were these balling drums, all heavy stuff. Really heavy. They had probably 3 inch cables that they were working with. [With a crane?] Oh yeah. All big stuff. [So how do you get the heavy equipment like that... Are there places built in that you can grab on to the cable?] Well, you see, there are usually picking eyes on the stuff. Loops (?) welded on the side of it. Picking eye...that’s what they called it. [Kind of like an eye bolt on the side for a way to pick it up?] It’s a piece of steel that is welded to the piece. Put a heavy shackle through that. 36:28 I liked working on TV towers too. The first tower I was on, the guy said, “You gotta go up in the air?” And I said, “Why not, what the heck. That’s part of my job, ain’t it? No problem.” So they had this picking boom on the side of the tower. It was a piece of the tower, you put it in place, bolt it in place. Then you jumped the picking boom on the tower on to the next one, keep on jumping it up. This was a utility tower out of Kansas City. [Leary talks about Tinker Nelson building WKOW TV tower also worked on it in the 60s. It’s pretty cool. He’s up there holding a camera with one hand and holding on to something else. He’s riding the heavy ball down.] Right, right, right. That’s how you get up there. [Tell me about that.] Then you have a special safety belt that you sit in. It’s more than a belt. It’s a whole harness and stuff. [when I saw this film and what some of these guys did, just wearing T-shirts. They weren’t wearing hard hats, things like that.] Nope. [How did it used to be then?] The same way. Yup. 38:45 [So what did you think when OSHA came in?] Some of it was good and some of it is a bunch of bullshit. [Like what?] Well, some of the regulations are fine and dandy but to me it should be up to that individual, what he considers safe and nonsafe. [Where the requirements you had actually more dangerous when OSHA came in?] I don’t know. Government, government, government...I don’t know. LAUGHS [Well, they would’ve shut down the foundry I was working on.] Right, right. I know.
Ironworkers;Augustine “Gus” Peplinski;1938;2011;0:05 [As the recorder comes on Gus starts showing some photographs of his dad, himself, brother, son, and nephew.] All ironworkers. 212 years total, to date. 0:34 Announcement, initial question modified to ask about Gus’s dad and how he got into the ironworkers trade? 1:00 Well he was born just out of Stockton [Portage County, WI], 1903. I don’t know, he lived there until my grandpa bought the farm, just north of Fancher Church here, on 6th Street off of County Trunk K. And he moved there. And that’s where I was born. Well, our whole family was born there. My sister and two brothers. And actually when he got into the trade I’m not sure. I think he started somewheres in the “30s, but he didn’t get a book till I believe it was 1941, according to what I got here. And then he went on the road. During the war time, projects. He went bumming for about five years. We lived in Kansas, Illinois, following the work. Basically I think it was under World War II projects and stuff. And then we come back here. Well, my grandpa got burnt on the farm, that was in 1946. That’s when my dad come back to the farm. We lived on the farm there ever since that. 2:25 I went to Amherst High School and graduated in 1954. I started ironwork with my Dad, Buren Powerhouse in 1957, January. Got my book in April 23, 1957. I’ll have 55 years coming this April. [What was your Dad’s name?] Leon Peplinski. [And did he have brothers who were also ironworkers?] No, he was the only one who was an ironworker. He had three other brothers and three sisters. [When you were a kid, traveling around with your dad, did you have much of an impression at that time what it was to be an ironworker? Did your dad show you things?] No, not really. I never got involved in part of his work or anything. He never took us out to the job sites or anything. One thing I do remember... We lived down by Baraboo and he would bring me a box of worms from work so I could go fishing in the Baraboo River. I was in the second grade I think. I remember that very well. [He was working on the power plant then.] Yeah, Badger Ordinance. 4:08 [What inspired you to get into the trade yourself?] My Dad got me into it and I had the opportunity to work at the Buren Powerhouse there. They were looking for people. There was quite a few guys that started on permits and stuff at that time. Matter of fact I initiated with five other guys when I got my book. After that, there was a lot of people took apprenticeships and there really wasn’t any apprenticeship program at that time anyhow. You worked on permit and went before the board. They okayed it and you got a book. That was it. There were quite a few guys at that time who got into the union the same time I did. [Where is the Buren Powerhouse?] Just this side of Wisconsin Rapids, in the little village of Buren, Consolidated Papermill there. It was a big powerhouse plant, a steam plant for paper-making machines. And at the same time, there was one paper machine was going in at the same time too, the same project. 5:40 [When you started out, what kind of work were you doing as an ironworker?] At the start, I was on the sheeting crew, siding up the powerhouse. Then from there on, I got into just about all of the phases then. [Was the sheeting crew like welding sheets?] No itt was aluminum sheeting, tiles. There were sandwich panels made up and then we bolted them to the girds. They’re still there today. LAUGHS [At that time, you say there wasn’t an apprenticeship program. So how did you learn to do all the things you needed how to do?] On the job training I guess. [Can you tell me, where there some old timers who gave you pointers or after screwing around, someone yelled at you...?] Well, worked under my Dad, he was a foreman. I worked under him for a few years. And then, I don’t know. I got to be a foreman at an early age, working for Consolidated and other local contractors. Wisconsin Bridge and Iron. I guess you just learn by being amongst people that knew. [Were there any people you particularly admired who were good at welding, connecting, tying re-bar, or...] Well, I knew a lot of guys through the years. I liked them all. They were all... Some of them were more structural men. Some were strictly rod men. They were all good people. I enjoyed working with everyone that I ever knew. 7:45 [So what was your favorite part of the trade?] Structural and heavy rigging. I just really enjoyed heavy rigging. I got into some pretty big projects and moved 300 ton transformers, pulling 200 ton debarking drum at Buren, that was at the Craft Mill. Done a lot of work at the  paper mills through the years. That was basically the bread and butter, the paper mill work. 8:24 [Can you tell me what’s involved in the heavy rigging?] Oh I guess knowing how to handle things, how to cope with everything. You’re talking about 200-300 ton of material. I mean, you gotta know what kind of rigging you’re going to put on and who is and what you got to do. Are you going to lift it. Are you going to roll it. Whatever the situation calls for. [Working with cranes then?] Yeah, most of your big stuff was always with cranes and power equipment. A lot of big stuff like when a big heavy chain falls. Consolidated Papermill had to set of 50 ton chain falls. [What did they call it?] Chain falls, chain hoists. They had sixteen parts of chain in them. You could pull all day on the thing and you’d hardly ever see the block move. They’d handle 50 ton apiece. [Were they set up inside the mill somewhere?] No you hung ‘em on a gantry or on a lifting beam or wherever you had to lift. There are a lot of places there. We moved the chipper out of the woodroom there We had to install mono-rail picking beam and pull the chipper out. It was down in under the first floor, kind of like the basement type of floor. Had to pick it up out of there and roll it out. Roll it on a truck. Took it in for re-building. It’s... There’s a lot of stuff involved in big equipment moving. I really enjoyed probably about the most. 10:20 [You mentioned working in paper mills. What kind of places have you worked in over the years? What kind of jobs?] Just about anything and everything. From the power houses, I worked at the Weston Plant, Powerhouses 2 and 3. Papermills...powerhouses and paper machines. Nekoosa, Rapids, Port Edwards, Stevens Point... Powerhouses down in Sheboygan... Two bridge jobs, I didn’t do too many bridge jobs. Mostly it was structure and machinery moving. And a lot of rod work with the college here in town. jobs. Tied a lot of rods...on the Sentry Building. Tied rods on that old building right from the start to finish. That was a big project. [Did you work mostly in Local 383 territory or did you boom out at all?] I didn’t boom out much at all. I was down in Milwaukee, working on a bridge, probably 2-3 weeks, month maybe. Work here, locally, was pretty slack in the mid-80s sometime. I was out in Sheboygan on the powerhouse for about three years. Other than that, I would say just my work was within driving distance. Green Bay and Rhinelander were the farthest and them places I drove. The powerhouse in Sheboygan, I stayed down there. I lived down there, got an apartment. One the good thing about that, down in that powerhouse in Sheboygan, every day after work, you could go out on the pier and go salmon fishing. LAUGHS That was lots of fun. I roomed with a guy from down around Iola. He was a millwright. He and I roomed together and he enjoyed fishing. Every day after work we’d go salmon fishing. Caught a lot of fish too. [An ironworker and a carpenter getting along?] Yup, yup. He was a helluva nice guy. I worked with him... And back at the Foundry, when I first ran into him, I was working for Hennes. He had worked for Hennes for quite some time. We roomed together down there in Sheboygan for about three years. [What was his name?] Roger... He’s been dead now quite a few years. It’ll come to me sooner or later... [How do you spell that...?] Hennes. They’re no longer in business. ASCO bought them out. They were pretty big in construction for years and years. I worked for Hennes for quite a few years. [Was he a Norwegian from over that way?] Yeah. The carpenter? Yeah. He was a Norwegian. [Polish and Norwegian? How did they get along...?] We got along fine. LAUGHS Yup. He was a millwright foreman and I was an ironworker foreman there. I had done all the rigging for him and the machine parts... He was putting in the turbine and generator. I was doing all the loading and rigging for them.  14:37 [So do the carpenters and ironworkers ever get into disputes at all?] Oh yeah, that was pretty common. [Could you tell me a little about that?] Well, no particular incidents but it was always...kind of bad blood between them, especially certain particular guys that were trouble makers more than anything. But they wound up getting settled. You won some, you lost some. That was... working with the paper mills, there was always conflicts with the mill rights. [What would some of the disputes be over?] Well, rigging. We never had any problems of unloading equipment and when stuff came in. But then when it came to setting machinery, basically they wanted to do all their own rigging when it comes to setting the machinery. According to our agreements, the rigging belongs to the ironworkers. It depends on who the job superintendent was, which way he leaned. The majority of job superintendents were carpenters, so you know which way they went. So they had to bring in the business agents and settle things. [Did you have to do any of that stuff yourself?] No. The majority of jobs, I was foreman on and I didn’t get involved in the steward... I don’t think I ever was a steward on the job. I was foreman on the job almost all my life. 16:25 [So what is involved with being a foreman?] Well, coordinating the work between the supervision and the men. Getting the job done. How many people you need to do the job. When you’re on a trip, all the stuff you need to plan things ahead. When there was a shut down, there was a spell there at Consolidated in Platteville. They had a two week shut down every year around the 4th of July. You could count on it. They had so many job scheduled that they had to get done. You had to know how many men you needed to do the job and get the jobs done and get them done on time. 17:20 Most of them was run overtime. That was the hottest part of the summer. It was pretty hot work a lot of the time. [I’ve talked to some fellows who said how a certain foreman was miserable to work with and some were great. Then I talked to people who had been foreman and how they managed the men. Do they yell at ‘em or do they work along side of them or how they...how they get things to happen.] Usually I got along pretty good with the guys. Once in awhile you get someone who wasn’t worth his salt. LAUGHS Most of the time you didn’t have much to say about running ‘em off the job. You just have to put up with it. I very seldom had any problems with as far as getting work done. Lot of times greenhorns, they didn’t know one end from another. You had to get them put in with someone who knew what was going on. Worked together. That was probably the toughest, pairing guys up on the job. Getting the right combination of workers together. 30 years, I guess, it all panned out. I’m sure I’ve made enough enemies over the years and I’m sure I probably made a few friends besides. Being a foreman isn’t a... It ain’t no glory behind it, I mean... A couple dollars an hour difference in pay sometimes it ain’t worth the grief you got to go through. Usually if there are problems, where does it go? It goes down to the foreman. 19:36 [You mentioned greenhorns. Did you ever run into...say, someone’s new and they get sent for a tool that doesn’t exist or...some prank played on them?] Cannon Report. LAUGHTER That was one in the service. The peons got sent for a cannon report. LAUGHTER Sky hooks a lot of times. Most of the time, there wasn’t much horseplay going on on the job site. Occasionally there would be something. A couple of guys working for Hennes at the Waupaca Foundry one time and they were really close buddies. Then they were pulling stuff on  each other just steady. It kept the rest of the crew in stitches most of the time. Everybody enjoyed them. They were both real swell guys and good workers. They just had something going every time you turned around. One of them, I know is dead, was Howie Reynolds and the other guy, Mel Ganthor. I haven’t seen him now for quite a few years. I think he’s still alive. I haven’t heard of him dying. 21:12 [What did they do?] Pull some crazy stuff on each other all the time. One time I think... Howie probably started it. Working in the Foundry, you had housing over the shaker conveyers and we were doing something inside of them, onthe conveyers or something. Mel was inside... I think Howie was inside. Anyway, one of them was inside and the other guy stuck his head in through the opening through the doorway there and everything was covered with dirt all over. He takes his arm and scrapes a pile of that black dirt right up and LAUGHS Mel was the one that scraped it...doing it to Howie. He didn’t forget that. Two days later, Mel was cutting a piece of manganese plate, the hardware plate and it’s hard to cut with a torch. You got to be real slow and steady in order to keep your metal flowing. He’s down on his hands and knees, cutting on that plate. Howie found a box of little box of...some old grease on it, laying around on the gird somewhere. Grease, black grease...and all full of foundry sand and everything else, dirt. Mel was bent over that plate cutting there, concentrating on that and Howie comes up to him and takes that box of grease and pushes it right on top of his head, screws it around. LAUGHS and he took off running. Stuff like that there...pulling on each other every once in a while. LAUGHTER [They both must have been good workers.] Oh yeah, they worked together for years. They got along fantastically with each other. They just had a little horseplay between them all the time. 23:30 [How about you – have you had any tricks played on you at all?] Well... not that I can recall as far as working on the job... I had a buddy of mine pull one on me one time. I’ll never forget it. I was probably in my early to mid twenties. We chased around a lot together quite a bit. One night about 3 o’clock in the morning he calls me up... “Gus, can you come and bail me out. I’m in jail. I need someone to bail me out.” So I get dressed and go down to the goddarn jail there. “Is Bert Ladeski here?” “No, there’s no Bert Ladeski here.” What the hell is going on. I found out later, he was sitting...got home late in the morning...or early in the morning, late at night. Was schnozzled up and called me about getting him out of jail. I called him up and I told him he better never end up in jail because you ain’t never going to get me to get you out! LAUGHS I’m sure he hasn’t forgotten that either. That was about the only thing that anyone ever pulled on me. 25:05 [Nicknames figured in much on the job?] Some guys all you ever knew them was by their nicknames. Cowboy Pearson was one of them. He was the guy that initiated the same day I did. I didn’t know that his first name was Howard for twenty years! I knew him by Cowboy all the time. I’m sure there were a few other guys with nicknames, nothing I can really recall. [Why did they call him Cowboy?] Well, he dressed and presented himself in cowboy boots and western type clothing, jeans and western type shirts and everything. [Pearson sounds like a Swede or some kind of...] All I know was that his correct name was Howard Ward 26:18 [Years ago, I got to know a couple of Ho-Chunk guys who were ironworkers. One was  Ken Funmaker.] I knew him. [Did you ever work with Kenny?] Yup. He was a good worker when he was on the job. That was the biggest problem. When he had a paycheck...I don’t know if that’s a typical Indian or what but it would always be a few days before he got back to the job. CHUCKLES He was a good worker when he was on the job. He’d get drunk and take a few days to sober up. [I stayed up all night drinking with him one time.] LAUGHTER [I guess he got hurt on the Portage power plant.] There’s another. My son was a pretty good friend with him. I can’t think of what his name is. It wasn’t Kenny. [Elliot? Robert?] I don’t know, all I know he was a Funmaker. Might have been one of those. [Also worked with a Potawatomi, Ned Daniels. He was a welder and worked mostly out of the local in Green Bay. He died awhile ago.] Y eah. 28:00 [Any characters you encountered on the job? Some who were colorful or memorable?] Mel and Howie were two of the most comical characters you ever run into. Swell of guys that they were, either one, they’d give anybody the shirt off their back. But they were just lots of fun to be around all the time, no matter what the job was. There was never a dull moment when them guys were around. They were always lot of fun. And then there were our after hour sessions, stop over at the bars after work. We had some pretty good times then. [So things changed over time as far as guys getting together and go to the tavern?] Well, no, I don’t think so. They probably did with me. As I got older, I kind of gave up going to taverns. I have been retired for over 12 years and right before I retired, I’d stop in pretty regular. Sit with the guys and stuff. Got home late for supper more than once I guess. LAUGHS 29:32 [When you finish a job or top out or something, is that cause for some kind of ceremony?] Well, a lot of time, there would be a pretty good party at the topping out. There was one party down at the Weston plant there... It was towards the end of the job and I was working for Hennes at that time too. They had a bunch of scrap iron they sold off the job. He threw a big party, all the boilermakers and ironworkers, and... We had a good feed, a big party, all night. Something like that. The guys would sell scrap iron at the end of the job or something and throw a beer party. Occasionally it would be a retirement party, someone was retiring. We had our share of parties. [Do you think more so than other trades...or similar...or...] Oh I would almost venture to say ironworkers are probably a little heavier drinkers than most. I don’t know too many ironworkers that didn’t drink much. I know a lot of them that quit drinking. And some of them quit at a pretty young age. They had reasons for quitting. Their wives told them you quit or get out. 31:24 [When I was interviewing some of these fellows around Madison, “Oh, you’re going up to Stevens Point – or farther north. That’s where the Jack Pine Savages are...” I grew up in Rice Lake so I always thought of myself as a Jack Pine Savage. So can you talk about that...?] I don’t know how that ever come to be. Nekoosa and Rapids area, there’s a lot of Jack Pine in that country. Paper mills, everything. They used a lot of Jack Pine. How that ever came about to be... We were always referred to as Jack Pine Savages quite a ways back already. I don’t know, other than that there was a lot of Jack Pine up here, like Adams County and surrounding counties, southern Wood county... That’s all there is is Jack Pine that country. There wasn’t a helluva lot of ironworkers that come out of that part of the country. [So what did you think about it if someone called you a Jack Pine Savage?] Didn’t bother me in the least. LAUGHS What the  heck... [In the 60s, when all these Polish jokes came out, did that figure out at all in the trade? Did people call you Polack or anything...?] Never bothered me anyway. I told just as many Norwegian jokes or Polish jokes. Listened to just as many, as far as racist or bothering a nationality, that never bothered me in the least. How many Norwegian or Swede jokes do you hear and pass them on... Polish jokes. That doesn’t bother me any. 33:30 [Do jokes get told much on the job site, people on break or at the tavern afterwards?] Yeah, well some guys could tell a joke and every joke they told would remind them of another one. They could go all night and keep telling jokes. I can’t remember one joke five minutes after I hear it. [Some guys are like that. Max and Pete Trzebiatowski, those guys were good. Do you ever hear of any ironworker jokes? Ironworker and carpenter...or something like that.] No, none that I really recall. Probably has been. You can take just about any kind of joke and even change the names and make it ironworker and a carpenter, or a priest and a rabbi. So I’m sure there were jokes that way. But I don’t recall any particular ones. 34:40 [How have things changed over the years, starting with your Dad and you being in the trade... Gear or safety things...?] The biggest thing that bothered me the worst was that safety crap. I’ve done my share of connecting and stuff and I never tied off, I never wanted to be tied off. You make a connection. You get up and go to the next one, not come to the end of the rope and so you have to unhook. That safety crap, that really... I’m glad I retired when I did. There’s nothing wrong with it. I’m sure it has saved quite a few lives. Everyone has a different outlook about things. Management and your company and everything else. They treated it a lot different than they did at the start. It’s a pretty big thing today, the safety part of it. I enjoyed riding the headache ball, going from point-to-point on the rig. Later years, then we used the basket which wasn’t much different than riding the headache ball. But after a while, you couldn’t even use the basket any more. You had to use man lifts and tie off every place you moved to. ‘Course my Dad worked with a guy, working on a dam. Paul Lang. I think they were at Petenwell. INAUDIBLE. He fell off of a scaffold 8 feet and got killed. [8 feet...] Yup. Two rings of scaffolds, fell off of there and broke his neck. 36:47 [Have you had any accidents?] No, nothing... Oh a few cuts and smashed fingers, a few crippled up fingers. That one won’t straighten out. That happened at Sentry. LAUGHTER Never had any serious mishaps. Not really any close calls. One probably could have been down at the powerhouse in Sheboygan...no, that was at Green Bay. I was riding the headache ball, working for Hennes there, working on the precipitator. I got on the headache ball and the operator was going to swing me back down to the ground, probably for lunch or whatever it was. He was working a little bit in the blind, not totally in the blind. He didn’t raise the hook up high enough and swing it out. And he caught the beam with that hook on the headache ball. Well the line was laid out at probably a 45 degree angle and I’m hanging on to it. He didn’t have a non-spin cable on the rig. He had enough strain on there, it kinda opened up the twist in the cable, the lay of the cable. And then when he swung back, I couldn’t even let go of the cable. The lay opened up and it pinched my gloves right in the lay of the cable. So he had a little strain on it. That was probably the closest I ever come to having anything happen. [How did you get out of that?] Well, he realized that he hooked the hook on the iron. Then he swung back and picked the load up and then went down to the ground. I wound up, I just had to pull my gloves  off. LAUGHS They were wrapped in a cable. The twists on the cable opened up and there was enough to pinch some of the fabric in the... [But not your fingers. Your fingers were... Oh man...] 39:00 [When you started out, what kind of gear did you have and how has the gear changed over time, what you wear...] I don’t think nothing ever really changed much as far as clothing or tools. Clothes, you just dressed accordingly. In the winter, you put on what you had to stay warm, and in the summer you stripped down to stay cool. The tools and equipment pretty much stayed the same all along. Well, to start with, on rods, you used a neck roll for tying rods, a big roll of wire you hung it around your neck and under your arm. That was a pain in the ass. It didn’t take too long and every shirt you owned, the shoulder on your shirt was wore out—just rolling that big roll of wire around, tying rods. Well then they come out the wire wheels, those little spools. That really made things a lot better. As far as structural, things didn’t change much. I think I was on one job where they still done a little bit of riveting. They riveted one little--it was a fly ash tower was what it was. That was at the Buren Power House. Then everything pretty much went to high tensile bolts after that. There was one little spell they used what they called darlettes. They were a high tensile bolt. They had a head like a rivet, then they had splangs right behind the head. We had to use a riveting gun to drive it in the hole. And the impact on the nut on the backside. We had to drive ‘em with a #90 riveting hammer to drive them into the holes. They didn’t last very long. I don’t think I used them more than a couple of years, couple jobs. I don’t know if they figured... They figured I think it acted more like a rivet. Fill the hole full. And then they found out, in time, with the tension on high tensile bolts, it wasn’t necessary to fill in the hole. The strength came in the sheer itself. The tension between the two pieces of metal done more than filling the hole up. With your high tensile bolts now and torque wrenches and everything, impacted it. Them darlettes didn’t ask very long at all. 41:54 [You mentioned when you had that wire...] Neck roll. [Yeah...tearing up your shirt. I ran into some guys whose wives made really good wool socks for the winter or maybe did some re-enforcing on some of their clothing. Do you ever have any custom made stuff...] Sew a leather patch on your shoulder that would take the wear of that roll. That helps. And then it got warmer too. That patch of leather in the summer time. I think the problem was that... Its new wire, just like you use today, you could let go of the end of that wire and it could spring up and pop you one in the face. It wasn’t too nice. [Did that ever happen to you?] Yeah, well... [There’s a little song that I’ve heard called “Ironworkers Blues.” It was made up by a guy named Duane Olby and he recorded in the Twin Cities. I used to know who he was but I never met him. He was still living when I was living in Washburn, Wisconsin. I’ve been in touch with his son. His son sent me a copy of the recording. But it has something about the wire comes loose and it hits your lip...or something like that.] 43:36 [What about the hard hats. Was there anything distinctive about the ironworkers’ hard hat?] No, there’s really nothing special about them. I mean everybody wore the hard hat. If you were on some job, some companies had different colored hats for different trades. But other than that, there wasn’t anything special about them. [Was there a certain color for ironworkers?] No, not nothing specific. I guess that was just up to the company’s discretion. They just see somebody goofing out there. Well, that was a carpenter, he’s got a red hard hat. That was an  ironworker, he’s got had a green hard hat. So he knew...just by looking at the hat what trade he belonged to. [Some guys decorate their hard hats.] Well, legally, the only thing you can do is put like stickers or decals on. As far as any other kind of decoration--actually, it’s foolish, it weakens the hat. You start drilling holes in it and mount stuff that shouldn’t be. Technically, you ain’t supposed to put anything but a decal on it. [Like paint or something...] Well, paint was never a problem. One guy, George Bienfang Jr (I THINK), he painted his hard hat titty pink. LAUGHTER I guess that was his trademark. LAUGHTER 45:25 [Your tools, how did you go about acquiring your tools when you started out?] Bought ‘em as you needed them, I guess. Some of them were handed down and some other guys...if...they had more tools than what they needed. They could have 2-3 wrenches and some didn’t need one of them. I think I’m sure all the tools that I have, all but the bull pin, I guess I got from my Dad. All the wrenches and everything he bought. [What did you call it, that you got from your Dad?] A bull pin. [What’s a bull pin?] It’s a tapered pin that you drive in holes to line up the iron. [It’s different from a spud wrench?] Yeah, that’s all it was used for, just for lining up a hole. It was a tapered pin. [So did you ever put your name on your tools or mark them somehow?] Well if you just marked ‘em, you’d stamp your initials on them or something. Very seldom did you lost any tools. 46:35 [How about...you were growing up. Did you ever slice wire or tie knots for the trade?] Oh yeah, I tied a lot of knots and sliced rope. Sliced long, short splice. I don’t know--hundreds of knots. LAUGHS [Can you talk about how you learned how to do that and just some instance...what...] Tying knots for an ironworker is quite important. You use it...well, you don’t call it a rope, you call it a line. You use it in a lot of applications, for tag-lining a load or pulling a bucket of bolts up to yourself. Many things. You oughta know how to tie a knot that’s going to hold, then its something that you can untie when you want to take it off. Over the years, I always considered myself pretty good as far as tying knots. I knew a lot of knots. [Is that still part of the trade?] Oh yeah. Yup. [Now a days, what would you use the knots for...? Say, working on a job... nowadays?] Same thing as always I guess. If you want to send up a bundle of something in a secure, so that half of it didn’t fall off on the way up. 48:28 There was an old story about this guy—I don’t remember how it even all went. This guy was going to hoist up a keg of bolts up to the top of a roof of a building or some darn thing. He got all banged up and smashed and the guy asked what happened? It all started out that... He started pulling up this keg of bolts and it got too heavy for him. He let it back down and he come back up to the rope. He had a hold of the line and jumped off the roof. Let his body weight pulled the keg of bolts. On the way up, the keg banged into him and it screwed up his arm, hurt his arm. Then when they got all the way to the top, what the hell was it? It hit a beam or something and the bottom of the keg fell out and all the bolts fell out. No that was probably the second trip around or some damn thing. Well, anyway he got hit back and forth three different times. Once he run his fingers up through the shiv when a keg of bolts overhauled him and it just went on and on and on. That’s how he got banged up. Every time he met the keg of bolts on the way up, that keg would hit him when he was on the way down. And when he was on the way up, the bolts were coming down to hit him. It was just a series of getting banged up. [I heard a song about that, Why Clancy Wasn’t At Work Today] That same story has been switched around in a  hundred different ways. Once, a bricklayer with a pile of bricks or a bucket of bricks. And I think that bolts, I think that was in an ironworkers magazine one time years ago. I heard that same story often. Different versions of it but basically it’s the same ending all the time. LAUGHTER 50:35 [Did you splice cable too?] No. That was...a rather complicated technique, to splice cable. The only thing that anybody ever did splice cable was making chokers, making eyes on that cable. As far as splicing cable together for linking out a piece of cable, it wasn’t practical. Making chokers was quite an art. [Did you make them or know guys who make them?] I knew a guy that did make them. [Could you talk about someone who was a choker maker?] That don’t... I never really know him personally. I knew the guy that made it. Companies would submit an order and they’d make different sizes, 3/8ths inches, different lengths. They would make whatever they wanted. [Were they ironworkers?] Yeah, most of them were ironworkers who did it. Some of them are retired ironworkers or whatever. [They do it by hand obviously?] Yeah. There’s a little hand work. I have pictures of the equipment... It’s like a thimble you wrap the cable around and then you’ve got a dip that you stick between the lay and then you thread the different strands in between the lays. [Yeah, I’ve seen those tools at Local 383.] That’s quite an act. I could splice rope, long splice, short splice. Splice eye in a rope. But I never got into cable splicing. 52:26 [What about... Ironworkers got to work in all kinds of weather. Can you talk about any strange or difficult weather you worked in over the years?] Oh, plenty of it. Some awful hot days and some awful cold days. One of the college jobs there [UW Stevens Point], that was early in the spring. Working on rods. Down from the footings up, putting basement walls in. Facing to the west in the morning time, the sun beating against the wall--it was hot. Hung a thermometer on the wall ties on there that wall--the panels are all oiled to release concrete and stuff. That thermometer went up to about 125 degrees. You sit there and sweat it out, and hope to get some breeze. Get done and get out of there. [Does it affect the iron or steel at all?] Oh, it’s hot. I tell ya. Working connecting the iron. The thing is, painted iron wasn’t that bad. There are a lot of jobs with raw iron, unpainted. That black iron is pretty damn hot to sit on. You can’t even grab a hold of it, it was so hot. You could fry an egg on that iron a lot of time. Cold got just as bad. Doing one of the dormitory jobs, working for Utter [?] in Point. You come in from break, I was wearing Sorel boots. Stopped in for a lunch break and my feet were cold. Took my boots off and warmed my feet up, pulled the liners off the soles and I couldn’t pull them off. They were frozen to the bottom of the boot. So now you know how your feet got cold. [It’s like those stories you hear about guys in the log drives. When they take their boots off, their boots were frozen on. So the iron would get slippery and dangerous in the winter?] Oh yeah. It can get pretty damn slick sometimes. Sometimes you had to go up there to clean it off. It took days. It wouldn’t melt off if you didn’t clean it off. [How would you clean it off then?] With a scraper and broom and shovels. You had a snow storm, snow built up on the iron. Well then you get some warmer weather, it starts thawing. Then it freezes back again at night. If you didn’t clean it off, it would take a week before it melted off unless you had really good weather. [Did you ever use torches or anything like that?] It wasn’t practical to try and drag it... The only way you could do anything would be with a brush burner and a bottle gas tank. A brush burner... You ain’t going to drag an LP tank up on the ice to try to melt the ice off. You done the best to scrape it off, get as much off as you could and then a little bit of sunshine would melt it off.  55:52 [Some of the ironworkers I’ve met and they’ve done some metal work or tables out of rebar or making sculptures out of tie wire. Have you ever run into that or do anything like that yourself?] I haven’t done none of it. No. After retirement, I went a little bit into some wood working projects. I never done anything in iron work as far as all that ornamental stuff goes. I would enjoy getting one of those plasma cutters. You must have seen some of the work that they’ve cut out with plasma cutters. It’s computerized... [Oh I haven’t.] They cut out pictures and stuff. It gets pretty darn expensive. [Yeah. Ed Smith has made a couple of miniatures of lattice cranes. I was at his place last week. It made me wonder if anybody ever made miniatures of any girders, or structures for building... Sometimes trades people made them.] Well, I’ve seen a lot of stuff made with match sticks or balsam wood or something. Build bridges with them. As far as metal works or something, I never got involved in any of it. 57:38 [Can you tell me a little bit about the folks who are in this picture then... You talked a little bit about your Dad but how about the other folks.] My Dad is in the middle here. It was when he got his 50 year pin. That’s me on the side and that’s my oldest son, Dennis. He’s an ironworker now. He’s down working on windmills down working by Portage. That’s my next younger brother. He’s retired now. He’s 69 or 70. And that’s his son, Wayne, who lives next door. I sold my old place to him. He’s living in my... I own a 40 and that old farm building and we put this house up in 2005. Sold the house over there. [What’s your brother’s name?] Jim. He’s got a book in the... Jim got his book in 1965. As far as I can figure out on the date on this thing, Dad got his book in 1941. I got mine in 1957. Jim got his in 1965 and my son Dennis got his in 1980. And Wayne, Jim’s son, is 1990. 59:13 [Some folks have told me that in a lot of the trades, but especially in the ironworkers, in the early days there were a lot of farm kids that got into the trade. Did you run into that? People who grew up on the farms became ironworkers?] Not especially. I probably knew just as many that came from the cities than came off the farm. I wouldn’t say one way or the other...more than the other. [Some people refer Local 383 as a farmers’ local sometimes. I don’t know where that came from.] I don’t either. LAUGHS [You hadn’t heard that.] No. 01:00:09 [I’m about out of questions but do you want to say something overall about your experience with the trade, what you think of about ironworkers.] Well, I enjoyed the whole...my whole lifetime as an ironworker. Here are some of my pictures from earlier. These are from the Learning Resource Center in Stevens Point and the addition they put on and what year that was. These pictures are INAUDIBLE. [So is that you on the beam?] That’s me. That’s me there. And that’s the same picture. [So this is from the Stevens Point Journal...?] South Center at the college there. [Yeah, but the paper is the Stevens Point...?] It’s the Stevens Point Journal now. These pictures were taken by the Point photographer, Doug Wojcik.. After these were published in the paper, he came and gave me these pictures that he took, connecting the trusses, trusses on that building. [That’s cool. I’ll make some copies of those.] This is at Nekoosa. This goes back quite a few years ago. Got a stiff leg putting on an addition on top of the paper machine. 01:02:03 [These are pictures of ironworkers up on top of the...like the lone ironworkers on top of the beam. I’ve seen a couple like that and they kind of remind me of some of those pictures  you see in the lumber camps with the big load of logs and someone on top of them.] This job was way back in the building. We had a little narrow gauge railroad track built on the roof and they had a crane down below to hoist iron up. Put it on a little cart and they’d roll it down to where we could get a hold of it with the stiff leg, to set the iron there. There’s one of the trusses going up. We had that stiff leg there, the beams mounted on the top of the roof there. The stiff leg was lashed down too. You’d put the iron in ahead of yourself as far as you could go, and then we ducked the boom back. Here we’re ducking the boom back behind to pick up our skid beams and cast ‘em ahead of you so you can move the stiff leg farther ahead. You had to unhook one leg of the brace legs, duck the boom around, the leg around the boom and then swing your the skids back around. [The stiff leg is like a stable part of the... Could you describe it?] This is probably about as good a picture as you’re going to see of it. This is a mast. It goes straight up and you got a bull wheel on the bottom that you can turn. You turn your boom around. These legs are triangular, off each way on the backside. That supports the boom. You could swing like from that corner around to this corner. You couldn’t reach back here without hitting those legs. So in order to move these beams behind you, you had to disconnect this one leg. You held the mast with a come-along and cable. Duck the boom around behind you and reconnect it, grab your skid beams and throw ‘em over where you could reach and then place them farther ahead so you can move on down the building. [Wow. This would be the part of the trade that would be called rigging. Is that right?] No, that’s stiff leg work. [Stiff leg.] Stiff leg derrick. [Makes me think of sailing ships.] Between a stiff leg and a gin pole, this is a stiff leg. You had stiff braces behind it. And a gin pole, you just had rope falls behind it. You used like an electric pole, telephone pole, something in the front with guidelines in back with an air tug or something that would fastened to the pole. It’s used for setting iron you couldn’t reach with a crane. [There’s a lot to the trade.] 01:05:33 [What did you think of it, as a trade?] I enjoyed every bit it. I wouldn’t want to do anything else. [What did you like the most or why do you think you enjoyed it so much?] Well one thing is being outdoors most of the time. This was one of my last jobs in Buren, we put up a big stack. This is the crew, on top of that 300 foot stack. That’s my nephew, he’s welding. That’s my son. And that’s a shot of the stack just going up with the rig. Just setting that top piece. This is at the Kraft mill. There’s the engineer on the job, one of the Consolidated’s engineers. That’s the basket that you had to ride up on. [Is that you in there?] That’s me. I don’t even know who that was. [I THINK I’LL TURN THE RECORDER OFF.]
Ironworkers;William W. (Bill) Kerwin;1941;2011;0:02 trade? 0:31 Graduated from there. I went to West High School. After West High School I worked for the city a little bit. And then I got drafted by the army. Went in and served my two years there, and then two years in the reserves. I was working for the city. There was three, four friends of mine that were ironworkers. So they told me to go down to the hall and apply. And I did. It wasn’t long I got hired. [Who were your buddies?] Charles Gorey and Jim Sielehr. They were ahead of me, but they were apprentices at the time. We were all the same age. [High school together?] No, they were from the old neighborhood. I hung around the The Bush a lot. Lot of people’d say, “The Bush!” y’know. But I could go in the Bush because of my friends. Lot of people wouldn’t Topic Announcement, initial question–when and where born, how you got into ironworkers I was born and raised on Charter Street in Madison. I went to St. James Grade School. go there at night . You’ve heard about the Bush? [Yeah, it seemed like a great place.] It was! Back in them days nobody locked their doors. We’d just go knock on the doors. “C’mon in! How are ya?” And “Is so and so home?” And that’s the way it was in the old days. Then I became an ironworker in March of “66, served my apprenticeship, did my years, my hours and stuff. Then I was hired by Theodore Kupfer’s. I worked there for 28 years. 2:04 [Any in your family in the building trades?] No. My father was the lieutenant on the fire department and my brother went to college. My other ones worked at Oscar Mayer’s and that was it. [What attracted you to the trade?] When I worked for the city, a friend of mine, Smiley Weiner, was my foreman and he said, “You know, you don’t want to work for the city. Got to get out of here. Get in the trades. Get out. You’re not going to make a decent living working for the city.” This was 1965. I went down to the Labor Temple, signed up for the plumbers and I signed up for the ironworkers. The ironworkers called me. That’s how I got in. 2:54 [Tell me about Kupfer Ironworks. What kind of a place...] Kupfer’s was a great place. There were a lot of great friends that worked there. We were all apprentices. I could name you a dozen guys who were all there. We all got along good and it was a great place to work and they kept you busy. You didn’t get laid off much. It was fine. Everyone was friends there. You had great Christmas parties. A lot of nice times, a lot of parties. But it’s too bad. Most of them are dead now. I miss... I happened to see my old superintendent, Bob Benton, three days before he died. He was kind of one of the ones that took me under his wings at Kupfer’s and made me a good ironworker. I became foreman and worked here and worked at... My favorite place was at the Kohl Center. I worked at the Kohl Center for 16 months and got out of there and went to Badgerland. I finished up my career with Badgerland. I was 63 years old and I said it was time to quit. That was it. 4:06 [Tell me a little bit about the old timers with whom you were in the trenches...] You couldn’t believe those old timers. They knew everything. I mean, there was Syd Erstad. Dick Higby was my really...like my hero. Dick took me under his wing and taught me very well how to be an ironworker and how to be safe, how to figure out the blueprint--and George Bunders and George’s Dad, Bob Benton, Jim Hein and Stub-all these great guys who worked for Kupfer’s back then. You just can’t remember them all – they were all so good. It was fun. I enjoyed that, all those years... [When you first started out, what kind of work were you doing and how did you...] The first day I went on the job I started my career at James Madison Memorial. I went to work. Syd Erstad was the foreman and Norm Lenzer was there and Everett Erstad and Norm Brown and a couple other guys that I don’t quite remember. But here I come on the job, a green horn, right out of the hall. First day on the job, some guy says, “Put a choker on that beam.” I looked at him like, “What??? Put a choker? What a minute! This is my first day!” LAUGHS Those old time ironworkers, they didn’t have patience. “What do you mean you don’t know. Get over here now and I’ll show you.” You had to make sure it was completely centered so it would go up right for the connectors and stuff. I learned a lot in the first week. [So a lot of language, a lot of terms there?] Well, you know, construction workers had their own way of saying things. Language wasn’t really clean language. They weren’t afraid of speak their word, them old timers. Them old timers made the union what it was. You did your best. I mean, like, “Get up and crawl on that iron!” That was on my third day. I mean, I didn’t want to get up there  and start walking around. I was kind of green but I learned. I got along good. So then I stayed with Syd for about a year. He was the foreman that I stayed with, going to different schools and stuff. Then when you work for Kupfer’s, they had maybe 6-7 foremen who all had trucks. You get farmed out with what they say. You go work for this guy a day and you work for that guy a day. That’s what I did and I enjoyed it – it was fun! 7:00 [Can you tell me about some of the different parts of the trade, like welding or rod busting or connecting... Your early experiences with some of those.] My early experiences...I was kind of a layout man for bar joist. You measure them out, lay them out and you didn’t do much welding until you went to school and got to be a pretty good welder. I was a certified welder once and then I never went back and re-did it. But I could weld. Then you get up there and all of a sudden I became a connector, which I really loved. Sit up there and grab the iron and cut loose. Move on to the next piece and that was fun. Never did much rod busting. Never did. I did a little bit at the Kohl Center and a few bridge decks, but most of Kupfer’s was all structural work. We were always doing this and doing that. One time I worked on a TV tower, WISC-TV tower. I changed some light bulbs and some welding, tack a piece on there. It was like a four day job. It didn’t last long but it was exciting to climb way up there. I could almost see Mount Horeb from up there – it was really great to see. I should have had binoculars but I never did. 8:27 [Tell me about being a connector. What did you wear, what kind of gear did you have?] Well, you wear your structural belt, had a bag full of bolts. You sit up there on the iron and they’d swing a piece up and you’d grab it. You got to make sure that you got it, end to end, because most iron was numbered and the numbers went a certain way according to the blueprint. A piece swung over and you grabbed and stuck the spud wrench on it. Try to hold it. Stick one bolt in and snug it up. The other guy gets his...crawl out, unhook it and wait for the next piece. [How important is it...because you work as a team...] Right, you had a partner. [Can you tell me about a favorite partner and some of the teamwork that’s involved?] Well, you know, Norm Brown and I got along good. We were kind of both young apprentices. I liked connecting with Norm. He was a good guy. There were so many different guys you worked with. Every day you’re on a different job and someone needs help, this and that. According to the union rules, there are five guys to a crew and so you just switched around jobs and connected iron with guys. Doing gymnasiums was probably the most fun. Great big long high trusses and put in the big bar joists. You got to set them in time to make sure they didn’t tip over. That was kind of exciting, putting them out there. [Did the connectors have a certain sense of identity, a high status thing?] Yeah, you know, guys used to say, “I’m a connector, that’s all I do.” I became a foreman for Kupfer’s for awhile, traveling out of town to do work. You hire men out of their local. Down in Illinois with Ed Smith, we had some crews down there. We did some connecting and stuff. Ed was my ground man and I was the foreman. The guys we had out of Chicago were connectors. Well, we got the iron all connected and everything and they said, “Well, we would like our paycheck.” And I told them we had a lot of work to do. “No, no, we’re connectors. That’s it. We don’t do detail work. We don’t. We’re high flyers.” Okay. That’s the way it was. You paid them off and they left. But ironworkers were pretty set in their ways. They’re pretty hard headed guys. There were guys that wouldn’t tie a box and there were guys who wouldn’t connect or do structural because they didn’t like height. That’s the way it was.  11:20 [Can you talk about going up...] As you go up, build floor after floor... [I mean your own experiences because... The challenge to get up high at first. Did you have to overcome anything in terms of balance or...] I was never scared of heights and stuff. A lot of times I thought, “Gee, I have to be careful. I don’t want to fall.” You always had that in your mind. You sit back there and took your time and didn’t hurry. I was very lucky and never fell, never really got seriously hurt or anything. But...yeah... I worked on buildings where you work your way up. You start on the ground floor and go up and up and up. You get up there and the higher you get, I think the safer you get. Basically, some guys would say, “Well, I was...” I know. I was an ironworker. You use a little more caution, you’re a little more safer. The higher you get, the more safety conscious you get. 12:40 [In the older days, did guys used to have a drink to steady their nerves or anything like that?] Well, I hate to bring that up but you know... I remember when there was a bottle stashed around on the job. They were old time ironworkers, you know? They were set in their ways. Back in the winter time, go have a coffee break, right? Give me B&B. You’d look, and I was just a young kid. I didn’t know what the hell B&B was. Because black and brandy coffee break. That’s the way it was when it was cold and stuff. Things have changed today with the new rules and regulations. All the drug testing that goes on now and stuff. Basically, them old guys knew what they were doing. They were great guys. You can not just... anyone ever tell you that the old time ironworkers, them hard headed so and sos, they would teach you if they asked. They were really good guys, deep down. 13:57 [Can you tell me about any who were particular characters that there might be a story or two about?] Well, my favorite guy I used to work with was Norm Lenzer. This guy was a great ironworkers. Probably other ironworkers told you about Norm. This guy would do a handstand on the beam just to show you he could do it. And this man was probably one of the smarter guys I worked with who could really teach you something if you wanted to pay attention and learn. I mean Norm was from the old school, an old time ironworker. He would bark at you, you know, and call you names but deep down inside, he was a good guy. He wouldn’t be afraid to teach you like tying knots or doing this or how to connect iron. You do it this way and you do it that way. Norm, he was a great guy. A lot of guys didn’t like Norm but I always thought Norm was a good guy when I worked with him. [What did you call people?] “You dumb punk.” Everyone was a punk. When you were an apprentice, you were a punk. You didn’t know nothing. “When are you going to wake up and learn something,” ya know? You know the cuss words, you’d use them too but... They didn’t mean much by it. The old timers called everyone a punk. It was a good learning experience. I enjoyed it. I worked 40 some years. [Any other characters that you can think of?] Syd was a good foreman who told you what needed to be done. He didn’t bother you. Some foremen would stand over your shoulder and watch. Most of the guys at Kupfer’s were really good foremen. Taught very well. Like Dick Higby and young George Bunders...of course we called him young George. They were good guys. I worked with them a lot. Higby was a good ironworker. He was one of those guys who never got excited or anything but he was a good teacher. That’s most of it. The guys I worked with...you know... And then I became a foreman and then it was my turn to work on those apprentices. “God damn it – pay attention!” LAUGHS “How many times do I have to tell you this!” But when you’re a foreman, you have the young men...like when I went to work with Badgerland. We had a lot of young kids right out  of school and stuff. They want to get right up there and be the... “I’m going to be the connector. I’m going to be...” “Well, you have to be careful now. Take your time. Don’t be doing this now. I don’t want anyone getting hurt.” I didn’t want someone to get hurt on my job and I was very lucky. And that’s as far as I can... Great ironworkers, great days. Badgerland was the last company I worked for. That was interesting when all those young kids and stuff, right here in Waunakee. 17:30 [What kind of work was being done in Badgerland?] Badgerland was Badgerland Metal Building. They did a lot of metal buildings. I never did much welding... Well, going back a few years, I worked for Sullivan. Ken F. Sullivan did nothing but metal buildings. Put up the structural and then you sheet it. You did it all. So you learned quite a bit doing a metal building. You were a real tradesman. You started from scratch. Then when you got done, the building looked nice. With Badger Building, sheet metal workers were...ironworkers... I did mostly structural for Badgerland. They did a few metal buildings, but I didn’t get involved with that very much. Other than that, you know, like I said. The best job I had was the Kohl Center. Worked for Oscar J. Boldt and got to do the Kohl Center for 15 months. That was interesting. [What kind of work did you do at the Kohl Center?] I did some structural and was in charge of all of the bolts, to make sure the right bolts went into the right holes. Did a little of rod tying when I first started. Then we went into structural. Did the roof and worked on the scoreboard and stuff above. Jack of all trades. 18:52 [Cool. When you started out, what was the gear like and where did you get your gear and so forth.] You mean all the tools and stuff? [Yeah, and the stuff you wore.] You could go down to the hall. As guys retired, they’d bring their equipment to the hall and you could buy it as used. Or you could buy new. Buy your structural belt and your bolt bag and all that. You get your hard hat. Things have changed in 40 years when you have all that safety equipment now that we never had back then. [Did you ever have anything homemade or modified or anything like that?] No, no... You had a hammer but of course it was called a beater. And your pin and your spud wrenches and your crescent wrench and that’s what you used for connecting. [What about the hard hats?] Yeah, you had to have a hard hat at all times. They changed. I always wore one with a big wide brim because being a red head, I didn’t want to get sunburned and stuff. But hard hats was something that they nagged at you all the time. [Was there anything distinct about the ironworkers hard hats?] No, nothing. A hard hat was a hard hat. A regular old...put it on. [What about the color...or...] No, I don’t think the color... I think most ironworkers wore their hard hats backwards. The reason was your welding hood. If you had the bill on it and your welding hood come down, it would hit. You see ironworkers today in most pictures and they have their hard hat backwards. “I’m an ironworker. I have my hard hat on.” [Did people ever decorate...? Now you see stickers all over it. In the old days, would people ever do anything with their hard hats?] Oh yeah, you’d always put your union sticker on your hard hat or if you donated something. A lot of people had different colored stickers on their hat. I was never into that. I used to have one for a local #383 because when you went out of the local, you know, and worked for different locals where you have to check in, they wanted to know where you were from. 21:11 [So did you boom out very much?] No, when I worked for Kupfer’s, there was some  work out of town, so you had to go. I think I was in Illinois twice so I had to check in twice there. Then out in Milwaukee. Of course, when you’re in Milwaukee, that’s a different local. That’s local #8 and you had to check in. I worked in Milwaukee 2-3 years with Dick Higby and those guys from Kupfer’s. I think we worked Northridge and Southridge when I worked for Kupfer’s. [Would you stay there for a week or...?] No, we drove back and forth, Dick and I. I think there was four of us and we’d all take turns. Drive back and forth, so it wasn’t bad. 21:50 [What about break time and lunches? How did that go over the years when you were working?] Well, you always took your coffee break at 9:30. Went in and had a little sandwich and a cup of coffee. Fifteen minutes time limit and then you went back to work. And then at noon... In the old days they’d go out for lunch. A lot of guys would go out for lunch. A lot of guys would bring their lunch bucket. You sit around and tell stories. They always had pictures on the wall, Playboy pictures on the wall in your job trailers. Now today with the girls on the job, things have changed. I noticed that when I was getting ready to retire. [Was that a good thing?] Well, you know... Eh... If she can do the job, why complain? I worked on a couple of jobs with a couple of young ladies. They could tie rods and kept up with the rest of them. They weren’t as strong... They couldn’t pick up... The rods come in 8th inch. A #8 rod is an inch. It’s 44 foot long. What are you going to expect a woman to pick up? Some of those hard head guys would go, “Hey, do it or get off the job.” No, no, no. Use common sense. Like anything else, it was pretty hard to get the women in. I could probably say about my father--he was a lieutenant on the fire department--he’d go nuts if he knew women were in the fire department. My father died...I think he retired in 1962 or 63 from the fire department. He was an old timer. But you know, it’s like any business. Women, right away they get excited. 24:00 [Did the tavern play much of a part in the life of an ironworker years ago?] Well, you know... A lot of guys after work had to stop. That’s construction. I never did. My wife told me, “If you’ve got to get drunk to face me, don’t come home.” I learned that lesson in a hurry. But there were a few guys that had to stop every night and have their beer. Not me. I kind of got educated at a young age. [Some of the young guys kind of piss it away.] Yeah, yeah. There’s a lot of guys I know that worked and spent more in the tavern than they should have but that’s the way the old timers were. It’s like anybody. I bet if you interview people from Gisholt or Oscar Mayer’s or any of the old businesses around Madison. It would be the same thing. I know when I was a kid growing up, I used to love to go down to the rail road yard down on West Washington Avenue. Of course it was Tremry’s [sp?] and a few other bars down there, that’s where the railroad guys hung out. I was just a young kid who enjoyed the trains and stuff. And I remember, geez, these guys get done and they get to go to a tavern. But not me, I guess. I did my days before I got married like anybody else, but after you got married things changed. 25:38 [What about nicknames?] I don’t remember too much. I was called Red...Brown was called Brownie. Syd was just Syd. Norm was Norm. There were a few guys who had nicknames... Stub...his name was Robbins and he was called Stub. There are a few... [Tinker.] Tinker, yeah. Freitag, we all called him Arnie. Yeah, there were a few nicknames, a few good ones floating around. I used to go to the union meetings quite a bit and we’d talk there because guys worked for different companies. It was interesting on Friday night to sit and talk to some of those old timers. Guys from up north who never got too social. Most of them guys were called  Jackpine Savages in them old days. But they were good guys too. I worked up in Nekoosa and Wausau area and got to meet those guys. It’s a long way for them to come to Madison for a union meeting on a Friday night. So when you got up there to go to work, you used to hear stories about these guys. When you got up there to meet the guys, they weren’t bad guys. They were good guys. [Do you remember any of those stories?] Well, I used to hear about those Jackpine Savages are going to do it their way. Come up here and... “You ain’t coming up here to change things and doing things this way and that way.” I’ve only been up there a couple different times when work was slack. But I loved the guys. They were great guys. I worked at Nekoosa at the power house. Met a lot of guys up there. Worked in Wausau and met some good guys up there. We used to hear stories, like any place else. You hear stories about guys from other part of the local. They were good men, the were all good ironworkers. [That’s what I am – I’m from Rice Lake. I’ve always known about the Jack Pine Savages.] Yeah, the Jackpine Savage. “Where do you live?” “Oh, I live out in the desert belt, out among the pine trees in a trailer.” They love, those guys up north, they love their hunting and fishing. If it was hunting time, they wouldn’t come to work. They’d go hunting. That’s the way it was. You wouldn’t argue with them. [Would guys bring venison sausage or jerky or something to the job?] Well, I was never much into...I never hunted or fished myself and I wasn’t into any of that wild turkey or venison. Guys would bring it and want to share it with you and stuff like that. It was just... It’s hard to say but, you had a good time. Growing up as an ironworker, I grew up. I did. I was young... Like they say, you are full of piss and vinegar. Right? Them old timers, “what are you trying to do, kill this job?” LAUGHS It was that... They had their pace and that was it. But when I became a foreman, my pace was a little more than the old timers. But I got along good with most of the people. Most guys liked working for me that I know of. I see them today and talk to them... 29:22 [What takes a good pusher?] To be a good foreman? Well, you just got to be... You can’t do a lot of hollering. I might have overextended sometimes like everyone else. They all holler. You make a mistake, it could cost a life or something so you got to be very patient with these young kids today. They’re not like when I started, with the old timers. They wouldn’t tolerate nothing. Today, you’d take the kids off the side and help them the best you can. That wasn’t the way it was with those old timers. They had their way. It was like anyone else. [The old timers talk about... What was the background of some of them? Were they farm guys or Germans or Norwegians?] I don’t remember. They were just... You showed up to go to work and these old timers...they were just there. I couldn’t tell you much about them. They were just... You go to work for so and so and just go there and do your best. And hope that he doesn’t holler too loud. 30:50 [Accidents. You said you never fell. Did you have any accidents or...?] I’ve fallen a small...nothing where I’ve been really seriously hurt. My friend Dick Higby and I were working together and he slipped off a metal building and crushed his heel. We were out in the middle of nowhere. I loaded him up in my car and took him to the hospital. Left the company truck and everything right on the job. Next day we were back on it. Honestly, I’ve never seen a guy really get hurt or fall a distance. Maybe...Everett Erstad one time...a piece of iron rolled over and broke his leg. I think that’s the extent of seeing a guy really get hurt. But I was never around someone that really fell far, even though you heard stories and stuff. No, I was pretty lucky.  Maybe if I would have seen someone fall and get hurt real serious, I would have thought no, this wasn’t for me. It’s time to leave. [When you were starting out, did you hear...that an old timer would take you aside during a break, would one of their ways of maybe teaching you by telling you a story about what happened to someone...?] Yeah, they would tell you that you had to be careful. Don’t be a hot dog. It happens quick. [Can you remember any of those old stories?] No, not really offhand. I know the one time I fell, I maybe fell 10 feet. It was like, shit – it happened. I’m here! How did I get here so quick? And right away you want to get up. But I hurt my back a little bit and right away they said, “Take it easy, take it easy, why do you want to be a hero and get up?” And I said, “Oh, I’m alright.” But I never got seriously hurt. It was just...I cracked a rib and that was it. And I thought, well, I’m pretty lucky. [That is lucky.] You hear stories about guys falling and doing this and that. But I was very lucky. Never was around anyone who really got hurt except I remember Everett getting his leg broke. It was just one of those little things--nothing where a guy fell and got killed. I think Higby and Wes Roscoe and a few other guys were working at the chilled water heating plant at the University when that fellow fell down the chimney and got killed. They were there. I heard about that but I wasn’t on the job. But you hear things like that. 33:53 [Can you talk about...say, with a greenhorn ironworker... Did they ever get sent for some tool that didn’t exist?] Oh yeah. You play those games. You send people after things that don’t exist. It’s kind of like when you were kids and you went snipe hunting, right? With a paper bag and you hit them with your finger. Yeah, they send you after things that don’t exist. I don’t remember too much about that. I remember hearing stories about that. [What would they be?] It would be some crazy thing to get. For a rivet or something crazy that they’d send you after in the tool shed. Some people would just laugh at you. I can’t remember, you know... But there were times when they’d send you after stuff and you’d just laugh. You’d learn the next day and you’d think how can I be so silly to believe that? 35:00 [When I went to Pete Stern onto the Findorff site, there was a guy busting iron rods. When he had his back turned, people put some gravel in his bag and any kind of little...pranks? Can you think of anything like that?] Well, you’d always do something like...you know... You might nail a guy’s lunch bucket down. When he comes to pick it up, he’d tear the handle off or... Just crazy things. I had a good friend Virgil. He was a good ol’ ironworker. We used to call him Melon Head because he had a head on him... He had a five gallon bucket for a hard hat. Yeah, those were fun days. Yeah, they pulled a lot of tricks, especially when you were tying rods. With the wire, they’d wire your pliers to the thing or just do crazy things. It was fun. It was all in the game. But nothing serious where anyone...you know. I can’t remember, but there were crazy things that went on. 36:06 [If you are a foreman, what was your attitude toward stuff like that...?] You’ve got to play a little bit. You can’t be serious all the time. I remember at the Kohl Center, a lot of guys played a lot of different silly games. Nothing that would get anyone hurt or at a cost. It was just in fun. But yeah, a guy would be tying rods in a tunnel and you go and tie the top rod so he can’t get out. He’d be stuck in there. Guys would say that they were on a job so big they used to have lunch in the bull hall. The bull halls are so big. Just crazy things, but it was fun. Or you weld somebody’s tool down. Nothing serious, you wouldn’t hurt them or anything. Just tack them to  the iron or something on the guy. It was fun. All those years. [Someone would do that to you or to a person, then you would try to retaliate later on?] Oh yeah, now that we’re talking about it, there’s one thing I could really tell you about welding. The window on your welding hood is kind of like a little piece of glass. One thing I would do when a guy wasn’t looking, I’d cut a piece of paper and stick it in there. He’d strike an arc but he wouldn’t see anything. It was just...”What”?!? Then he’d open his welding hood and look around and then he’d figure it out. You stuck a piece of paper in there. If you know anything about welding... My favorite of all time, now that I’ve been thinking about it... I had a young apprentice one time and a welding rod, if you know anything about welding rod, Jim, you stick it in the holder and when you strike an arc, it sparks. They stuck a sparkler in his things. He struck an arc and it wouldn’t go out. He just got mad, threw his stinger down and walked away. He just kept on going. He didn’t know. That was one of my all time favorites. Sticking a sparkler in a guy’s stinger. He struck an arc and it would just... He would make a face and hold back...and then he finally figured it out. That was one of my all time favorites. [Did you do that when you were a foreman or...] Well, a couple of different times. When I was a foreman, I had a good little apprentice. Joey. Joey Dern. I used to say, “God damn it Joey.” But he was a good kid and apprentice. He was willing to learn. He’d make mistakes so I’d holler at him. Yeah. I pulled little pranks on Joey once in a while but he was all right. But that sparkler was my all time favorite. If you know anyone, talk to any of the other ironworkers, they probably done the same thing. Stuck a sparkler in the stinger. [It sounds like a classic...] Yeah, whenever you go back to school, go down to the shop or something. Ask the guy, “Did you ever stick a sparkler in your stinger?” Stuff like that. That was fun. [Would there usually be an audience for something like that?] No, you kind of... You didn’t want to embarrass the guy real bad. You know? You might tell another guy, [whispers] “Watch this, watch this...” And the guy would strike an arc...because every time you set your bar joist and stuff you have to weld them down, weld both sides and that. The guy would go to coffee break or something, that’s when you would... Just mix a sparkler with a bunch of welding rods. Most guys start welding and just stick it in. It was fun. That was probably the best I’ve had. 40:06 [Did you have a favorite part of the trade that you especially liked to do?] I used to like to connect. When I first worked with Syd [Dick?] Higby a lot, I did a lot of connecting. I had a good old ironworker...well, he’s not old. He’s younger than I am. Nick Rochon. He was a hippy and a good guy. Everyone knows Nick. The hippy dippy guy. He was a good guy. I loved to connect with him. A few of those guys were good connectors I worked with. You’ve probably going to talk... [I’ve seen pictures of Nick...] Norm Brown and all these guys were all there. [You’ll see Nick in this little film...] Yeah, Nick was a good guy. Me and him were going to apprentice school together. We had a lot of fun. 41:05 We used to do crazy things in school too. [Like what?] The guy would be welding in there, just apprentices learning how to weld... The teacher would be teaching. When the guy ain’t looking, you’d turn his welder up to 300 or something. You’d just ruin whatever he was doing and he’d have to start all over. But those were... Things we did in school that we shouldn’t have done. Things have changed. Things are more... I’m taking like 40 years ago. Things have changed. [When you were a connector, you told me you can’t rush things too much but you must also...you want to be fast. Maybe be in competition with other connectors. Could  you talk about that?] Well, you didn’t... Most of the time... I always liked connecting because the time would go fast and you’d get a piece all bolted up and by the time the train turned around and come back, you had done another piece and reach up and grab it. It was fun building that, going up and up. It was very interesting. The bigger the piece, the harder it was. I don’t care what they say. The bigger the iron, the safety factor keeps going up. You start using your head. 42:35 [How important is the crane operator?] The crane operator is probably 99% of the job connecting. He could kill you in a minute. Say you’re up 4 floors and you’re working in the blind. The operator can’t see you and you’re on the telephone or on the walkie-talkie. “Swing to the right easy...swing to the left...boom down...hold the load.” The operator is 99% of the safety factor when you’re connecting. You’re sitting up there on a beam, say 3-4 inches wide. Here comes a beam swinging in and it can’t be coming in 100 miles an hour. You’ve got to be able to reach up and grab it. Once you’ve got a hold of it, the safety factor was better because you knew where it was. You could guide it and do what you want with it. Slide it into position and get your spud wrench in there. Quick put a bolt on there and put the nut on it. It was a big piece, you put 2-3 on. The operator I always liked... Louie Ziegler was a good operator that worked for Kupfer’s for many, many years. Louie lives in Waunakee and is a good friend of mine. A couple of times, things happen, but right away you want to blame the operator. But hey, come on. He’s got a helluva job as it is. Picking up a piece, trying to swing it over, get it right where you want it. I would say operator engineers, if you’ve got a good crane operator, you could make well progress on a job. Setting iron always was one of the things that was taught. This is how we make money: so many pieces a day for the company. You try to get that many pieces as you could. Once in a while, you got one in backwards. Then you got to go back and take it all apart and turn it end for end. You know... Most of your iron has a number on one end or the other. And most guys would mark that iron Red’s end or Norm’s end. Put an R or an N. So when you’re connecting, you knew which piece...so it was in right. [So that was your ground man?] Yeah, the ground man would write north, south, east or west or put your initial on it, which helped. So when an iron come up and you’d grabbed it, and you’re a connector, you’d say, “Oh, that’s my end.” So what you do is give it a spin. Then he’d grab it. That way you got it in. Times happen when you do get ‘em in backwards. Then you have to take it apart and you got to change it. It’s like a bar joist. Bar joists all have a tag at the end. They tell you 3-4, 35th. All bottom joists had numbers. And according to your blueprint, you’d put them up by this, whichever way they were. The tag...the tag end is marked. And you get one in backwards, then you have to get it back up, turn it. That would cost money, right? And if you owned the company, “What happened here? What took so long?” And you always had a superintendent come out and check on you, which was part of his job. [Would you use hand signals some too?] Oh yeah, yeah. When you’re signaling, “boom down” – you’d put your thumb down. Pump your fingers, that means boom down or hold the load or just boom up. Swing right or left. When you’re on the telephones it’s the same thing. Swing down. Hold it. Boom down easy, a little bit. You’d always be talking. The operator is always working the crane. You hear a lot of stories where operators...things happen. I know when I was on the Executive Board, that young man fell down in Dubuque on the bridge. He was young...I think his name was Woodhouse. A young gentleman that fell off the arch there, down at Dubuque by the bridge. I understand that he fell off of there and landed on the barge. The crane operator just froze, they said, and he couldn’t... It was a shock. I wasn’t there. Homer [Ingram] was the business agent then and I was on the  Executive Board. We heard them stories. 47:30 [Would you ever ride the load up?] Oh yeah, you’d ride the load a lot of times. But you can’t do that no more. Two guys, guy on each end and you’d ride it up and its inside of a column when you get it up there. You can’t do that no more. [Tell me what that was like though.] You just sat on it and just hope that the other guy kept his spot. You had a hold of the tie and you worked your way up. It was exciting, sitting there and riding the load. Of course you can’t do that any more. Like when you were on a big job, you used to jump on the headache ball and the crane operator would let you down, you know, at lunch and coffee break. Two-three guys would get on and hang on to each other. You can’t do that no more. We were in the old days. 48:22 [What about the weather? Whether it was wet, cold or...] Yeah, it was... The old time ironworkers used to tell you, you know, “First drop of rain is God’s fault. The second one is yours.” You know what I’m saying? [I’m not sure.] You’re at work and the first drop of rain hits you, that’s God’s fault. The second one hits you, and that means get off the job. Do you know what I’m saying? The old timers...it would rain, we’d go and head for the tavern. We’d wait it out but yeah, that was their favorite saying. First one is God’s fault and the second one is your own. [Are the beams slippery?] Oh yeah they are very... Like in the winter time I worked at American Family for Kenneth F. Sullivan back then. That big complex of American Family Insurance. We used to have blow torches with a couple of good guys working for me. I was kind of one of the structural foremen working there. I had Don Wigdal who was a good friend of mine who passed away. Jerry Roscoe was an ironworker. He’s still around. Jerry would pick out the iron for me and Wiggy would take the blow torch and try to melt the ice and stuff before it went up. But you had to be very careful. Snow, weather... A lot of times they’d shut the job down. Too cold. Too much snow. Too windy. You can’t be raising iron three floors and they’d come up spinning like a top. No, no, no. You’ve got to be very careful. But in the winter, you did your best. No one wanted to go home. When I started, I made $2.10/hour and I was married. It was tough. But I made a good living and I enjoyed it. 50:32 [Tell me about climbing columns and the art to that.] There was an art to it for guys to do it but I was never very good at it. Norm Lenzer, now that was a guy who could climb iron. You don’t do it any longer. You used to shimmy up and tie them, you’d get the foot in the web. You could get up there pretty good. Sit up there, and a piece of iron would come, you could get it. Once you got in, you climbed up and sat on it. Yeah, I remember some guys were really good at shimmying iron, they’d call it “shimmying iron,” y’know, they’d get right up there. But me, I wasn’t worth a damn. [Is there a term for walking the beam too?] No, not that I... You could “beaver it.” That’s if you sat down. Put your feet on the bottom and go across. “What are you beavering the iron for? Get up and walk it like a man.” “Naw, I’m fine this way. That way I’ll go across the bottom.” LAUGHS 51:35 But you were talking about fooling around... Now that it came to me. One time we kinda pulled a trick on a guy. He had a bolt bag. We filled both bolt bag with things when he had to shimmy up the column. Probably had 50 pounds of tools on it and he was just an apprentice, you know. “Naw, you don’t do that.” It’s just crazy things. You’ve got two bolt bags on and they were pretty good size. Then you’d throw different sized bolts... Fill ‘em both up for a guy and  he’s an apprentice... “There you are. Go to work.” Yeah, that was fun. We’d sit and reminisce these old times. It’s good... It’s too bad we don’t have more get-togethers of old time ironworkers. Some companies go out once a month and they have a breakfast. Guys sit around and get to reminisce old times. It’s never happened. Old ironworkers, I don’t know why it is. It just seems like things have changed. We don’t play around any more. 52:40 [What about when OSHA came in. Could you tell about before...] I hated OSHA. Them guys...they didn’t use common sense. They just...come in. That fining crap all the time. You’re better off just to leave the job if you know they’re coming. You could save the company money. I mean, they are there for a reason but it’s pretty hard to tell an old timer how to change his way. It took a lot of adjustment, even for me, for OSHA’s rules and regulations. Being tied off. That’s the way it had to be. OSHA was OSHA. It’s the government and you can’t argue with them. [I think every once in a while people do ignore some of the things.] You could get by but don’t get caught. There’s a difference. You can do certain things. It’s like driving your car. You’re supposed to wear seat belts. How many times do you put it on? Sooner or later, you’re going to get caught. 53:55 [How about your involvement with the local.] I was a trustee for a few years. A trustee looks over the bills to make sure of things. Then I got on the Executive Board with Homer and those guys and I was on that for a few years. It was kind of nice, though it took a lot of time and stuff. You went there and tried to keep everyone happy. Negotiated contracts a couple of times. Tried to get a raise. Do this and do that. Try to keep the local solvent and keep everyone happy. You’re there and guys would come and complain about this and that. So you had to make sure everyone was happy, one big happy family. Yeah, I enjoyed being on the Board with the old time ironworkers, the old timers and young guys. [What were the meetings like when you first started out?] Well, when I was a trustee, we would just go...a couple...another guy would just go through the bills, make sure there’s nothing there that ain’t supposed to be. Try to keep the locals solvent basically. Then you got on the Executive Board and you had a meeting before and you kind of discuss this and that. Then you had the Board meeting and the union guys were there. The Executive Board was actually mostly there for negotiating the contract. You wanted to have good guys on the board, try to get you that dollar raise or that dollar fifty raise. Try to sit down with the contractors and be fair. You can’t... I always thought, when I was a young guy, you can’t go in there and tell the contractor, “Well, Jesus Christ. We need a $5/hour raise.” Well, you know... Think about it. $5/hour. And there were times when we would negotiate and we’d come back to the body and they were never happy. The body was never happy with what you came back. You had to sit down, there were five of us. You had all the contractors and they are negotiating with all the trades, not just the ironworkers. You can’t give one trade a $2/hour raise and then another trade a .50/hour raise. The carpenters, ironworkers, electricians, plumbers, you had to stay... I always thought that the contractors knew exactly what they were going to give you, even when we went on strike a few times. We went on strike and came back and got what they wanted to give us. They were going to give you a dollar and that was it. You could sit and argue with them for days... You’d want a dollar an hour raise for the next three years when you’re signing a three year contract. Or a $1.25, $1.50... But I always thought the contracts knew exactly what they were going to give you before you sat down at the table. That was kind of the hard part of being on the negotiating committee. The body was never happy. I don’t  care... You could settle for $5 and come back and someone would say, “Why didn’t we get $6?” Yeah know? [What about when pensions came in and guys had to pay into their...] Oh yeah, we started paying into the pension. I was one of them guys that kind of thought at first... “Why in the hell do I need someone to take care of my money?” You know? But as you think about it, and sat with other people, if it wasn’t for that pension plan we have now, there would be a lot of guys in big trouble. I mean...it’s a good pension plan. It pays ironworkers a pretty good pension and that. Old timers, “No--no, no!” They didn’t want nobody touching their money. I was kind of in that group a little bit. Not 100% , but why did I have to pay someone to take my money. But now when you think about it, it’s not such a bad deal. When I retired, I had my money in the SMA. You know about our pension, being an ironworker. Doing what you’re doing. You have your pension. You have your SMA. You can either merge it or take it out separately. I took my pension, of course... I have cancer so I took 50-50 so my wife, if something happened, she’d get a nice settlement. But I took my SMA and went to a financial advisor. I’ve done pretty well with it. The money I got, I got some $100,000 or whatever it was. Went to a financial advisor and advised me... I didn’t want to be a millionaire, but I didn’t want to loose my money. I need this and he knew what my pension was. Yeah, it was very hard to get them old timers, including myself, to believe in the pension. I’m not one of those guys that’s going to deny it. I’ve said it and they know that I’ve said it. “We don’t need people taking care of our money.” Now that you think about it, it was a good deal. So you can call me an old timer. LAUGHS 1:00:10 [I wanted to ask about the relationship between ironworkers and other trades...] “Well, those God damn scabby carpenters. They’re terrible.” I’ll be honest with you. That’s the feeling we all got. Them damn scabby carpenters and laborers all want to do our work. That was a lot that was going on back in those days. They used to say, everyone hated carpenters. Everyone used to try to steal everyone’s work. That wasn’t a good part about it. You still hear that today on the job. It’s too bad the trades can’t get along. I think if the trades got along, they’d be a lot better, work wise and getting things done. But other than that, we still have that hard feeling between the guys. [Did you have any run-ins with the carpenters?] Oh yeah. When we were on strike, the carpenters were doing our work and stuff. We’d have to put a picket up and everyone hated us in those days. I remember when they were doing the campus square if you remember when they were going around. Joe Daniels was doing the work up there. We did a lot of protesting up there. [This spring you mean?] No, this was years and years ago when we were... Oh, I don’t remember. When they first started doing the fountains and stuff up town and all that work was going on. They still have that problem. You know... I still go and visit my friends at Badgerland and Sullivan. Marty Ballweg, I stop to see Marty whenever I can. He’s with Ideal now. You still have that carpenters and laborers, especially on road construction. The laborers are doing a lot of tying rods and stuff like that. You still have that problem. [Laying down concrete?] Yeah, like laying the rebar out there. If you ever get out on a bridge deck, the rods go two different ways. They are dipped in that paint, in that epoxy paint. Their paint is mostly green now. Yeah, that’s... You bring that up about... Yeah, the trades, they all hate each other. They really don’t hate each other but, you know, carpenters... Everyone hated carpenters. Every ironworker... [I have some guys I know out in Mount Horeb. Some are laborers, some are sheet metalworkers but a couple carpenters...and they say... “Jim, you’re working with ironworkers? Aren’t you going to interview anyone skilled?] Yeah, skilled all right! Some of them carpenters, all they can do is put up forms. They’re not...trade carpenters? Go ask them to go build a cabin  or something like that. There are some very good carpenters. But talking about crazy things: some of the crazy things that went on at the Kohl Center. Oscar J. Boldt. There was carpenters and laborers and ironworkers, always pulling funny things. The Kohl Center, you had a carpenter in the basement, a carpenter on first floor, a carpenter on second floor building the sky boxes and stuff. Every carpenter had their own gang box, full of his own tools. The best thing about doing that was take tools out of one tool box and put them in another, from floor to floor. I used to have a good friend who was a foreman there and he’d--blueprints were like 2-300 pages--he’d be working on something and when he wasn’t looking, I’d turn the page, 3-4 pages. He’d come back in and start looking at one of them. “I’m on the wrong page.” [Laughs.] Or take a piece of black tape and put it over the end of the transit [i.e. transit compass]. [Laughs.] Now that we think about it, some of those crazy things that went on, it was fun. Other than that, you know, I really enjoyed the trade. I loved what I did or I wouldn’t have stayed as long as I did. I met a lot of great people. Sometimes I miss it. I’m 70 years old and I know I can’t do it no more. It was fun. The best I can tell you, it was fun. [I think this is a really good interview. We did an hour and 5 minutes.] It was fun, yeah, it was fun.
Ironworkers;Everett J. Erstad;1941;2011;Topic  Announcement, initial question–when and where born, how you got into ironworkers  Time  0:02 trade?  0:28  up on the east side of Madison, 2941 Milwaukee Street. And it’s always been, our whole family’s been in the construction trade. I had two uncles, a cousin, and my father. And you find that nepotism was pretty prominent in a lot of trades in the Madison area. And I had an uncle that was a cement finisher in the Vogel, and I got a cousin that was a laborer in the summer. He went to college. So I had an uncle, after the Second World War was over, he got into the trade and stayed at our house. And the discussion at a lot of our suppertime was talking about upcoming jobs and  I was born in Madison General Hospital on the west side of Madison in 1941. And I grew  who’s doing what, where, and where they’re traveling to get the work don--and carrying on from there. And I always took an interest in it, and when I got out of high school I was kind of rambling around. And the shop in the main company, it was a sub-contractor, Kupfer Ironworks, they were located just about four blocks from the house. So when we’d go down to the park you could hear, over the tracks, all that banging and clanging and stuff. And that’s where my father worked. And I took my mother’s suggestion, why don’t you go over there and see if you can get a summertime job, something to start out with, see what they’re doing. And I went in there and, first thing you know, they seen who I was and they pushed me right in the office. Next thing: “A big strapping kid like you,” he says, “I think we put you out in the field. You don’t want to work in the shop.” The shop scale was a lot less, ‘cause all they did was fabricate there and stuff. So they signed me up for an apprenticeship program, and it wasn’t long before I was out working on different projects.  2:36 The one I started out with was, let’s see here, in the summer it was down in Hartford [WI], putting new schools in. School building was going great guns at that time. We worked the summer there. And then in the winter, it was on top on the 9th floor on Oscar Mayer’s on the east side of Madison, tying re-rods. Some apartment buildings, we’d put a slab in, tie re-rods and stuff like that. I was into reinforcing rods more so than structural starting out. I think they wanted to beef me up you might say. Then we progressed from there. After the apprenticeship was over with and I stayed with Kupfer for 13 years. Then when I got laid off from there, I went with Helga Steel. It’s a metal building contractor, they call them. They work on pre-designed buildings. I worked for them for 8 years. They’re no longer around but they have some sons in excavating down in the Janesville area. He had a twin engine Golden Eagle 8-seater Cessna. He travels around the country. We would go up to northern Minnesota in Rush City. We had a project up there for Fox. What they do was, the outfit with all the snow mobilers and stuff like that. It’s a fair sized metal building job up there. And then we went there to Indiana. We were down there about 10-11 months. We spent a week out in Local 10, I think in Kansas City or Independence. From there I worked with a lot of the local contractors. JP Cullen, Findorff, a lot of different things we were picking up around here. Then I got a phone call from a company that splintered from Helga Steel. It was Debco out of Janesville. They said, “How would you like to spend a winter down in North Carolina?” And that sounded pretty good. I said, well, “How are expenses?” “Well, all your expenses are paid. Motel is paid.” And they guaranteed you Rockford scale, which was like $7 more an hour than around here. I’d spend a winter down there. It’s hard to get a guarantee forty [hours a week] the construction trade. That’s the reason some people think we’re getting rich but it’ really not the case. LAUGHTER It used to be, when my father was in the trade, it was a seasonal thing. It was 9-10 months out of the year and then things would quiet down. Because they didn’t have any way of pouring the concrete and stuff until they get the additives now and the chemical changes and stuff. Now it’s a year round thing, weather permitting, which it makes it kind of tough. Yeah, that’s... Then I went from there and worked for Findorff, off and on.  6:15 I had a chance to get in with Klein-Dickert Glass putting curtain wall up. I worked for them, off and on, and when they got slack I went to work with the glazers, 50-50. They needed a certified welder and I was certified. They got a lot of embedded plates and concrete. I would go up and weld bolts on it and stuff so they could drill holes in it, fasten the curtain wall and then    help them put the glass in place. [So this is for these, for the First Wisconsin buildings, the ones with glass exterior?] Yeah. I’ve got a picture of it. One of the things with that one... It was taken out of the paper. GETS PICTURE Here it is. That’s the Mullins Building on the north side of the square. Where they had that fire? That’s right around the corner. See that? You know where the Strand Theatre used to be? [Yes.] That’s it. I’m on the end there...it’s pretty hard to make it out. I saw that in the paper and I said, “Hey, that’s me!” LAUGHTER [Cool.] I was working down on different, smaller projects for Klein-Dickert...and then would go off with Findorff or the local contractors. If we hit...  7:50 If I back track a little bit, I remember when things got slack here and we were on strike, I went down to Byron, Illinois, and worked on that nuclear plant on the second shift doing cad welding. That was an experience and a half to work on a big plant like that. That thing is near 300 feet or better. And it’s a dome-shaped facility. Then we had to go inside and tie the re-rods for their inside there. The mat was two layers and they were about 5 foot, 4 or 5 feet thick. You didn’t want to slip and fall and straddle it because that would raise your voice quite a bit. LAUGHS But that was an experience and a half working there. An old timer was there with me and he brought a camper down and we stayed at Lake Louise. It’s about maybe ten miles north of there. That was pretty nice. Otherwise it would have been an 80-90 mile hour drive.  8:55 That’s the trouble with the trades. The fact that the work isn’t always local. You’ve got to go where the work is. I spent some time in Milwaukee when work slacked here. I remember hooked up with, I think the conversation was with Nick Rochon. This was back in the 60s when we were on strike. Nick was still an apprentice. Then we hooked up and went to Milwaukee, working on the interstate bridges back then. That was a lot of fun. A different experience, different people you know. A larger local, but they needed the bodies. You might say that, you’re working on bridges like over the Milwaukee River and different places there. As far as the eye could see, that’s what you had to get done. You’re tying, it’s like you’re bent over, tying shoe laces all day long. You carry a reel of wire. I think it’s about 750 feet. When you make a tie, it’s about 4 inches, 5 inches or so. Then they would want you to carry a bag with you. The only break you had was to walk back and get some more wire. But they wanted you to carry a bag with you and have two or three rolls with you so when you straighten up, they’d slap another roll so you get right back down there tying again. You get used to it but then again, you don’t. It wears on you the older you get. It’s not an easy job. [Like picking cotton.] Yeah. A lot of guys don’t do it but it pays the bills, you might say. A lot of people say, well, you’re an ironworker. It’s all structural. That’s only a fraction of what’s actually going on. I think there’s 7 different union books in it. Reinforcing, actually right now in the local... I talked with the business agent yesterday. Reinforcing has more work than there is in construction and all the other stuff. I know when I was at the convention back in 1996, they had to include--they said the ironworkers, structural and ornamental, they never included reinforcing. So they added that in to our sign, to put reinforcing in there because it’s as important as the rest of it, if not more.  11:45 Working down in Milwaukee, there were several different projects. I worked on the new federal building, supervised putting the tubes between the two towers in the new federal building down town. I think they were 16 inches tall and it’s like 7 inches wide. They were about 15-20 feet long. We had to tailor make them to round columns and they had embedded plates. We had    to weld them up. They put scaffolds out for us and we welded them. Then the tower crane to swing the piece out and hook it up. We weld them up. At times, we’d work out at Jones Island, which is a sewage plant out there. They added on that...they’re doing that... It’s on going all the time, one thing or its something else out there. Then I went on the north end of town and put up  a warehouse over there... I and three other guys. When work got slack and then they brought in another supervisor. And they said, “Well, as long as you’ve made supervisor and you’re in another local, we’ll see you. You’re going back.” Boom. LAUGHTER They were protecting their own work because its their local. It’s only fair. We do the same thing here. It’s a territorial thing, you know. It’s like a cat fighting over a mouse.  13:15 [Let me back up to make sure I get your uncle’s name and your dad’s name.] Milford Grove was my uncle and he was in the Army Air Force. He came home and got right into the ironworkers because things were starting to break. [He’s your mother’s...] Right. And my father was Sydney Erstad. He was a steelworker, machinist. Just as... He worked for Gisholt Machine Company, which is on East Washington Avenue. Then he went down... Things were picking up and he went down to Fairbanks and Morris in Beloit. What he was doing... They were machining parts for the submarines for the Second World War. Then what happened, he had an opportunity to go over to Hawaii in about 1942-43 to be part of this... They had to upgrade their submarines because their engines weren’t functioning proper. They were having a lot of problems with them so they’d send them over there. He was over there for 3-4 years, something like that. Then he come back and got into the ironworks. From there on in, he had over 50 years in. I got about six different copies of that, toward the tail end of that. Looking through the trunks and different things, I found a bunch of copies. It’s quite interesting. [Pearl Harbor Banner, newspaper clipping.] Yeah,  15:20 [Do you know when and where your dad was born and...] Up in Windsor-Deforest. He grew up on a farm there. His grandparents come from Norway on my father’s side. I think it was one generation off from my mother, and its kind of a long story in that respect. My grandfather on my mother’s side...he was born in Oklahoma. What happened there is... I don’t know if he was part of the Oklahoma rush for land down back then. It was 1870s-1880s. Anyway, his father, they found him in a spring...he had died. But he had an injury in the Civil War. He was over at the spring for some reason or another and they found him the next day. So his mother was from Darlington, Wisconsin, which is just west of here. She decided to get on the train and take little Johnny, which was my grandfather’s name, and move back up to Darlington. It was such a long period in Darlington, waiting for their relatives to pick them up that she caught pneumonia. Back then there wasn’t much...going on there. Anyway, so she died. So he was adopted. Come to find out that his name was changed from Paterson to Grove. And then the Grove, the people that adopted him, that was their name I guess. They sent him a couple of years to the university in advanced agriculture. He got into farming and that was his thing, doing the farming stuff. Part of the history of that is that they found out later that the land they owned down there, it was all oil wells. So my two uncles and a cousin went down to pursue it and they found a relative, this Bennett guy... GIGGLE They looked into it and he was a pastor at a local church. “Oh yeah, they used to own such and such land here and stuff... Oh yeah, they lost the right to it because the fact that they burned down the courthouse.” I hear it the second, third, fourth hand, it’s hard to say...but that’s history for you. That’s where they come from. My    uncle...at the WWII, I had five uncles in the service. Two of them got into the trades, along with my father.  18:25 [What was it like, growing up on the east side? Can you talk about it as a working class...?] Oh yeah, all working class. We spent our time at the local ball park, close to... Kupfer Iron Works, which is across the tracks... We’d play for business...and compete at different parks. See who was the better guy in their age group. We’d compete back and forth. We’d go swimming in the summer and fishing down at the local creek. Starkweather Creek was close by and you’d catch little bullheads and carp. That was about all that was edible, the bullheads. The carp would just steal your bait. Then we’d go down to the lake and fish down there, and go swimming and stuff. That was... I had a paper route at 11 or 12. I followed through with that, my brother and I. We both had two routes that joined each other. We had to stop that after a year. He was sixteen, caught cancer and died within a matter of three months. It was a tumor of the arm and it just passed through him before they could cut off his arm. He was 16 and I was 14. Boy, talk about something that’s hard to deal with... So I quit the paper route and I became a part time...average... Dykeman’s Restaurant up town on the square. I cut up stuff and cleaned pots and pans. Yeah. Cut up vegetables and different things. We’d cry with this other guy, cutting up the onions and all the business like that. That didn’t pay very well. Then I finished school and got into the ironworks business.  20:25 At the time, we started out at 2/3rds scale. Then you work your way up. As you get 1000 hours in, you get an increase in wages and stuff. A lot of the friends I knew back then, the jobs that they had were pretty much mediocre compared to what I had. I had a pretty good deal going, really, at the time, because wages were just increasing. I remember... We used to go out to fight for wages and stuff and it would be a nickel, a dime, 15 cents. You think about it, it barely kept up with the cost of living. There was a lot of argument and carrying on. It was quite interesting to be part of that business. There would be a lot of scuffling and stuff and people would want to go on strike. Some wouldn’t because they’d loose their wages and didn’t want to go out of town to work for another local. Their time to go on strike is different than ours. Their contract is different, different timing. It worked out a lot. If they had a lot of work, they would absorb as many people as they could...to help us out. Then we’d work the other way around which was pretty nice. There’d be some scuffling and there’d be some fights. A guy would be hitting down at the bar afterwards and everyone would want to argue this and carry on.  21:55 [So what year was it that you started? 1959?] 1959, July. The same time as Tinker Nelson. We went in and both got our pins and stuff and watch for our 50 year business at the same time. [Some people have talked about just starting out. I think Gus Peplinski didn’t really have a formal apprenticeship. He just got the permit and then started out.] When you start out, if you’re in an apprenticeship program, like I say, you start with 2/3rds scale and you work your way up. Well if they got a whole pile of work and not overload us with apprentices, because they’re locked into them, what they’ll do is put on a lot of permit guys. If a permit guy gets so many hours in, he has a right to go for a union book. Ok? But there was a little agitation there because of the fact that I was working at 2/3rds scale and he was making full scale. We’re working right along side one another and I know a lot more than what this man does. So there was some agitation there in that respect. But I know he was going to be temporary help. So he    was there six months, eight months, and some cases longer. But the thing was I was making less money and doing the same thing he was, which was a little agitating. Because he just come off the street and then he started throwing his weight around a little bit. LAUGHS [Did you get special training as an apprentice?] Oh yeah. You had to go to school once a week and spend the whole day there. I don’t know what it is now. You had to get so many hours in. That would be for the 9 months school year, from September through June. You’d get the summer off and then the following year you do that, for three years, until you had your... And then you had to try to get certified. One of the courses they give you is how to get you certified. It would be a welding course. You’d have a teacher looking over your shoulder all the time. Have a written test and stuff like this. We had blueprint reading, knot tying that we created ourselves because they didn’t have any of that there at MATC, uptown, that’s where it was at the time. They had it in the upper half of Central High School in the downtown area. Now it’s way out on the east side. It’s just the 9 months. Once you got your hours in and stuff, then you had to go sit down and have a test.  24:52 We changed that test quite a bit. I was on the examining committee for several years. Each time you get elected to something it’s a three year stretch. I was on the executive board for three years. I forget how many times I was on the examining board, maybe six years. Then I was a trustee. They signed the bills and coordinate all the election stuff. They count the ballots and everything like that. Then I played sargeant of arms. That was a three year deal where you stand by the door and guard the door. Anybody gets pesky, you got to grab them and throw them out. But that never happens. It happened before I got there though. They used to get pretty loud mouth in there. People get to drinking, right after work, and the meeting wouldn’t be until 8 and it’s on a Friday night. You’re already getting warmed up. If there’s a strike or you didn’t get enough money on your contract...when you send the guys out to represent the local. “You didn’t get enough, you SOB.” Oh geez... It could be a real picnic sometimes. Then you’d laugh about it for a week afterwards. Yeah.  26:19 Companies... Kupfer was a pretty prominent company to work for. It was a good thing I got in with them. It was a subcontractor. Basically they got all the raw steel... They had a franchise for Bethlehem or Inland. They’d get the raw parts of the metal in and shape it all up, cut it and whatever is needed in the shop. Then they’d ship it out to the projects or we’d work on it and put it together for them. The good thing is...they did a lot of their own work because in fact, a lot of it didn’t fit so we had to go out there. We’d always complain about it but then the main guy in the office said, “Well, if everything didn’t fit perfect, there would be no use to having ironworkers around.” LAUGHS Then again, I got into with Helga Steel, now that was what  they called A pre-engineered building. They had all this stuff...cut and everything like this. They did it all in their shop. And what they said was, “Well, you want100,000 square foot, 200,000 square foot...” Everything is pre-designed so they just...well, take 2, 3, or 4 of that length and 2, 3, or 4 of that length and they just slapped it together. All that stuff is pre-made. And then it’s all metal building of course. Insulation and stuff. It was a different experience.  When you started out working, some people talked about the old time ironworkers being a different breed. Could you talk maybe about some characters and old hands that made an impression on you?] Oh yeah. Their language wasn’t, you might say, real kosher. LAUGHS I have to chuckle sometimes about how you had to get their attention. This guy would let out a    bunch of those foul mouth words. Construction workers are known for it. I’d look at him and I’d say, “You certainly have a way with words.” LAUGHS The guy, he’d look at you dumbfounded like... Well, who is getting the last laugh on this one. It was funny. And the guy said, “I hope you guys all took a bath because it seems as though I gotta kiss your ass to get the work out of you here today.” LAUGHTER [He was a pusher...] Yeah, pusher, grumbler or screamer... It’s... I forget all the... There were others and more of that business. Guys a’grumbling... Let’s see..  29:20 You’d get together at picnics and things and see a lot of the guys and hear stories, a lot of different ones. It was quite amusing bunch of guys, characters... They all loved their beer, whisky or whatever. Sometimes they’d have it on the job, you might say. Like when we worked on a project... Nick Rochon and I worked out of Milwaukee on one of the bridges. They sent us out on the north end of town. Silver Springs I think is out there somewhere... On an overpass. We were tying rods and he said, “Well, this is Ole Olson’s job... The guy is coming back with coffee now. Take your break underneath the bridge.” So Nick and I went underneath the bridge. And we’re thinking, “Why the hell do we gotta go underneath there?” Here he comes around the corner, he’s got a six pack of 16 ounce Schlitz. We’re drinking...and we looked around... We were drinking Schlitz first thing in the morning. You’d never see that in Madison. They’d throw us off the job. It was funny. And other one...a few weeks later, we were working on one of those long bridges. They had ordered the concrete for the following morning and they weren’t getting done. So what do they do? Okay...everybody, take a break now. They come out with 3-4 cases of beer and set them out by the edge of the job. Drink what you can and let’s get back at it.  Guys would drink 2-3 of them down. They were sweating. I mean, you sweat it all out before you know it. Then we’re right back up there and finish up so they can pour concrete first thing in the morning. Yeah, it was funny.  31:00 [Who were some of the characters here in Madison, in Local 383, some of the old timers?] PAUSE I’m trying to think of somebody who... PAUSE I’m thinking more... I can’t... [It doesn’t come to you right away...] No, no... It’ll come to me.  31:40 [Can you talk about...when you’re starting out...did anyone send you on a fool’s errand or play a trick on you? Send you for a tool that doesn’t exist?] Yeah, yeah. When I was an apprentice, starting out, you know, they says, “Why don’t you go into the truck and find a bolt stretcher?” And that was a common thing. A bolt stretcher. I forget some of the other ones. They’d play it on everyone. It goes down the chain, of course. Sometimes the guys are warned ahead of time. “I can’t find it... What the hell is a bolt stretcher? LAUGHS [Why do you think people do that?] They’re testing you. They’re looking over you and they’re just laughing. They’re getting their kicks. He’s just a greenhorn. We got to kind of put him on the spot. Whatever. Some of these guys get a little pumped up right away. “I’m an ironworker.” Some of the guys have a pretty big head on them. But it’s funny. Bolt stretcher is one I can remember right off. There was other ones too. One tends to forget over the years. [That’s true. You’ve  got to have something that jogs your memory. Pranks...did someone do something to someone’s tool belt or their...?] Yeah, well, you had a wrench laying there and a guy would heat it up with a cutting torch. He knows you’re on break or went to the can or something like that. And you reach over and pick it up... “Geez...what in the hell...?” It would get your interest up right    away. They had these big carts with oxygen and settling in them and they had big caster wheels. They’d haul ‘em from place to place. I know I played a trick on a guy once. He went to coffee and I turned the tanks off. That’s a common trick. But then I took the thing and wheeled it over on the hose so none of the stuff would go through. So he turned the tanks on...and looked around... “You son of a gun...” And he forgot to turn... I had him buffaloed...peeking around, looking at him, ya know... CHUCKLES Yeah... [So you tipped the other guys...?] Oh yeah, you gotta tell everybody. “Look at the fool!” LAUGHTER [When someone does that to ya, are you going to do something... Do they get you back?] Oh yeah, most of the time...and then some. LAUGHS That’s a...Interesting characters, my dad would talk about it at length. I forget a lot of that stuff that he told me but it was funny. Guys would get themselves into predicaments.  35:15 [Nicknames... Did you ever have one or...?] Eeegor. She [my wife] got such a kick out of it, I have a plate, a personal [license] plate with Eeegor on it. I got tagged with that... I was working down in Indiana. Eeegor. LAUGHS [What meaning does that have, do you think?] I have no idea. Someone came up with it and bam, there it is. And then there are E’s. Eeegor. You mention that to someone and they say, yeah, that’s him over there. Like Tinker Nelson. Big Red is another guy. [That’s Bill Kerwin?] Yup. Big Red. Yup. He’s a motormouth, that guy, he’s a talker. We had gotten together with another friend of ours that worked together, Charlie Gorey. I worked with him for 8-10 years. He lives up in Madison. He’s retired from the ironworkers and he went into maintenance work at the city library. I don’t think his knees or feet were working the best. And you see a lot of guys who get into their mid-40s and early 50s and look for something a little easier. It can be stressful. It’s harder to get out of the hall sometimes too [i.e. to get a job]. They want these young guys, they want these runners. I was fortunate enough to hang in there. I got lucky enough to get in with a company like Klein-Dickert where you don’t have to get around, snake around 8-9 floors in structural. You work on platforms.  Like you see in this picture here. That’s where most of your work is being done. It’s a lot nicer. The aluminum was a lot lighter than iron too. It’s not like the rebars that were solid. I was working down in Byron. The vertical bars were #18s, that’s an 1/8th inch for every point. Then the horizontals were #14s, so you had to use double wire all the time to tie ‘em up. But then the vertical, the #18s, were all cadwelded. But we worked on a project on Madison Meriter Hospital on the parking ramp. That was G-locked. I don’t know if you’ve heard about G-locks before. It’s #14s and they were butted together. You smack a sleeve around it and it would be 2/3rds around. You slip a sleeve on there, they had a little bin on it, a little return. When you slip that sleeve on it, it would slip into place. But to get it to go, you had to take a five pound beater and just beat it down in there. It would lock it in. That was the first time I had an experience with that.  38:20 There’s another thing I can think of. I was working up at that particular parking ramp. They were blasting the footings for that. It’s built on a limestone quarry, Madison General or Meriter Hospital. It’s all limestone under there. They drag a mat that’s 12 inch by 12 inch cable. They drag it over the top. Then they throw a bunch of oversized rocks that they dug out of another whole on top of that. When they got that all drilled and all the wires into it ahead of time for us, they drop their dynamite in there. Then they tell the hospital so they’re not operating or something. Then they popped the thing. When they pop it, one of the rocks... They didn’t have    enough rocks on it and one of the rocks flew out in the middle of South Park Street. LAUGHS The thing was about this big – it would have taken out a wind shield! GIGGLE I can’t... And these guys got it a little short, you know? GEEZ... Little things like that happen from time to time. Its funny. Nobody got hurt. You think about it though.  39:45 [Some of these things that happen on the job are amazing. Could you tell me more about Bill and Nick at the Kohl Center?] Well, it wasn’t at the Kohl Center, it was on Langdon Street. It was on a sorority house if I remember right. What they had done... There was a tower crane on there. And Bill Kerwin was sitting on the center part, my understanding, and Nick Rochon was out toward the end by the counter weight. When the picked it up, they evidently had the cables ahead of the counter weight. When they picked it up, the end of the boom buckled. Nick disappeared over the edge. And Big Red was flying out there like a flying rod, you know? And Nick said, “You MF’s are trying to kill me!” LAUGHTER [Did you ever have an accident or a close call?] Well, she’s chuckling [Ev’s wife]. That’s a dead give away, isn’t it? Yeah, I put her on the edge of the seat a few times. I was working on Stoughton high school and I had a 4 and a half ton beam roll over on my ankle. She’s giggling again. Quit it. We had a three year old son and she was like 7-8 months along. It was a busy time for us. I’m walking around, about 6-8 weeks off...on crutches. I think when you’re off, during that time, it’s $62 or $70 week. That’s it. That’s your compensation. Sometimes in the union hall and the following union meeting, they would pass the hat and you might get 80 bucks or something like that. Which is nice, the guys come through for you. That’s one situation. That was my left ankle. Okay. Now the next one.  I took a dive... I was working on a nursing home in Stoughton. Stoughton is a bad place for me to be in. LAUGHS [Even for a Norwegians eh?] Yeah. I took a dive off the wall. Someone pilfered my ladder. They come down...and everyone disappeared for coffee. So I went looking for it. I didn’t realize this, one joist wasn’t welded. It just skipped... I took a dive and landed on the corner of a black wall with my arm right here. Broke my arm. Knocked the wind out of me and I’m laying there on a pile, not able to get my wind. A person walking down the side walk took it all in and he come over...and I couldn’t say anything. And he says, “What can I do?” I said... “The guys are all up in the trailer having coffee. Get them down here.” So they hauled me off of there. That worked out because then the following Saturday, I think we took off for California for 3 weeks. I was collecting the $70/week and we had already planned the trip with my parents. So we went on a three week-er. I’m limping around on crutches. I bruised my hip.  I had crutches for about a week until my hip felt better. That was... The other one that I  had...to retire on. I was 59. This happened in October of 2000. I was working with Klein-Dickert on the new pharmacy building. We were going to jump one of these rigs. What you’ve got to do is... I’m going down the ladder a little ways so we can tie a rope at the end of it so we can drag it over, being led by the cable, being dragged over and landed on the roof. [This is the scaffolding for the curtain wall...] Curtain wall. Right. So I took one step down the ladder and for some reason, those big heavy duty aluminum ladders. Another contractor had it out there and I checked it. It was wired off. Everything was proper. I knew it was a heavy duty. You could see the beefier ones. I took the second step down and right down toward the base, it snapped. Down I come. About three floors and landed on concrete. I landed feet first, broke the right ankle. Then I did a slam on the right side, broke my collar bone. Knocked the wind out of me again, of course. And two ribs in my back and my left arm. That was my demise right there. I laid in the hospital because when my agent stopped, I had a blood clot problems. My calves and    my legs were cramping up and all kinds of different things going on. I just couldn’t manage it. They sent me to the warm water pool... I spent three and a half months in a wheel chair. Then I was on crutches. Then I got one of those walkers. I still got the walker, it’s kind of neat. I came out of it pretty much. A little limp here and there, some aches and pains of course. Its...that was it. I’m done. Just a few months later I was 60 years old. Enough was enough. WIFE: It took months to recover. Eeegor: They sent me to the warm water pool over in Harbor [Athletics] in Middleton and I kind of enjoyed that. I’d go from...right now, I go over there and with the aches and stuff. You see a lot of people in the same condition, the same age. It’s a tough trade. I know a lot of people that fall and you don’t see them again. That’s it. They’re gone. Either that, they get so crippled up, and they’re a lot younger than I am. I’m surprised... There are a lot of guys that get the hell out after 40 years, 45 years or something like that. They get that wound and they’re not able to get around as well. Yeah, it’s a tough trade, there’s no getting around it.  46:48 [Could you say something about the weather conditions under which you worked?] Working on American Family. OSHA says every third floor has to be decked solid so people can’t fall over three floors because people can survive when they fall three floors. Four floors, five, six, nine floors, it’s not like years ago. It’d be 9 floors and so what, 10-20 floors, but every third floor... So they decked it in the middle of winter. So here comes this big snow storm. 12-14-18 inches snow. Then the sun comes out and thaws, freezes, thaws, freezes, thaws.  Comes down all the other floors. Solid ice. And this happens from time to time and we’ve got to go... Me and my partner have to put cables on and different things. Clean this stuff off so you can put the decking down in between the other floors. It gets a little hairy at times. I’ve seen situations where... When they were working on Madison General then, now it’s Meriter... We’d clean off the iron the best we could but what are you going to do if you get a rain storm and stuff, and it freezes on. Different things like that. I went on my keister more than once. Luckily it was only a floor, sliding around, trying to get a day’s work in. You’d bang... You go ahead of yourself and bang in the iron so you can work. It can get pretty hairy at times. Especially iron. That’s why I kind of like working on the re-rods in the winter because you’re down in the hole, where you’re out of the wind. Or you’re in a more level plain. Your work is right in front of you. It’s not as slippery or stuff like this. And there’s times where you just can’t work. The guys... You got to just clean it up. It can be too damn hazardous for people would be out on it. But  they don’t ever want to shut it down anymore. These guys are... “No, we’ve got a job to do here. Things got to be done.”  49:04 [When your dad was working, you said it was 9 months. So was it winter when they shut down?] I don’t think they could pour the concrete back then. You didn’t have the additives in  the concrete. The stuff they put in it. So there were time periods where he’d be off and take unemployment. Either that or get the heck out of the area and go further south or make a few phone calls. A lot of times you could check the union hall and they’ll call... They’ll call the union halls to see if there was any work or what kind of work it is. They’ll say, well, we’ll need a  couple structural guys here. They’re talking high flyers too. Either that or rebars or something like that. Guys would get their names in and drive on down. Pack a suitcase and there you’re gone for a few months. That’s the trouble with this type of work. You have to go where the work is. You’re gone sometimes a week or two. A project that we worked on down in North Carolina. I had to be gone a couple of weeks at a time. It was a pretty good deal. It was warmer    down there than it was up here in the winter. I left her alone. She had to take care of the driveway. She either hired someone or managed it, stuff like that. But it’s still stressful.  50:35 [You talked before about how re-enforcing had to be added to structural... Was there a status differentiation between one or another of those? Little rivalries? ] Oh yeah. There’s competition there. A lot of guys that work structural, they won’t work rods. “I don’t do that. I’m better than that.” They see the rods are grunt work you might say. It’s the laborers compared to a brick layer. You know? “You can bring my material up and everything like this but... Don’t bother me with all these incidentals. I’m a structural man.” Yeah, there’s an arrogance there, there always has been. I enjoyed all of it. It didn’t bother me one way or another. It pays the same. Some locals it isn’t. Some locals are mixed. Those that aren’t mixed, there’s structural... Like Local 1. You’ve got your ornamental. But I think they’re mixed now, whereas the scale is probably the same in some cases. I don’t know. I got that book here that tells you all the scales on it. New York is the place to be if you like high rises though.  51:58 [With some of these different parts of the trade, are there little terms or nicknames used if you’re tying re-bars versus connecting?] You mean a Rodney Re-bar. [What’s that?] You call a guy Rodney Re-bar. LAUGHS Yeah, here comes Rodney. LAUGHS [Rod buster?] Yeah, rod buster is pretty common. [What does that mean?] Pretty much typical what you call them. Well, he’s a rod buster. That’s his forte. That’s what he does. Yeah, he’s an old rod buster. [I think Ryan Roth, whenI asked him if he was a rod buster... And he said “We’re rod busters and sod busters.”] Yeah...  53:00 [You used the term high flyer. Is that...?] Some of these guys are high flyers. I mean...these guys who loved to get up on the structural and get around pretty good. There’s no getting around there. Yeah, well, he’s a high roller. Just like a high roller. LAUGHS [A gambling man.] Yeah, you’re gambling up there, I tell ya. You’re being influenced by other material coming in, and cables and weather and wind. But you know, like I was talking to the guys yesterday in the hall. He said, “You know, they don’t even permit these guys to walk around iron any more. They’ve got cables stretched across so you have something to hang on to.” You never seen that years ago. They’d send the material up and a keg of bolts and there you go. Sit on the iron over there, reach over there and grab your stuff. I’ve got pictures of a lot of that business. It got hairy. And the thing is, you’ve always got to be looking above you. A lot of guys, they drop materials and stuff on you. You hear things clanging down from several floors, you kind of want to climb right into your hard hat, you know? [Did you ever get hit?] Oh yeah, I got stuff ricocheted off my shoulder and stuff. One time I had a 3 quarter ratchet come down and hit me in the back. Put a big gouge in my back. Stuff falling on you all the time. It’s just...  54:44 And these people...years ago. A lot of guys never wore hard hats, a lot of them. A friend of mine that I’ve worked with – it was before the time of hard hats. He was working at Royster’s on the east side. It was a big fertilizer plant. He said, yeah, they had some iron come up. He didn’t have it hooked right. You might say it shit out of the device they had it in. He had an old army fatigue hat with the brim up. He said the thing came down, knocked the brim down on my hat. That’s how close it came. LAUGHTER He never forgot that. It was like.... Whoa...  Some cases, the hard hats don’t really get it either.    55:42 [Is there anything distinctive about the ironworkers hard hat?] There was a variety of... There are saucer hats. Now they’re pretty much standard with the... They have it around tight and they have the brim in the front. I got a couple of them out in the garage. My dad used to wear the type what they called the saucer hat. [I’d like to photograph some] I have more of this stuff. I eat this up. It’s great that someone does that. There’s a lot of history and a lot of people...to see and do things like this. It gives you a great feeling to see this. [I sure am enjoying this.]  BREAK  56:50 [Could you tell me a little bit about how you got your tools for the trade.] There were places that were recommended. You’d go up to a particular wholesaler because they were a different type of tool, the spud wrenches and stuff. You’d go to this facility... I forget. It’s been so many years. You never see anybody else carrying that type of stuff. Yeah. They recommend... [This was in Madison?] Oh yes, the east side of Madison on Williamson Street. This one place had everything you needed. Some of the basic...like crescent wrenches and stuff like that. It’s no big deal. Big beaters you get at Farm and Fleet or these other facilities and stuff. Welding hoods and stuff. There’s a safety facility, South Safety Equipment, and stuff where I used to get gloves and different things. Just any kind of safety equipment you wanted. But a lot of contractors supply some of this. But your belts and different things like that. Sometimes you’d have to go to a shoe shop. And they would make...in their advertisement, they’d say, “Hardest making” and stuff for horses and different things. You would go and tell them what you wanted, what type of belt and stuff and they’d lay it all out for you. Get the slings and different things over your shoulders if that’s what you wanted. I had one for re-rods and when you’re tying walls. You’re going up the wall and you have a hook that you... And you had a little wide belt in the back that you slip on over your other belt. The original belt would be that thick but you’d have a canvas thing about this wide that you would snap behind that because you’d be resting back into it. You might be 30 feet up on a reinforced wall, and you’d be tying there, hanging all day. Stepping in... You go up and snap on...go on up...keep going...stuff like this, all the way up.  59:10 [Were they custom belt makers...] Pretty much. They had them out there if you look around. Try them on and different things. But they had to be somewhat of a heavy duty belt, safety belt and stuff. They got more and more fussy over the years. Some of the belts were not of quality until people started getting hurt. Then they started looking into it and some contractors supply what you needed. But you’re pretty much on your own in that respect. [This shoe maker, do you remember who that was and where?] No. It’s been too many years ago. It was over on the northeast side. It was recommended by a friend of ours and he went in there. He had harness making, shoe repair, and stuff. I’ll look into it and sure enough, he had what I wanted. He had some of it pre-made already. Other people had come in there and asked for that same style of stuff. Some guys did it for themselves. Some were pretty good at it. [Do you know someone who would do it now?] No. But I know they had done it, talked about it and stuff. [This would have been early 60s or something like that?] Actually middle, early 60s. 61, 62, 63, somewhere in there. It was pretty much standard just to have a belt on. But when you have a belt on, you’d have two spuds on one side of course. Then you’d have a beater. They made a harness with a little snap for it. You can just drop a beater in. The hard part of the beater would be up and the    handle would be sticking down. It had a 12 inch crescent which is proper. Then you have a tape measure. You have a bolt bag and tool. A lot of companies what you to have two bolt bags.  And then they want you to fill both of them up. You might... These are 3⁄4 inch bolts and you’re talking 35-40-45 pounds on you. Then you’re expected to go up a column. You’re carrying your bronze body and all that stuff, although they don’t do that much any more. I could manage three floors and that was about it. [You could climb...] Vertical. Three floors. [Could you tell me your technique for doing that?] It all depends on the shape of the columns, the configuration of the column. In some cases, you would put your feet ahead of you, if it was deep. You grab on with your hands... And back and forth, up...all the way up. If it was a different configuration, a shorter one, you would grab on the back side of both flanges, and then you’d put your knees crossed and work your way on up. It would be an interesting experience. And then when you slide down, you have to watch out. When they built columns sometimes, it would go straight up and then it would step in because it’s less weight. Then it would go up to another level. Okay. When you slide down, the inside of your knees would hit these little out-croppings. It would make tears come to your eyes. GIGGLE But... You... But once you get up on the level, you are there for a couple of hours so you had plenty of chance to rest and stuff. Then you’d go to the next level, hooking up the iron. A lot of times they would snap a bag on the hook and bring it up to you. Then you wouldn’t have to go all the way down for bolts or anything like that. They would bring material up to you, once you got on the level that you were working, depending on how big a floor it is. How much iron is there. A lot of times you spend half a day on one level. Then you only have to climb one floor to the next level and go from there. And between time, you get to sit and wait for the next piece to come up. Smoke a cigarette or whatever. Tell them to hurry up or whatever.  01:03:30 [Did you ever have a rope...or did you use your notch to haul stuff up levels?] No usually the stuff is way too big. You can manage... [Just a bag of bolts or something.] Yeah, something like that. They’d pull some up. On a lot of the iron they’d send up... The ground guy would have a rope around one end, a tag line, so he could steer the iron to the proper end to that particular person. And then the rig would swing the iron to the other guy. He would just cut the rope loose. Or he would keep it on there in case he needed some material, like more bolts or something in the bag that you have down on the ground. Follow through that way.  01:04:20 If I can make a comment. It’s funny kind of. This one guy. He was one of the best connectors I had ever seen. But he was a feisty SOB. His name was Norm Lenzer. Pat [his wife], she’s met him... He was a hard drinking, carrying on kind of guy. Anyway, they were working at Oscar Mayer’s, putting an addition on the hog kill. They had brought the iron up,  with a tag line on one end, the steered around to where he could...hook it up. They couldn’t make that thing fit worth a damn. The first thing he did was a mistake... He pulled the rope off and let it drop to the ground, which is probably 6-7 floors. Anyways, my dad was pushing the job. He was down on the ground. Norm, not thinking, “God damnit, I need a beater. Son of a bitch, it ain’t gonna work.” He says, “Well, you know you had a hand line up there and you dumb son of a bitch, if you would have hung on to it, you would have had a beater coming up to you.” Just like that, Lenzer was down on the ground, skimming all the way down, looking for my old man. The old man disappeared. GIGGLES He wasn’t going to hang around after laying into  him like that because he was going to knock him on his ass. Anyways... He tells me about it    about 3-4 weeks later. “Ya know, the old man just disappeared. I don’t know where the hell he went.” And he just laughs about it. This is a constant thing. Especially with this guy. He was a character. [Well, tell me more about him.] He isn’t in the best of shape. The last thing I heard about him, I think he lives up in DeForest. He quit probably in his 50s. He went into bridge inspecting for the state. Then he got hurt so he couldn’t do that any more. He’s probably around 73-75. But he’s got the things in his nose and he has to carry around oxygen because he was a heavy smoker. He was a heavy drinker...heavy on everything. I think he was on his third wife. LAUGHTER [Good connector though.] Oh yeah. I tell ya what. I can show you a picture of a project we were on. If you can get up 9 floors and stand broadside on a 4 inch beam and yell down to the ground crew and say “Where the hell is all the iron?” Bitch about something up there. You’re standing on something that’s 4 inches wide. It takes... In references to that, it takes balls the size of grapefruits. LAUGHS Here’s one picture... Here’s another one. That iron wasn’t that big. [Wow..yeah...four inches?] Yeah, that top stuff is pretty narrow. These guys... That’s what you wanted to see right there. [Oh, okay. Ev shows a rodbuster decal which Leary photographs]. Here, do you want it? Go ahead. [Way cool.]  01:08:24 [You did re-bar for a long time. Was there kind of an art to that?] Oh yeah. There is a lot to it. There are a lot of different ties. A saddle tie, criss-cross tie. Snap tie. Vertical tie. Yeah, there’s a whole book on it. We drug these guys through an apprenticeship program when I was on the board. We would have to test these guys to make sure they know it and then you ended up giving it a rock and then spin it. Then tighten it up because you don’t want nothing loose. The larger the rods, you have to use double wire. I was pretty good at it. It is an art.  You can really buzz through it. Get a lot of that stuff done in a hurry. Some people kind of drag along, and they won’t be around very long. The supervisor would have to get rid of that SOB. But I kind of liked it myself, especially on the wire. It’s too damn cold sitting up there 8-9-10 floors up. That’s enough of that business. And the work is more consistent, f you’re not afraid if you have to bend over all day long on some of them slabs, but some of it is vertical. A lot of the jobs where you’ve got to make up the columns in between the floors. You’re on the ground and what they do is set up two saw horses. You’ve got 4, 6, 8, 20 barbed columns maybe 20 feet long. You get up all these little circular parts in to separate the rods. They call them bands. You’d have some configurations would have to be this wide and stuff life this. Then the rig would come over and pick it up, stand it on end, and that would be your separation from one floor to the next. They pour all that in and they’d have... When they come to the mid-floor, they would come up and have a 90 degree turn. And that 90 degree turn would embed into the floor above. So that’s how they continue on. It all locks together.  01:10:44 [When you’re tying that rebar to your... It’s not a solo thing, you’re part of a team or people...who are setting them on saddles or something...?] Oh yeah. There are a pair of guys working here and a pair of guys working there. There might be 3-4 guys working on a wall because as you bring the material in, there would be three or four of them that would probably put it on their arms and then they climb up, and then put it on the wall and snap it with one hand. The other guy is holding it place and stuff. It depends on who’s the approacher on it. There are a lot of different... In some cases, what they’ll do is take the whole works and it would be three times the size of this room. They would make it on the ground and put all their ties in and all that.  Then they’ll bring in what they call an evener bar. It’s a beam with hooks in a variety of distances    on the outside. What they’ll do is have the rig’ll swing over and with the evener bar, they’ll pick up the top of it up over here and bring it up like this, carry it over and laid it against the wall and set it down. Tie it all in place. It works neater than hell. That way it’s a lot easier for everybody because then its all at your feet. You know? They work layer after layer sometimes and do it that way. So it’s a different approach. Everyone’s got a little different approach on it. And it depends on how all those configurations. If it’s a 90 degree turn here, there and stuff. Things... There can be a variety of different approaches.  01:12:26 [So did you ever work with some guys who were really good to work with and also that weren’t too...?] You’ll get that, you know? I know that job with Helga Steel. We had a nucleus of guys and we pretty much traveled together. We got along great. Whereas with Kupfer’s sometimes, some of these guys... There’s more politics going on there. You get politics just like in anything. Some guys would get most of the lion share of the... If there was overtime coming up, you knew who was going to get it. I might get one Saturday a year. And you got a young family and stuff you want to take care of. And some of these guys would get it a dozen or 14 times. You know? And you’re hungry. But there would be animosity and some guys would say, “Oh take your job and put it where the sun don’t shine.” He’d move on to another contractor. You hear that all the time. Some guys like to burn their bridges. I never did but that wasn’t the smart thing to do. GIGGLE Work gets slack. You start burning your bridges, you’re in a world of hurt unless you’re really good at what you do. But then they got an ego trip and some of these guys have an ego the size of a Mack truck. GIGGLE Let me see if I can find this. PAUSE  01:14:00 [Let me ask a couple more questions. Topping out ceremonies? Do you ever get involved in any of the customs in the trade?] Oh yeah. I was working in Milwaukee, on a new federal building down town. They finally... We put the last final piece of these tubes together, tying two buildings together. Then we were working on the hand railings. Kenny Kruska was the main guy from Findorff and he brought a group of people in from the local guys down there and they all...contractors and stuff... You all sit down in the middle in this atrium and what we did... We made a platform like what you see, what they’re standing on. A pick. It’s what you call a pick, what you stand on...when you’re on these platforms. We made a pick set up and then we had four ropes come out of it, put clove hinges on each end and then put... I forget the name of the knot...up on the top. Then they picked it up a little bit. They had a Christmas tree on one  end and a flag on the other end. That’s the ceremony. And then the overhead tower crane picked it up real slow. These guys are snapping pictures and stuff. We backed off... They were saying... One of the supervisors down there said, “Tell them guys to get the hell out of there. They’ve done their job.” LAUGHS So we had to scatter. We felt used and abused at times. [They used a rope and not chokers and steel cables.] Yeah, to be a little more...trouble, you know. What was handy. It worked. They send it up and all they did was send it up and they swung it over the 12th floor and set it up on the deck up there. It would sit there for a day and then they’d tear it all apart. And that was the end of that business.  01:16:15 I CAN tell you a story about working on that project. They had a tower crane come up in the middle of one of the stacks. They had two tower cranes on there. One level was this and one level was that. Well, they were getting closer on this one than they were on this one    because the square footage is larger over here. So the smaller square footage, they were catching up. One day, they come around, the guy wasn’t watching, and they had these two ... BAM ... come together. And here it is... It’s right at the top. One supervisor asked me, “Do you want to climb out there and see...? They’re not sure if there’s any damage up there. See if there’s a bunch of fissure cracks” and stuff like that. And I’m thinking...No, you can do it. LAUGHTER I ain’t going to go up there. If you want to be some here, you go for it. GIGGLES They eventually had to tear it up, nothing ever came of it. I remember... One tower crane that took care of the larger area, they’re about in the 10-11th floor. They had to put another section in...or two. What they do is... This thing has a big ram in here. Inside there’s a sleeve. The rubbers were shot on it. So the ram would come up and then it would just die right back because the hydraulics wouldn’t hold because the gaskets were gone. So we had to climb up there and beat the ladder all the way up because there was ice all over everything. They brought the tower crane in, the hook, and we disconnected both of them. Then they took it down to the street and took it to some manufacturing place, tore it all apart and got it back together and brought it back in. GIGGLE They put it back in place. What they do is... This thing would come up like this and it would extend itself. Three sides of this tower crane would raise up. It would go out to the street and pick up another section and come in, and drop it on the existing tower. Then this thing would let down on it. That’s how they done it. There’s so many different ways they can do it. When they come to take it apart, they had the biggest one...in Hennes ??? rig. They brought it up around this alley next to the parking ramp. They boomed it up and the guy couldn’t. You gotta boom it up and then you got a jib on the end of it. It gives it a little more reach. It’s like this. You can see the jib so it doesn’t carry as much. So they got the big block here and a small block there. So he’s up over the deck where he can’t see from the ground. He steps up on the rig and he forgot that he had tripped on the levers on the thing. The extended part, the big ball that pulls the cable down, that’s the big headache, they call it because that’s what’ll happen if it hits you. LAUGHS And these things go 300-400-500 pounds. What happened was... This thing come up and sucked this thing right up and back, and buckled it right to the cab. LAUGHS He was beside himself. They brought it back down and they got the extra stops on each side. It’s going to come down. It’s happened where they come right back, snapped off, and then run right back into the cab where the guy is sitting. That can be a little hairy.  01:20:03 What happened down in 9 Springs... The guy is working the clam bucket. Do you know what I mean by a clam bucket? You can see the big bucket where the scoop the mud, bring it over and put it in the thing. They were taking a lot of that stuff out of the sewage plant over there. There’s all these PCBs or whatever it is. All that pollution. It’s part of that super fund. They were cleaning that all up. He’s got the base of these things...both sides of your boom sticking up. There’s a huge pin that comes across here. This thing has a lot of wear and tear on it. So he swings over and boom down and the clam would pick itself up. This boom would come back like this. He brought it back like this and the thing snapped across like this and the thing twisted. That happened a couple of times where we had a boom come right down and land on the iron, snap the... On that job in Hartford...they had a rig in there that was able to pick up... It’s limit was 10 ton. And they had a big box truck that went over a gym. Box truck means it has four sides like a box. It had a...it goes like that. It goes the whole length of the gym and everyone ties off of that. Everybody... They had cables already on it and stuff. So once they get up there, they can cable it off so the wind doesn’t take it. The boom was right up tight. If you’re    going to lift a lot of weight, you got to be right up close. He got up there, set it there, and everyone kind of wiped their brow and the boss is stressed. “Oh, you got everything? Okay. Fine. Hook it up. That’s great.” Here it is the next day... I’m walking by the rig. I hear a whomp... The damn hydraulic line broke on the rig and the headache come down and missed me by about four feet. If that happened a day earlier, it would have taken out about four people. Its that kind of thing that is progressively happening. You can laugh about it afterwards but it’s not... It gives you... The old timers would always tell you... When you’re working with a rig, stand between the rig and the load because then you have a chance. If it’s going over, it’s going to go out. So if you’re out there, you’ll have a chance to get out from under it. One thing about cables and stuff like that. You can hear a whooooooooosh...like that. That’s when the cables are unwinding. And the drag line... They’ll come out... You take a cable out and when you’re setting stone, you set it from 2 points. They come in a truck, come in like this or this. They’ll pick it up with one and then pick it up with another. How they do that... They’ve got the jib line come down and they’ll pick it up here... And they have a line coming from the center of the rig right at the base of the cab. They’ll come up and pick it up here. This line will pick it up to a point and this one will hold it to keep it from skipping off the thing. That way they can bring it up, cut it loose, and bring the piece up and set it in place.  01:23:40 But we were working on the Anchor Savings and Loan on the corner of the Square. He had a piece that he picked up off the truck. It didn’t quite make it clear of the truck and it broke loose. Thump...on the ground. And we were waiting up there to set it. You don’t stand under things either. You always keep an eye out for stuff like that. You got to have eyes in the back of your head sometimes. There are people who get hurt too, who don’t realize when they’re young... A lot of guys don’t think about it until you see something happen...and then you say shoulda coulda woulda whatever. It’s a little late then.  01:24:30 Yeah, that Norm Lenzer, he was a character. Fist fighting SOB. [Was he a big guy?] 6’ 2” something like that. Kind of long and lean. He was in the Marine Corps and was out on some kind of expedition or something...just in training. A jeep went over his arm so he was not able to stay in the service. He got out of there. He had one arm that was a little crooked but it still had the strength there. So he got into the trades. Yeah. He was... We used to get a kick out of him. He had guts like you wouldn’t believe. There are very few people who could keep up...you know, climbing the columns and getting around. But few of those guys used to work out at Turner Hall. It used to be a work out place. Gymnists and stuff like that. They were getting pretty good at it. They kept themselves in really good shape. But then they drank just as hard as they worked, belligerent bunch of people sometimes. But they would help hold together in a group.  01:25:50 Years ago, they used to travel around in what they called a gang. It was a small group of guys and my Dad was part of a riveting gang. They’d travel from here and there and they would work... Like I mentioned before, he worked on the State Street Bridge in Chicago. It’s one of those things he can remember. They built scaffolds up and platforms that they can work off and used riveting gangs. They would throw a few bolts on the thing to connect it and they’d get up there on that. You see that on a lot of railroad track bridges where they have a lot of vibration and stuff. In some jobs, they did it years ago. Then they went to what they call dartlets,    I think it was dartlets. It had the round head on it. Oh look at here. We have a visitor. A big ol’ chunk of lead. Is that your dog? LAUGHTER Yeah, they... I’m trying to think of the ones we used at American Family. There was a... They had a funny head on them, the nut head. You’d put the bolt in and tighten it up, just snug it up. Then you put this electric wrench on it. Then when that rattled up, this very thing on the end... You knew you had the proper torque when it would snap this end off. I think it was called a “luck bolt.” I think that’s what they call it. Then you knew you had a proper torque on the damn thing. Years ago you had to adjust the tork ?? when your cranking on bolts, rattling them up. And then you’d have a guy who would follow through. Sometimes an engineer would follow through and check periodically with a tork wrench to make sure you had enough on it.  01:27:49 I had an experience in one of the first times I supervised a job. It was on the Worzine [sp?] Engineering Building over on the Medical—it’s out Mineral Point Road. I think Gammon Road comes across. Not quite Gammon. Back in there. It looks like a concrete building. What it was... It was an L-shaped or a T-shaped building and all of a sudden I’m there supervising the job. The first thing, a guy came out of the trailer, the superintendent. He said, “Well, some of the anchor bolts...” They already had one floor in at ground level because there was a basement in it. We had a row of beams in there. So we had to start along the parameter. Every one of them bolt settings were off. And they are 4 3⁄4 inch bolts and they’re off an inch this way and a half inch to 3⁄4 inch the other way. That was the whole wing. So we have to tip over the columns and cut all the new holes in them. Then we’d tip them back up. An engineer says to me, “We got to put washers on that. You can’t just put a big 3⁄4 nut on that. This thing is going to tip over.” So okay. We got a bunch of washers and got that all settled. We come to that T-part, and the superintendent says, “Oh, by the way, what I told you the measurements were? That ain’t right.” So we had to lay out a whole new set of holes. And then when we go to set the stuff, they were squared tubes, like that. Six by six or something like that. The night connections that came out were at the wrong level. So we had to cut them off and re-weld them at a different level. LAUGHS It was one thing after another. They had a supervisor that was just....ARGH The exterior work was all pre-cast concrete. We had to tie the rods in a box, you might say, and some of them were pretty big. 20-25 feet long and 10 feet high or whatever. We would tie all the reinforcing in there and then they poured the concrete in it. After the concrete would set up, they would pick the stone up and set them on horses to dry. Then the guy would come along and sandblast them. There would sort of be a rough edge on it. We go to set some of these things...some of them are over 10-12 ton. LAUGHS We’d swing over and set it up and it would sit on two little bitty lugs. It’s surprising. But this engineer, you see this guy doing the welding, he’s certified and he’s been tested. The guy looked over his shoulder and said, “I don’t want him weld any more.” So I had to do the welding. I was the only other certified guy there. So you set up and get things tacked in place.  01:31:10 On this one big piece, we had to set... We set it up on there and I should have had another part in line. It had two parts in it. One part come down...you should have had another part in the damn thing because they set it up there... He set it up there and he couldn’t hold it in place and the thing kept pulling down. The brakes wouldn’t hold it because it was too heavy. So he set it up there, finally got it up in place. Set it on the lugs. It was interesting. These big pieces of concrete, when you set them on these horses, they were 6-8 ton and all of a sudden... Their    horses were kind of old. Three or four of them just went...THUMP THUMP THUMP THUMP And you just don’t slow them down. And they had to start all over again. [A nightmare job.] It was interesting. Did you ever see any cowbirds? [Yeah, I used to see them all the time.] See the one out there? We had some red birds coming in here.  [Is there anything you’d like to add...?] I’ll think of something once you leave. That’s what always happens. [Well, we have an hour and a half...]  PART TWO OF THE INTERVIEW  [I’m back again because I’ve got to hear that story about the stockyards you just told me.] Okay. While working on, I think it was Stoppenbach’s, we were putting that three story addition on the back side next to the kill floor in the stockyard pen. It come break time. An easy way of getting down instead of flying down a column was to jump on the headache ball. I jumped on the headache ball and he swung me out over the side. I think this was a little joke on them, is the fact that he, he swung me right over and dropped me down in front of a big old bull. And there was no place to go. I didn’t know what to do. He’s laughing so hard that he pretty near fell out of the rig. And the rest of them are just a-cackling. And eventually, it come to the point to well, ok, it’s over with. He lifted me up and brought me down on the outside of the fence. But, oh, funny! [So where was that now?] I think it was in Fort Atkinson and it was for an addition on the backside of the stockyard. It was either Stoppenbach’s or Jones Diary. Jones Dairy, I think is in Jefferson. But this was in Fort Atkinson. Stoppenbach’s... I don’t even know if they’re still around. [Cool...great...]
Ironworkers;George L. Bunders;1939;2011;0:04 trade? 0:32 and I’ve been here ever since. So I attended high school here, and a couple years of college. I kinda was at an impasse and my father, who was also an ironworker, was a superintendent at a company called Theodore Kupfer Ironworks. And he kind of put it to me, if he could get me an apprenticeship would I be interested in it? And I said, yes, because I was kind of at the end of my rope. I didn’t know what I wanted to do. So that was my start. Started in February of 1960 as an apprentice in 383. I think that one of the other fellows you’ll talk to, Everett Erstad and I started together. His father was a foreman there [Kupfer Ironworks] also. So we, the two of us, went to Kupfer’s as apprentices. That’s where it all got started. So I’m what you’d call a second Topic Announcement, initial question–when and where born, how you got into ironworkers I was born in Milwaukee, 1939, June 8th. Moved to Madison when I was six months old generation ironworker I guess. 2:12 [Tell me a little about your dad? What his name was and where he was from.] I was a junior so he has the same name. George Laurel Bunders and I’m a junior so, since he’s passed away, I don’t use the junior anymore. He started basically in the ironworkers way back in the Second World War. He worked at Wisconsin Foundry and worked on ship parts or something like that. He started working for Reynolds which is a company in Madison. They had a few ironworkers for moving things. He started there and worked for them for quite a few years. There was a big teamster’s strike and Kupfer’s, the two bosses at Kupfer’s and Reynolds were good friends and were at lunch. They offered him a job to come to Kupfer’s to work and he started there as a foreman. Shortly after that, he became a general foreman for them, or a superintendent. He had a 45 year pin when he retired, before he died. And I have a 50 year pin so...we have lots of years behind our belt. [So where did he grow up then?] He was born in Prairie du Chien. He moved...said his sister got him out of the river bottom or he’d still be there. He went to Beaver Dam and began as a truck driver. He used to drive truck for Kroger and Kroger was based here in Madison. That’s where he met my mother, working at Krogers’. During WWII, he got started and was an early welder. He was learning welding when they were using the bare sticks and stuff. So he was in on the base... There was a lot of welding in this Wisconsin Foundry thing. So he had his experience there. As the war ended, the ironworkers were looking for welders and he had experience. Basically, that’s how he got started in the ironworkers, as a welder. At first the ironworkers didn’t recognize welders because there weren’t a lot of them. But then as the trade grew, welding became more prominent. He was then welcomed into the fold of ironworkers. So I guess you’d say that I started in the era of when... The criteria for getting in was you had relatives or you knew someone, which is totally different now. You go through a process of tests and things. Even though I had to take tests for the state apprenticeship, I actually got in because I had an uncle who was an ironworker at one time and my father...and a couple of friends that were in the trade. So I guess that’s basically how I got started in it. 6:30 [Did you have a sense growing up of ironworkers as a trade and a culture?] Well, the only... Not early of course but... I did as my father grew...as he grew into the trade, I was conscious as I grew older of what he did. I would go look at some of the things he’d built and stuff so I had a sense of it. But the actual know-how, I would be the first to admit that I had to start from ground zero. I learned what I know from the people in the trade. 7:20 [Could you say a little bit about that process of learning? How did you learn stuff as you started out? How much did you know going into it and...?] Well, to be very honest, when I started in the ironworkers, there were a lot of farmers. They had worked with machinery and probably repaired things. I have to say I had to start at ground zero. I had to learn my way through what makes a welder work, how to get the engines running, all of this. It was all new to me. So I guess for saying anything in my own stead, I did keep after it and try to watch and learn. I tried to pick up... And I had some really good mentors. I had probably a really good friend through many years who passed away in 1990 who was in the next apprentice class ahead of me. So he was getting done and I was starting. We became great friends and he really kind of led me by the nose, through the pitfalls and showed me what needs to be done to become a good  ironworker. So that really helps to have people there. And I get a lot of knowledge from my father. He was well respected and did a lot of pretty...for this area, fairly good sized projects. He gained knowledge through that and then just by doing it and learning...and not being afraid to say that you don’t know it all. 9:30 [Tell me a little bit more about your friend.] My friend was Dick Higby. He was an ironworker...he got out probably at age 55. He was a foreman at Kupfer’s and we were basically doing the same thing. I became a foreman in the late 60s and so we were working together, doing the same thing for Kupfer’s. Socially, our wives got to know one another and we did a lot of things away from work too. It was a good relationship. 10:20 [When you were first learning, were there people playing tricks on you some?] Oh sure. Apprentices...that was... I think it’s changed somewhat now. When we taught, I taught a—mentors, talking about mentors and how you need to bring these people on--they don’t know. You have to teach them. But in 1960, when I started, the old timers looked on the apprentices kind of like danger for their jobs. And in some aspects, they probably were because I know that at Kupfer’s, for instance, shortly after I started in 1960 and in the 60s, they made a big transition from older ironworker foreman that they had over the years to a younger better trained probably a little more active type of help. So since it was... But we all know that what you can do at 25 you can’t do at 55 so you have to realize that at some point in time, someone is going to have to replace you. Even though you may not think that, this needs to happen and that’s been one of the trade’s biggest drawbacks, I think. They want to covet things for themselves and then all of a sudden, they wake up one day and say, “I can maybe do this but I don’t really want to do this. I want some younger guy to do this.” And so if you don’t train anyone, there is no one there to do it. [Did you have any tricks played on you?] Oh, basically the... In the early years you’re the gopher. They all say, go to the truck and get the come-along. You’d run down six flights of stairs, run back up there, bring it up... “Oh, we don’t need that now. We’re done already.” That kind of thing. It was just general joking, trying to trick you to doing something that they can laugh at. But as you go, if you’ve paid attention and watched. That was one of my pet things as a teacher to tell a younger apprentice how I learned is... You don’t watch the guy that’s a fumble bum...and struggling. You’re not going to learn anything good from him. You watch the guys that make it look easy and know what they’re doing. Pay attention to them. You watch what they do. And most of them, if you talk nice to them, will show you how they do it. They’ll talk to you about how they do it. That’s really much easier than to learn. 14:10 [Years ago, I used to work in the woods peeling popple bolts. And then later on I did interviews with loggers and there was a sawyer who ran a saw mill by a lever and a carriage. Very steady. And there was another guy who loaded with a hydraulic clam onto not just a trailer but a “pup” as they call it. Where you had to load logs but couldn’t really see but kind of feel through the hydraulics. They said you could paint a picture on the side of his loads. Could you talk about some guys who were really good and had good reputations.] Guys would make jobs look so simple. Because I was a certified welder, I did some connecting but we were a small company. You’re talking about school houses and things but I never connected on a large building like a power house and stuff, or a multi-storied building. Some of these guys could... In the 60s, you know what I’m talking about. In the late 60s, they quit doing it but they used to fill  our bag with bolts, climb a column, stick a stud wrench in, sit on it, and wait for a load to come. As I learned and became a foreman, I mean, you can do it that way but it’s a little more dangerous and it’s hard on the man unless he’s really good at climbing. And the potential for an accident is higher. As a foreman, we would try to send pieces so that they could work from one to the other to the other and around in a circle. The first piece, someone has to get up there to make it. After that, if the foreman is organized, he can send the pieces so that they can go to one to the other to the other to the other without climbing up a bare column and sit there, waiting for the piece. There were any number of... A guy by the name of Norm Lenzer who was there when I first started, could walk on anything, could climb, knew what he was doing. He knew how to use his spud wrench. I saw guys who didn’t know to use a spud wrench get caught between the beam and the column, and you can’t get the spud wrench out. It’s bound in. They got it in too deep and it bound in. And the early years, we used to do a double connecting, which now they’ve kind of eliminated. They have a few but they do what they call now an “OSHA connection,” which OSHA had nothing to do with it. The ironworkers were the ones who came up with the idea. They add an extra set of bolts. You have to drill two more holes in the column. Then put the beam that you’re starting with, you have to have two more--an extra set of holes. You can go down there and the guy goes out to the blind column, he puts two bolts in the bottom home plate and tightens them up. He still can make a double connection because that next beam that comes won’t have that. There’s no safety problem. Where the old connection... The connector would have to hold the beam with his spud wrench, take the nuts off the bolts, bring the piece in so it slid on. Try to get a nut started and then bring the piece around and keep holding it with the spud. That all works fine and dandy if you know what you’re doing, but if a column was a little bit out of plumb and the anchor bolts aren’t just right, all of a sudden the column walks away from you. The beam is heavy. All of a sudden your stud wrench is bound. You can’t get it up. You can’t lift it up. Too heavy of a beam. Now it comes time for a come-along chokers and hook it up. Pull it in. It’s like half an hour process, where these guys--the good ones would make it look like clockwork. If you got someone up there that didn’t know what they were doing, all of a sudden you have a major problem. 19:02 [The come-along, is that a choker?] It’s a lifting device with a handle and chain. You can reel the chain out and put a choker on the beam, put a choker on the column, if you had a column above you. Then you hook it up and jack it up, pull that weight up again so you could get the spud and pull it back in. Then sometimes you’d have to put one on the other way if the column was too bad. Pull it in tight and why, you made a bolt. It got... I’ve seen some hairy things. These guys would make it look pretty easy. And of course the walking, which is practically out of the picture now. They’d get fired for that. They’d walk across anything. This Norm that I talked about... He would come to a column and instead of hanging onto the column, walking around and going the other direction, he’d just jump across the corner. He had big long legs and he’d step three-four feet across and keep right on going down the other one, never slowing down. These guys were very good at what they do. 20:22 To be perfectly honest, the things that have changed with safety, with OSHA, because of accidents--if you had an accident, it was bad—but these guys, and I’m talking about a group, a pair of connectors that worked together, that was their trade. That was what they did and they were very, very good at it. I never saw one of them fall or injury themselves. It was usually  people who were not good at it. They’d do something stupid and get injured. But they are also part of the workforce so as safety and insurance got high, the contractor is willing to go by the speed to get it done safely. But as I told a lot of my apprentice classes, some watch some of the old films. What how they worked and watch what they did because you’ll not see it in your day and age. And that’s very true. Now they use these basket booms and take two of them. They go up there and there’s a guy in this basket and a guy in that basket. Then they make the beam and they look at one another to see, well, am I going to get out and take the choker off or are you going to go out? And this was all clockwork when two connecters would work together. They would trade, one would make the live end one time and the next time, the other guy would go. It was the up-most that I can remember, working as a foreman, that if that ball wasn’t down in 30 seconds, he was screaming. “What’s going on up there?” The whole thing was that—“If you can’t make the bolt, stick your permit in it.” They would take...not that it was safe or anything but... 22:50 Crane time and availability were so critical that if there was something wrong with the connection and they couldn’t make it, stick a piece of 9 wire in it or something like that. Wire it off. Let the bolt-up gang take care of it because the crane was so critical that it was needed at another job. You had to be done...well, we’re going to be done here Thursday and the crane had a place to go on Friday. Nowadays, cranes are available everywhere. We used to arrive on jobs, we’d be the only crane on the job. We would be a premium. Everybody on the job would be looking for a—“Jeez, can you give us a pick over here. Can you lift this up for us? Can you do that?” Yeah, later, when we weren’t so busy. Then we used to do it quite a bit. Nowadays, it’s so changed. The first jobs I was one, the old mechanical cranes with the steel booms, without the hydraulic, it would take a day to put a big crane together, a whole day. Now they arrive on a job. The operator can give you 200 feet of boom in ten minutes and do it all by himself. The ironworkers used to--that was one of our things.--the operators liked working with ironworkers because we always chipped in and helped them. Get the riggers out and pick up the pads, put them in... The ironworker always did that because he depended on that operator for your life. He was that ... He was a real plus. And that’s the other thing that made ironworkers easy or hard. You have a good operator, setting steel, no problem. If you’re the foreman and I want that end to go that guy... You take it up 2-3 floors and boom, that guy would have that in. He knew how to turn it, get it to the guy, put it to him where it didn’t knock him off. 25:14 We had an old timer, and he was an old timer when I got there at Kupfer’s in 1960. He didn’t have a huge crane but it would have 85 foot of boom with a jib on it. If you were setting chintzy little stuff that was hard to get out, to get the choker, he would always say just leave it. When he’d get a little slack time, he’d go up there with a hook and pull the chokers off. His depth perception was that good. He could reach up a couple of floors, 60 feet, and put that hook over there. Pretty soon he’d have that choker off of there without anybody... His name was Otto Renewatts [Reneau? Renoir?]. He was a heavy set guy, bachelor, lived alone. He was the primary operator at Kupfer’s when I got there. He liked his beer but he could do the job. These were all pull out riggers on this crane. You’d have to carry it around. He had this big 12 by 12 about foot and a half long... That was always on the back of the crane. We’d say, “do you want the riggers out, Otto?” “Naw, naw. Just put that 12 by under the back or in the middle...” And he’d get something on the front of the crane and it would be four feet off the ground and he’d be  fishing it in like a big fish bowl. He knew what he was doing and he was excellent at it. Until he got a little older and then of course he was, like everyone, did less. Very good. 27:28 [Any good welders, too, that were special?] Yeah, I always...prided myself I guess for being a fairly good welder. I mean there were lots but I said you can teach anyone to weld but you can’t teach, unless they want to, to be a very good welder. Sometimes it is a multiple pass weld. It’s kind of a monotonous type job. You’ve got to want to do it right, to do it good. I always looked at when they start a beam and weld a beam... what it would look like when it finished. Some guys would get to the top and leave a half an inch. They wouldn’t finish what they were doing, finish it off. “Make it look like a tradesman did it,” as opposed to someone that just didn’t care. So it... And that evolved through my time. Welding was really coming on. In fact, at the [Dane County] Coliseum, I was one of the welders on the Coliseum. That was our first introduction to a rod we called 70-18 which is low hydrogen which is used almost exclusively on any structural welds. They even...now, we’ve transgressed to the wire feed even is coming in. In the 60s it was pretty much 100% stick welding. Now, if they got column splices and things, they use wire feed. It speeds it up. It’s more uniform. [Continuous feed?] Yeah, the drawback to a wire feed is that you have to have the spool on the thing. So you can’t carry...like, climbing around on stuff, like that, you can’t climb with it. But if you’re on a multi-story building like this, if these columns where they splice have to be welded, of course, you’ve got a floor. So now you can bring the wire feed there. Sit right by the column and it speeds up that welding process by a ten-fold. You figure that a 14 inch welding rod and you burn it down about 12 inches and you throw two away. Where this wire, you’re just whoossshhh--you may lose a half an inch here or there but you’re not wasting time. You can go clear across or stick if you start and you have a twelve inch column. You’re not going to make it with one rod. You have to stop and that means you have to re-start. The wire feed, you just keep coming across. You don’t have as many re-starts in your weld which is basically where you may leave a foreign particle in there, where you make your re-starts. 31:00 [We’ve talked a little bit about changes in technology with welding. What about welders’ gear, you know... What they would wear so there wouldn’t be sparks in it. Has it changed over the years and what did you start out with, what did your gang wear?] Well, I always wore cotton gloves because of the fact that we were doing more than welding. If you’re sitting on a stool and you’re welding here, you can put on those big leather gloves because they’re heat resistant and sparks don’t get to you. But if you’re welding here and then over there you’re putting nuts on a bolt, they just don’t work. They’re too clumsy. You couldn’t do the things you needed to do. I always wore the cotton gloves with the gauntlet to keep the fire out of your wrist. If you wore just gloves, you’d always get the thing in...and the gauntlets helped. Keeping the fire with the torch. Lots of times it backfires on you. They just improved hoods and devices that we had to wear them on the hard hats. There were a lot of guys who didn’t want the hard hat. Use the old thing. Well then, they said you had to have the hard hat. Then they came up with lots of different ways you could fasten them on. They had little horns on the side and the pins that went into some of them. There was a ring that came over and snapped over it. I used that kind. I guess I preferred the pin ones. They were less apt to get broke. Then you just went and popped it on. That was one sign of a welder. They almost always wore their hard hats backwards. The bill was in the back because if you’re a welder, you can’t have the bill there so that kind of distinguished  us. I think the ironworkers liked it because we thought we were a little different. We always wore them backwards even if we weren’t welding so... 33:43 [Years ago, in the 60s and 70s, you used to see sometimes guys where cotton or polka dot hats with a high crown and a long bill, you wore ‘em backwards and they were called welder’s caps.] I think basically I think it originated to my knowledge fitters, steamfitters, did a lot of sit-down welding. That’s no longer... Their trade has changed so much. They used to get boxes full of elbows and 20 foot lengths of pipe and then they’d sit and weld, and weld on elbows, and make up these pieces. Now all that stuff comes shipped in. Some are all put together and then they just make a couple of connections and it’s all done. Plumbers the same way. It used to take them days to hook up a bathroom in a public building, you know, where they had four or five stools and all this. They’d build it all individually. Now the whole kit ‘n’ kaboodle comes in all put together. They bring it in, they set it on the floor, line it up. Put two anchors in and it’s done. The fitters, just like the ironworker with his hat backwards, a fitter always had these fancy looking hats. Not that some ironworkers didn’t. Some guys wore them. If you were doing a lot of welding, some of them would get, they’d go to the welding shop and get these little beanies. They wouldn’t even have a bill on them. They’d wear that beanie to protect from...and then they’d put their hood over before they’d force you into wearing a hard hat. It’s a little hard to wear a hat under there, although I have seen some. They’d wear a billed hat, turn it around backwards and put their hard hat over that. [This guy was showing me that the bill of the cap...where they had so many seams sown on. That was supposed to mean something...?] I don’t know that. I’m not familiar with that. 36:10 [Do welders drink anything to protect their throat?] Water. I was doing some welding up at the Sheboygan power house. Galvanizing is bad. It’s hard to weld because you have that coating on there. To really get any penetration, you almost have to burn the galvanizing off. While you’re... You’d make a pass with 60-11 which had a little more dig to it and not so much flux. And your first pass would kind of burn the galvanizing away and make room. Then you’d clean that off real good, sometimes grind it. Then put your finish pass on it. I was working one day on this intake and there were these baffles had to be welded on ‘cause the water would swirl in from the lake. There were big plates and they had to be welded 100% up the side. I was in there all day and I was looking around. It was like the whole room was blue... I was in and out, but I was welding a lot. I went to the motel by myself. I got there and I thought...geez. It’s freezing. I was shivering. I got into bed, covered up and I still couldn’t get warm. I deducted after a while that I think I have galvanized poisoning. I didn’t know what to do. I’m there all by myself. So I took some aspirin and finally it went away. But that’s not a good thing. I probably was really close to... And then your tolerance for that, after that whenever I was anywhere near it, I could just taste it immediately. It does something to your body and it reacted to it. The other thing welders--your hair growth in your nose. My nose hair when I was welding would just grow profusely. You had to be trimming it all the time. It’s a protective thing. Your body is reacting to that. Fortunately, the ironworker probably escaped some because we did a lot of welding in the air, in the wind. But like those situations that I was speaking of, where you’re in enclosed rooms, even regular welding was not... I always joked that they put warnings on the welding rod cans about twenty years after I welded. I said, “What does that do for me for the first 20 years?” So...you know... So far I haven’t had any emphysema and my air is pretty good. I feel like I got  away pretty easy. My knees are probably the worst. I had this one replaced and this one probably should be. They got banged. Kneeling on concrete, that was the worst thing. In the winter time, you’d be doing stuff, drilling holes and kneeling on the ground to tighten anchor bolts and stuff. It takes its toll. 40:18 [Could you talk about weather...as an ironworker?] That was the thing. Being a foreman, it was a kind of a funny thing. I kind of got started early knowing that unless I worked, I wasn’t going to get paid. So early in my career, I took the option that saying it’s too cold. If there was any possibility of working, I worked, because that’s when I got a paycheck. Then through my foreman years, it got quite funny. There are those days that it was very, very miserable in the winter time. When it’s 10 below zero, the higher you go in the air, the colder it gets. If you can do something on the ground, it’s a whole lot different. I would usually, as a foreman, try to find something... Like if we would be setting iron and that first two hours are the worst. You’re coming out of the warm car. You’ve listened all the way to the job site, you’ve listened about the wind chill factor. You don’t even know if it’s the same where you are but you’ve heard it. They’re saying this thing...and these guys, before they even set foot out of the trailer door, they’ve already made up their minds that its too cold. So I always tried to get them... “Well, let’s try it to coffee break. We’ll go out, we’ve got something to do. Let’s shake out some iron, let’s do it. Keep moving. Let’s see how we feel when we come in and have a cup of coffee at 10 o’clock if we want to do it or not.” Most cases, we’d end up working the day. And then the majority of the crews said, “No, we don’t want to work.” Then we wouldn’t work. But I found it to be very strange because on Monday, it would be cold. They’d say, “Oh, this is too bad. We can’t work.” Tuesday would come and it wouldn’t be any better. So “Oh, we couldn’t work yesterday so we can’t work today.” Wednesday comes and it was probably worse than the first two days. But in the back of their mind, gee... Two days... If I don’t work today, I’ll only have two days of work. So they end up working on Wednesday in conditions that were worse than Monday because of this thing in the back of their mind that says, hey, I’m not going to have any pay this week. It’s just a way...human nature. You just can’t... 43:30 [It reminds me of a story a logging camp in the UP. Big Eric Erickson got together with his men Monday. And said, “Well, boys...it’s Monday...and its pretty cold. Pretty soon it will be Tuesday...and Wednesday... We don’t have no work done yet.] LAUGHS 44:02 [So how was it being a foreman, the pusher...?] The head foreman you worked for... There are guys you enjoy working with. I guess I was the type that I didn’t tell anybody to do anything that I wouldn’t do myself. And I worked with them most of the time. There are times when you’re setting the iron, you’re reading the prints. There is no way that you can do that. That’s your job and you have to be doing it. But when that was done, I was up there doing the same thing they were doing. So I was not asking them to go up there and freeze their butt and me sitting in a trailer, looking out the window. If they were working there, I was working there. I found that I think guys respected that. I was able to get them to work by respect more than screaming at them and telling them “Get doing this and doing that.” I always said “If that’s what a foreman has to do, if I have to scream at people and make them ugly to get them to work, then I don’t want the job. I’ll just be one of the guys that works.” It seems to have worked out for me. I was real fortunate in my later years and I would go to work for people who had work for me.  They would say, “What do you want to do?” And I’m like, I thought I was supposed to be told what to do. I felt good about that...that I didn’t burn bridges behind me because there were people out there that would play the big time and then you’d learn, if you were in the trades as long as I was, that you can be top dog one day and the next week you might be down here-- because I see the cycling in the company. One company could do no wrong for a while. Get every job that they bid. Then they get enough work so they coast a little bit. So then the next guy steps in and he starts sharpening his pencil. So he might be the big dog here, but then all of a sudden, “Oh, this is the last job we have and I don’t know where we’re going next week.” You might be the top dog, but see ya. Now you’re over there, working for that guy and someone else is up there... So you learn quickly, don’t burn too many bridges in one place. 47:24 [Did you boom around to many places?] I didn’t...well... I don’t know if you’d call it booming out but the first... I worked for Kupfer’s for 25 years. The first 15 or 20 of that, I mean, I spent more time out of Madison than I did here. We had a lot of work in Kenosha. Rockford, north Chicago even. We went as far as north Chicago. I had guys from Local #1. I had guys from #63. Local #8, #498 in Rockford. We were pretty much gone a lot. Being that my father being the superintendent, and he was telling me where to go, I didn’t really bitch too much. I’d say, okay... I thought about it a lot of time but I figured he had a lot on his plate anyway. There were guys who would whine... “Why do I got to be the guy who goes there?” I was down in Kenosha. I was stuck there doing 3-4 jobs in a row. One would start one after another. “Well, you’re down there, you can do this.” I was ready to come home and have someone else do one. But that’s the way it was. 49:00 [Would you live in a motel or...?] Mostly. Yeah. We started back in the days before we had... When I started in 1960, there was no nothing. The contractor didn’t have to pay you anything. If you decided it was too far for you to drive, you stayed over. So we’d find the most cheap motel. I remember staying down in Kenosha in a motel for $2.50/night, no bathroom ...one down the hall. Sink in the room, no shower. Living on a second or third floor of a rickety old hotel. One of the first jobs...a big school, Tremper High School in Kenosha. We had this job trailer, they bought a new semi-trailer and we outfitted the thing. We put bunks in it. It was the job trailer but we put bunks in it, three of us slept in it. We had a plug in. They hooked power up and we had an electric heater which was sufficient. But we’d bring a camp stove and everybody’d bring something along. We’d eat at least a couple three meals in there. We’d stay in this job trailer basically. At that time, I was working out of the Milwaukee local and they did have... You got... First it was $3/day and then if you went back on Monday, you would get paid for Saturday and Sunday. So that was, 3 bucks, that was $21/week. That was your money to stay out of town. Then Milwaukee went up to $5, and that was $35/week. Working in Milwaukee, the scale was higher...then the $35/week, I did pretty well. It didn’t probably cover drinking beer at night, but we rented an apartment over a tavern in Kenosha. There were five of us and it cost $80 a month and they had enough beds for five of us to sleep up there. We had a kitchen and two bedrooms and a living room. Five of us slept up there. It did have a shower and a bathroom upstairs. And with that, we paid $16/month, 5 of us paid $16/month [each]. That was about as cheap as you could get. That was about half of our $35/week and the other was spent on food and beer.  52:26 [Was there a lot of beer drinking?] Yeah, that’s part of the thing when you were young. That’s another thing you have to learn how to pace yourself with that. So many of them... Luckily I got through it or had enough brains or what and made it through. After I started teaching the apprentices, I would come in after drinking... I have to admit that the 60s was a much milder with drunk driving and all that. I mean now they are all over. You get stopped, you’re had. Back in those days, they might tell you, “Get your ass home” or “Get off the road.” They don’t do that anymore. I would see it in some instances...I could see it coming with premises. The last one all I can remember is down at University Hospitals. We were working there and we got rained out early, like 10 in the morning. “Oh, let’s go to the tavern.” We went out on University Avenue, had a drink, and then we got just about to noon and I thought, “It’s time for me to get out of here because I could see this coming.” So about that time, here comes one of our bosses, we were working for Findorff’s then. So one of our bosses came in. He had left me in charge and he comes. Fresh money. So he buys a couple of drinks. I had two more and then I got out. The next morning, we get to the job and this one young dude... “I wonder where Dean is today?” “Dean didn’t show up.” About 10 here he comes, head hanging down. “I got drunken driving ticket last night.” “I don’t like telling you this but I could see that coming.” And then... I don’t know how you... Either you’re lucky or you’re a little bit smart but he got clocked going 55 on a city street. To me, that’s not too smart, especially if you’ve been drinking. You better follow the rules. That kind of thing happens. 55:11 [Years ago, you hear about some guys drinking on the job...] When I first started, the joke was... If you said, “Well, we have a job in Platteville.” It wasn’t 80 miles to Platteville, it was how many six packs it took to get back from Platteville. That was the standard. “That’s a three six pack job,” so then you knew it was at least 80 miles away. I thought that was kind of a joke. 56:00 [So did you work with or meet some characters...?] Oh definitely, there are a lot of characters in the ironworkers. I enjoyed working for the guy because he was fun to be around. By the name of Charlie Miller. He lived down by Edgerton and worked at Kupfer’s a lot. I worked with him on and off. Then he moved up by La Crosse and my parents lived up along the river so I had a project up on the St. Francis Hospital in La Crosse. Charlie lived on Stoddard and my parents lived at Victory so he came to work for me up there, working out of La Crosse. I said, “Charlie, I’m driving the company truck and living with my folks. I drive right by your place so you might as well ride with me.” So yeah, that sounded good to him. I’d pick him up in the morning. That was a hot time of the year and there was a little tavern down the street. We’d stop and have a couple of glasses of beer. We’d usually have 2-3 and then head on down the [Mississippi] river. I was sitting there one night and I told him when we went in, “Charlie, my parents are going to Prairie du Chien. I have relatives down there and I’m riding down with them. I can only have a couple and then we’ll hit the road.” So every time I’d turn and talk to someone, and every time I turned my head, I’d look back and my glass would be full of beer again. So...we had about 4-5 and Charlie said, “Okay, are you ready to go?” I said, “To hell with you. Do you think you’re pulling the wool over my eyes? I see what’s going on over here. You just think I’m going to leave now. I’m too late to go with my parents. I’m staying now.” So he continued on for another hour or so. I dropped him off at Stoddard. The next morning I come and I pull up in front of the house. No Charlie comes out. I wait a little bit and pretty soon the door opens and  he comes out. He’s humped over and gets in the truck and says, “My chest hurts so bad. I got home last night and I sat at the kitchen table and I got one shoe off and I passed out and fell down. I laid on that shoe all night long. My wife wouldn’t even get me up. I laid on that shoe. It feels like it’s right through my chest.” I said, “Serves you right. That’s the pain you get for being like that.” He was a character. Tell jokes...he could tell jokes. Just mention a subject and he had six jokes... He worked for me with another job by Hales Corners. We used to drive that and stop... He’d come from a different direction and we’d get there early. We’d stop and have a cup of coffee before we got to work. We’d go in this restaurant and its busy. There’s a couple of waitresses and they’re just working their tails off and their ugly. They’re not happy. Charlie comes in there and starts telling jokes. First no one would make a sound. Then a couple of people at the counter would start laughing. Before we left, he had both them waitresses just about falling down in the aisle. They were all happy and when we first came in, they were about as ugly as you could get. He was quite the guy. 1:00:19 [Did nicknames come into play much?] Oh, yeah. I think you talked to Dave Nelson, he always went by Tinker. I worked a lot with Arnie Freitag and his actual name is Harlan and hardly anyone called him... It was either Arnie or Harnie...or... Nick Rochon, we worked with him. He had long hair and a big beard all the time. We called him The Roach. So there were lots of nicknames and stuff. 01:01:10 [We’ve talked for over an hour...and it was a pretty good session. Do you have something that I didn’t bring up that you’d like to mention?] I guess...you know...talking about the general working situations... I felt like I was very fortunate, like I explained. I got my start and then my really working at learning...and doing extra curricular things to learn more. Just pure luck of going through probably one of the early 80s, which was about as bad as it is today. I happened to be sitting in a good position. I had a good job and I was foreman and they still had work, so I slid right through that. The 60s when I started, I mean... There was a shortage of good help. They were looking, the jobs were just popping up. Kupfer’s would get so many jobs. I remember my Dad saying that they had so many jobs on the list, and he’d say, “Bid it high.” And they’d still get it. It didn’t make any difference. They had these clusters of little contractors in these little towns and they were all busy. If they got a job, we got the job. It was almost automatic, even though it was done by a bid process. They weren’t looking anywhere else. They were looking at Kupfer’s. I remember in the 60s my Dad telling the foreman before I was a foreman that if they were setting steel, putting up buildings, you don’t do any finish work like stairways. That was only done on rainy days when you could go inside. Otherwise, they were just put on the table. When a rainy day came along, he’d reach in the pile and say, “Here’s an inside job, you can go do this.” But there was so much stuff going on that they couldn’t, they needed to get it up in a certain point in time. They had so many miscellaneous jobs like that. 01:03:53 I remember working one period... I think it was almost 6 months. I’d put up a little steel here and there, but basically did ornamental work. Stairways, railings, cat walk here... I did that for almost six months. Sometimes you have to write down notes, because I’d forget from Monday to Friday... I’d be saying to the guys, “Where were we at? What were we doing?” We might’ve had three jobs on Tuesday.” And if you don’t write it down, pretty soon you’d have it all jumbled in. I didn’t even know what to put down. So you had to, I’m sure you had people  with equal talent as me just weren’t as lucky and didn’t hit in the right places. I was very, very fortunate and the other thing was that I didn’t burn any bridges. I kept... I never was turned away. If I got laid off from a company and the next time they called for a man, they didn’t say, “No, I don’t want George.” I went back to work there because I didn’t do anything to mess that up. 01:05:28 [Is this trellis or swing set your work?] Yeah, I just built that swing set for a little girl. [Was that pretty common for ironworkers who were welders?] Yeah, some do. Eddie [Smith], who you just saw. He’s really into it. He sells at shows and stuff. He’s made a lot of that stuff over at that electrical thing. He’s getting very talented at that. I made that trellis there. I volunteer over at Habitat [for Humanity] at the store over there. I found that stuff over there that came from Springs out here, the place that makes the blinds. When they brought those things in, they were curtain rods. I thought I could do something with those...so I made that trellis. I made a couple more of them and they sold ‘em. They were having kind of an art project sale and I made a couple and sold ‘em at their thing. I don’t know what they were sold for...$35 or something. It didn’t take that long. And I’ve got a trellis thing and a gate over on the other side that I built. That light post out there, I put that together. [I want to take a few pictures here.] The stuff I picked up and cut it down and made it to fit what I do. I’ve been doing... Tomorrow I probably got to call this guy from Habitat. I do some welding for them. On their jobs they have things to store, propane tanks and stuff. And OSHA of course wants them to be in a cage. I made some frames and he was going to bolt them together. He called back and he said, “I think it would be a whole lot easier if we welded that together.” So I got to do that now for him. That’s what I prefer to do. I’ve got a little scroll-bender, like Eddie [Smith], some of the stuff that he does. I haven’t tried to... I’ve done projects where people will pay me for my time but I’ve tried not to get into it as a business because then, to me, it’s like I’m back working again. And I like it where I am now. So I love to do...to fix things for people and weld things for them. Most of the time I don’t charge them anything. 01:08:28 [Years ago, would there be much scrap on the job?] Oh yeah, and that was another thing about working at Kupfer’s. They were a fabricator. The trucks, we always carry extra angle [iron]. Every job had something left over. Pretty soon the truck would have a ton of iron on it and what am I going to do with it? So I stored it in my garage. I’d put piece of angle scrap out of the railings that came out with a piece of strap on it to keep the pipes spread. You knock it off and what are you going to do with it? You throw it on the truck. I had all this iron. So my wife was saying, “What are you going to do with all of this stuff?” I told her, “Don’t worry, someday I’ll use it. And gradually...I built a lot of things out of that. It just blows my mind when I go to the store and buy from Wiedenbeck’s and I’ll take the bill and I’ll say, “See why I kept that stuff? See what that piece of angle cost?” “Oh” she’d say. LAUGHS 01:09:44 [I’d love to make copies of these. Is that you in that picture?] No, this is a gal...and was taken in Kenosha. She came out of... She was an ironworker from Alaska and a lady... This is back in the early 80s, so women were pretty new to the trade. She came out and worked on that job. 01:10:25 This is Baraboo, the courthouse in Baraboo. That was a job that I went in the hall. And  that’s McFarland’s and Sauk was the fabricator. I went into the hall, I was out of work and Sam [Wilcox] said, “This Marcon & Johnson [sp?] is going to build this building up in Baraboo... This is a picture of it here. And they want a foreman to run the steel for a couple of weeks because their major foreman setting steel is going on vacation. So I said sure...I’ll go up and see. Someone from the company didn’t tell the superintendent. So I go up there and go in the shack. There’s no one in there so I’m looking at the prints to see what it consisted of. The superintendent comes in and he’s like, “Who are you?” And I told him that Sam sent me up here because you needed a foreman. Well nobody told him, he didn’t know anything. So I just left and went home. I get home and Sam calls and then the superintendent calls and he goes, “I’m sorry. I didn’t know. I didn’t know that you were supposed to come here.” So the next day I went back and as it turned out, apparently they were pleased with what I did while the guy was gone. So they had me continue to erect the iron, and when he came back, he did the detail work. It was a nice job. 01:12:39 [These are some topping out...] Yeah, that was the beam, the last beam. There’s a picture of it going up from there. That was something I took on a vacation. When I go on vacation, I’m always looking at iron. [Is this one, the one with the beam...] Yeah, that’s the last beam. [In Baraboo there?] Yeah. There’s a picture of the connectors waiting for the last piece. PAUSE 01:13:20 This is kind of a different deal here. This was in Sparta and this fence was around a square in Sparta. We took... This Jim Hind, who was a Findorff guy that got killed on the job... We were out there and we had to cut this all up in sections. They sent it back to the shop here at Kupfer’s. If you go by the governor’s mansion, this is the fence from there. 01:14:09 [That is kind of spear looking—in reference to a fence.] Yes, and it’s all cast. They took the parts and made enough so that it could be put up around the governor’s mansion, all across the front. [This is you here...] Yes, this is me and this is young Jim Hein there. I look a little younger there for some reason. LAUGHS [Leary does some copy photo work and talks about working in a foundry. George shows photos, including one of his apprenticeship class.] This is Everett, the one that you’re going to talk to...when we were young dudes. And here is a guy by the name of Jimmy Carter. [Did that come into the trade much, a sense that some people were Irish or German...?] PAUSE 01:16:38 This was at St. Francis Hospital up in La Crosse. [This is lunch with people...] Yeah. This was the bunch that we had up in Baraboo. [What building is this up in Baraboo?] It’s the county courthouse. Yeah. 01:17:55 [That would have been in 1960...] That would’ve been in 1963. I started in 1960 and this was our finishing up the apprenticeship. That’s the governor’s mansion or the remainder of it. I had a piece of...right where that trellis is there [from the ornamental cast metal fence]. I had it up and using it as a decoration in the thing because it was pretty historic. We had a tornado go through here in 2004 and blew a big limb out of the tree and just smashed the thing. Bent it all over. I finally ditched it. [Oh no. Okay, I think I’ll turn this off and play it back...]
Ironworkers;Edgar L. “Ed” Smith;1940;2011;0:03 Announcement, initial question–when and where born, how you got into ironworkers trade? 0:50 I was born in Vernon County, Wisconsin, at Kicakpoo Center in February 14, 1940. We lived on a farm. My grandfather had 440 acres at Kickapoo Center and we were basically, my father was working with my grandfather. 1:28 [Anyone you knew in ironworker’s trade?] Not really. Of course, you’re a young kid and everything is new to you. But because of WWII, my parents decided to move to Madison, Wisconsin and work in the war industry. My mother went to work at Oscar Mayer’s and my father also worked there in the beef kill for many years. Eventually he retired from there. But it was my good fortune to grow up in Madison, attend school here. Needless to say I ran into and encountered more tradesmen in my young life. I attended Madison East in 1953 until 55, at which time, I had no choice. I had to go to Monona Grove High School, it was a brand new high school then on the east side. Got involved with the shop classes. I had a couple of good instructors, although I’ll back up a minute. I also had some excellent shop instructors at Madison East. And so I enjoyed working with my hands. And then my father was also a carpenter. So I got a lot of hands-on training from my father. I decided early that I liked working with my hands but not necessarily as a carpenter. Too much vegetation or vegetable matter to work with. But I did like working around iron and different metals. So back in the 50s or early 60s, it was pretty common for guys who didn’t want to go on the college track, that we could go down on Park Street, er, it was Butler Street then where the old labor hall was. You could walk in that door and literally go from office to office and speak with the business managers and the BA’s [business agents] and find out what the employment picture was. Back then I was too old to come in as an apprentice because they had an age limitation back then and the only way you could get in is if you were coming out of the military and then they would waive that. Otherwise you had to be 18-19 to get an apprenticeship. But they had a system that was called “permit workers,” and if you were lucky enough to get on, you could work on a permit until you kind of proved yourself. Then they would approach you about joining the local. That’s how I got started. I started out on mostly bridge work, highway work. Long hot days. Hard work physically, but I did like it. And I liked the guys I got to know and work with. 5:13 [Give me your parents’ names.] My father’s was Herbert Newton Smith and my mother’s maiden name was Opal Pearl Hoke. [I take it you lived on the East Side?] Yeah, we lived in Monona Village, at that time, before it was a city. Lived at 205 Nicholas Road. [Some suggest that the East Side is an old working class part of town...?] Oh very much so, yes. Absolutely. [Could you elaborate...about what your neighbors had done or what the...?] Very little industrial base on the West Side of Madison. It was almost entirely on the East Side. Some of it is still there. Most of it is gone, unfortunately. By far and away... I always referred the fields of the East Side was middle class working people. All the 8 to 4:30 people. We used to have the Capital Times paper which was the evening paper. And most working people got the evening paper because they didn’t have time in the morning to read the paper. They got the fresh news in late afternoon. Pretty much our daily ritual was my father sitting down and reading the Cap Times. Then discussing things [laughs]. It was usually one-sided... [chuckles]. Just a remembrance. 7:20 [You mentioned Oscar Mayer’s. What were some of the places where people worked in?] You had Madison Brass, the printing outfit out there. You’re making me stretch here a little bit. Oh, Ray-o-Vac Batteries was at Union Corners. That employed a lot of people. Gisholt Foundry was alive and well and busy. That started out with a guy by the name of Johnson and he basically was in farm equipment when they first got going. Then it evolved in Gisholt’s. We used to call it the Norwegian poorhouse. LAUGHTER [I have a friend, George Gilbertsen, who lives on  Waubesa Street, who is on the Ramblers...] You’re kidding. No, we talked...yeah....yeah... [So he lived right up against the rest of those...one of those foundries...] I think I know what one. LAUGHTER The one that they claim pollutes. [So what year did you start there as an ironworker?] I came in during the early 60s on a work permit for a couple of years. Then a business manager approached me on the job site and at that time, you needed two journeymen to sign and vouch for you, which they did. Wesley Roscoe and Swede...Swenson. John Swenson...his brother... Boyd Swenson was a superintendent ironworker for Findorff Construction then and he was the other guy who signed for me. [So what outfit were you working with on permit?] Well, they kicked you around a lot when you’re working out of a mixed local. By far and away, most of our members worked for various contractors. I had one year that I literally worked for 30 some contractors. When I had my taxes done, the CPA looked at me and says, “Jesus, son, can’t you keep a job?” He had no understanding about how our system worked. I really liked it because I got so much diversification in the work that I was doing. Of course, when I came in I was just a little dumber than a stump. Over a period of time, and thank God for the old guys, they kicked you in the butt and point you in the right direction. So I did not...was never formally trained as an apprentice, although I did pick up a set of training manuals. I still have them today. Much smaller than the new ones. But anyway, basically on the job training. I always enjoyed going to work. That’s one thing I have never felt bad about...or wanted to take the day off. Between the guys, the type of work, and learning...just the whole experience. Working outside. Perfect view every day at the office. 11:08 [Tell me about some of the old guys that you learned from.] Herb Tiedeman. Syd Erstad, the foreman for Kupfer Ironworks. I think I worked for every one of the old foremen at Kupfer. They just put you where they needed you. Crews were always intermingling and changing man power from day to day. You never knew where they were going to send you. You’d go to the yard in the morning and the field superintendent would come in and say, “You, you, and you, you’re going there.” And so on and so forth. So it’s a must to bring all your tools, finishing tools, rod tools, welding tools, structural tools. That was your kit and you needed it almost daily. [So when you were learning sort of the ‘school of the hard knocks’, what was your technique or how did... Did you just watch people, did people yell at you sometimes or show you things?] Oh yeah. I’ve been referred to by many derogatory terms when I was young. But at the end of the day, you knew they liked you. They were going to take care of you. It was just their way of expressing their feelings at the time. You’ve got to remember that some of these guys never finished high school. They came up the old way. Hard work and you learn as you go. Someone taught them. You have to remember that even if you do away with a formal apprentice, the apprenticeship will survive because it’s the oldest job learning technique in our history. It goes back to Biblical times. If you’re a girl, your mother is the one that taught you how to cook. Your dad taught you how to change a tire on a car. That’s an apprenticeship. It’s learning. It’s an experience. [Do you remember any derogatory terms that were directed to you?] Well, let’s see. You’re a waste of skin. That was pretty common. They didn’t like long hair. That was kind of a no-no back then because you were either a hippie or a subversive, one of the two. [Chuckles.] Some of the young guys used to get haircuts “voluntarily.” [Not Nick Rochon.] LAUGHTER Nick Rochon. Where do you know Nick Rochon? [I’ve got pictures of him from a story that Dave Nelson...] Tinker? [Yeah.] Tinker...his shop is just over this hill here. You can just about throw a rock and hit that. He was one of the classics. He got his hair cut at the...  Well, we were building the Dane County Coliseum. I remember it quite well. [laughs] [Can you describe what happened?] [Laughs] Well, they just cut his hair. Well, they shortened. Let me put it that way. And Nick wasn’t terribly happy about it as I recall. But yeah-he went home lighter that night. [Laughs] [So they might have grabbed him a couple of times...] GIGGLE Well, they might have, yeah. 15:14 [You mentioned having to go to the job with all these different tools... How did you come by your tools?] Well again, if you keep your mouth shut and your eyes and ears open, it’ll take you a long way. You can’t be afraid to ask questions when something important, or you feel its important comes. So when you start out...and you go... “Where did you get that stud wrench? Where do I go to get me one of those...? How much are they?” The old guys would tell you, “Well, you can get them here, here and here. And they’ll cost about...” Ornamental tools? You’re not going to find too many ironworkers that don’t love hardware stores and Farm and Fleet stores and any stores that carry multiple use tools. You watch and of course experience...and some of the old guys... The good ones will show you how to correctly use an adjustable wrench, for instance. Any tool...the air tools, the impacts [impact wrenches] and everything. They will show you the way. Then they’ll kind of kick you in the butt every once in a while if you’re doing it wrong. And so basically that’s the way we learn. [Did anyone ever make or modify or...] Oh, strictly, certainly. Because everyone’s hands are different size, different length. Maybe you’ve got long fingers and small palms, vice versa. So you’re going to have to adapt the tools to your liking. Like a sleever bar, you can go out there and structural guys... You can run up to 10, 12 structural guys and you’ll notice their sleever bars all have a little tweak or tick to them. They’re not all identical. And of course, you know, small guys are going to be a little different than the big guys. So on and so forth. That was the other nice thing about the trades. Everybody isn’t 220 pounds and 6 foot four and 20 years old. You have to adapt with different size guys, different weights, different...so on and so forth. And when you’re working with stuff and you’re in a pinch. You gotta holler out and get some help. If it’s too heavy, too long, too short, whatever. That’s all part of a team. [So with your tools, are there some that you’ve modified or customized in particular?] PAUSE You can take a 12 inch adjustable wrench, for instance...commonly referred to as a crescent wrench. You can literally run the screw back off it and get the travel to go longer. It will open...the jaws will go wider so you can make an adjustment on that wrench...when you encounter different sized nuts and bolts and things that you find you need to do that. Your rod wrench, for instance, your hand... You’re going to heat up the lower handle and put a bend in it. There again, one guy’s bend is more than the next guy’s. So on and so forth. You work it until you fit your hand, not theirs. Well...why you kind of got me here. I’m not thinking too good. [That’s okay.] I’m not an interviewer. [Have you ever put your name or initial anywhere...?] Oh sure, you’re going to either mark it with slash marks, paint isn’t permanent so you won’t see much of that. Carpenters, they’re more into painting or something like that to mark their tools. Most of ironworkers’ tools are either notched with a grinder or else you weld your initials or first name or something on your wrenches or that, especially if you’re on a powerhouse job or real large project where you have many, many ironworkers because, yes, if you look at a spud wrench, it’s a spud wrench. It’s pretty similar. And so on and so forth. 20:12 [Do guys ever...prank with someone?] Glad you asked that. We were working up to  Manley Sand and Gravel many years ago and Ray Spangler--as I remember right, Ray was single but he had nieces and nephews. Ray had a tendency--he always packed his lunch. He took a lot of grief. He had been to the old Treasure Island Store which is long gone now... Treasure Island used to set where American TV is now on the beltline if I recall. They had run a real special on Easter candy--all the hard candy on the outside and soft stuff in the--eggs, candy eggs. Ray had bought just a ferocious amount of bags of this candy for his nieces and nephews. He would drive the car up to Manley Sand and Gravel and park. We’d go to work and John Schuepbach, he had a pretty playful way about him. Unbeknownst to him, he would periodically come out and ask Ray if he could borrow his car to run into Portage for something. Maybe 2-3 miles outside of Portage was where Manley Sand and Gravel was. We went up there and bolting up and... We were bolting up the structural, as we go from point-to-point, we kept finding these stupid Easter eggs. [laughter] They would be anywhere--under the beam, behind a flange, it was just crazy. At first we started eating some. They were pretty good. Who doesn’t like sugar? Ray just couldn’t get over that. None of us could. At the end of the day, Ray had to go home and he discovered that his Easter egg candies were gone. Ray didn’t finally catch on to...who was using my car? Ahh, well, he got to locking his car after that, [laughs] especially when he discovered that his Easter eggs were gone. [Laughs.] That was a humorous situation. 23:05 [Can you think of any more?] We were down in Monroe, Wisconsin... I can’t remember what we were working on but we were starting a structural job. Donny Hein was the crane operator. I think his brother, Jim, was pushing... I can’t remember for sure but I think his brother was pushing the job. Kenny Zespi [sp?], he was an old timer and he was from Cross Plains, Wisconsin. He was always buying old rattle traps to get to work and back. He bought either a Plymouth or a Dodge. On their way down to Monroe to the job site, a gas tank strap broke and the gas tank was kind of hanging anti-gogglin’ [??] there. Rubbing on the road so that would be a no go. So when he got to the job site, because they weren’t that far I guess to go, as I recall. They decided that they would re-weld the gas strap. So they had Jimmy Hein... We put slings as sprutters on the back of Zespi’s car. And they raised it up. They could be welding and they could tip a little to make sure the gas was down at one end. That was in the days before they figured out that it’s the fumes that explode, not the liquid. But...anyway... They were welding that strap back together and they blew a hole in the gas tank with a torch. Now the gas is on fire. And Donny Hein—he and his old live boom crane—he picked the car up right away and he started going around in a circle. The only problem was--the gas that was spilling on the ground caught fire so there was a ring of fire. He was just keeping that car ahead of that ring of fire. It was quite something to behold. Let me tell you. LAUGHTER 23:36 [A minute ago, you talked about a particular part of a bar... Was it a slaver or...] Sleever bar. It’s actually a truck iron but... HE GOES AND GETS IT If you work structural, this way you have more lever than a 12 inch spud wrench--when you’ve got to pry, when you hold stuff on. So one end is for holding up on structural steel, the other is when you have pinch points, you can--one man can move some huge iron around with this sleever bar. Now this is... [Like a giant spud wrench...] Yeah, but here you can lift things, you can pry things apart or...so on and so forth. Now the average ironworker will alter this. They may heat it down here and put a bend in it so they have a rocker seat for the pry. But we always put...weld a large washer on here...and then we adapt it to our belt, our structural belt [i.e. the tool belt worn during structural steel  work] so you can wear it on your side. Slip it in and it’ll stay. It will be in like a holster. You need your hands when you’re kicking around. [You don’t want to trip over it...] No, no, no. It goes in your belt, about like this. You just pull it out of the shealt. I do not have—my old one I donated to the apprentices. Most of my tools...most of them have been donated. These are probably... various shapes and forms. Here’s an octagon one and... It’s the same way. This is the ones that will glide and adapt to their own personal length. [Cool.] I would assume that, you go over by the hall [Labor Temple], you could probably get someone to show you how they adapted theirs. When you’re up there with 5-6 ton beams, it’s a little hard to move them around with a little spud wrench. That’s just for holding up and bolting up. 28:50 [In your trade, with a mixed local, were there some kind of jobs that you liked better than others? Oh, certainly. It’s like... Anyone who has a job that’s multifaceted, you’re going to just gravitate toward things that interest you and you enjoy performing. So absolutely. And without further adieu, you’re going to get better at that. You’re going to get more proficient. Pretty soon, it’s word of mouth. You work for different contractors. They’re in business, they’re in business to make money. That’s what it’s all about. So they’re going to try their best to surround themselves with journeymen that they like and good crew members, but also... No matter what task they are assigned, they know they’re competent at it. They know they will do the job...which in turn turns into money. [Laughs] [Did you learn welding, connecting, rod busting...?] I did a lot of rods when I first started out because probably that is...from my point of view...probably the least popular part of the trade. It’s bull work. It’s hard. Hard physically. I did a lot of it. I always enjoyed the guys I worked with. You’re always partnered up on rods and stuff like that. You’re always working with at least one or two other guys. You realize that after your first structural job that, hey, this is a little bit easier. There’s—a hard day, you’re still getting short rests in between. When you’re waiting for the next piece iron to come up, there’s a short period that you’re waiting. Anticipating. Nice part of structural is that it’s too heavy to do by hand. Rods...rods are different. You move that, carry it, place it. Structural is different in that area. Of course you’re off the ground now so the rules change. You’ve got to know where you’re at. You’ve got to stay at ease. You certainly get around the iron much better if you’re comfortable. If you’re butt cheeks are all tightened up because you’re afraid of falling, it’s not a good situation. And if you keep at it, yeah, you acclimate and you get pretty confident. You always know where your feet are. The edge...you don’t even look. You know. You can feel it. Most guys are... You get your boots worn in, you can feel the flanges through your shoes. You know where you’re at. And you still perform your work. It’s the old story. It’s easy climbing up there. It’s doing the work after you get there is the hard part. And it’s pretty crude. 32:30 Iron... You get in there in a quarter of an inch on the level, that’s pretty tight stuff with that. Structural, where you go over to metal, and now you’re dealing with 64ths, 32nds... That’s finite work. Most of it is anodized so you can’t be scratching and scrubbing stuff. It’s real picky-picky stuff but a lot of fun to work with. When done correctly, it looks really nice when it’s done. 33:07 Welding. Welding really runs the gambit. There’s just... You’re always referred to rough welding. You’re welding down a bar joist on a job. You can get a little sloppy and nobody’s going to get hurt. Everything’s cool. If you’re welding moment connections [see definition  on-line] on a building, you’ve got to be a state licensed welder in order to be able to do that or supposedly licensed to do that type of work—because those are the fail points on a building. Many are magnifluxed or they’re x-rayed after you get done. Sometimes they’ll issue you a welding stamp so that when you’re done with your moment connection, you stamp your initials in it so there’s a record on the job of who welded it, how they welded it, under what conditions. You’ve got to slow them down, make sure you slag it and clean it out. Jitter bug it, whatever it takes. Then you go over and other parts of welding are--some of them are very ornate and ornamental. They are going to be exposed to the public, especially on an entry of a building, foyer in a building, something where it’s right out in front of you there. So you’re going to use a different technique and different type of electrode or process or to weld that. They’ll accept some...some are unacceptable so they have to be worked on again. 35:05 Every facet of the trade... When you get into it, there’s a tremendous amount of stuff to learn and salt it away. And again hands-on experience without a doubt the most important part of the job. [You used a couple of terms with the welding. One was to “slag in and jitter bug a beam.” Tell me what that means.] Well, if you’re using a gas shielded process where there is no slag, you’re in good shape. It’s called a mig. That’s great. But I’d say, even yet today, 90% of the welding that the ironworker performs in the field is done with the old fashioned electrode in a stinger. They are 11 inches long and the electrodes are coated with what I call a cake mix but it’s a combination of chemicals that cover the electrode. They’re all part of the process for that specific electrode. They are all numbered and all different sizes. So for instance, if you wanted a certain technique and you need 60-11 electrode. Another process, another type of welding done, you might want 70-18, low hydrogen electrode for. But anyway, in the process, while this thing is melting and you’re fusing the metal together, the chemical combination on the exterior of the electrode becomes slag... It burns up and its there to shield the molten metal from that electrode from the atmosphere. The atmosphere has a tremendous amount of contaminants in it. An open weld that’s unshielded, you’ll get all kinds of junk in there. You’ll get pit holes and so on and so forth. So when you’re done, obviously this is raw metal. Somewhere along the process, this is going to have to be painted. Many years ago, we used red lead paint, which is “really good” for you. [Laughs] But anyway, slagging is just taking a chip hammer or hammer and chisel or whatever and getting into that weld and knocking that slag off the weld to expose it. You wire brush it. Clean it up. And along come the painters, later on, and will apply some type of finish coat of something. On the welding. [And the jitter bug?] Jitter bug is an air-driven rattle... It’s like a chisel. It’s got a chisel blank in front of it. It’s a vibrator for air pressure so you can go along. It’s like a miniature jack hammer. [Cool.] 38:40 [You’ve mentioned contaminants in the air so then maybe it’s a good time to ask about... Weather. What are your experiences as an ironworker. You said you’re office is outdoors but...some of the... What can you say about that?] Well, I think most ironworkers will agree with me that only in Wisconsin...working iron...there are only 2-3 days that are perfect. The rest of the time it’s way too damn hot or its way too damn cold. But if you have a wife, and kids and a mortgage, you’ll find a special impetus in you to go to work every day. I’ve worked at -5 outside. Not too bad. Not pleasant but not that bad. The next day, the wind is blowing 15 miles an hour and its 10 above zero and you can’t make it. It’s exposure so you’ve got to call it a day. If you want to be an ironworker, you better get comfortable when the weather swings or  otherwise you’re going to starve to death. So you dress accordingly. Grouch and moan and things like that, complain, but you get through it just like the rest of the guys. That’s called making a living. 40:13 [What about accidents? Have you had some or did you call in any?] I don’t think you’re going to find too many ironworkers that haven’t been or received an injury on the job. Unfortunately I’ve fallen a couple of times and as you interview some of the old guys, you’re going to find that a few of those guys have fallen too. In my case, I got very fortunate. I was lucky both times that I fell. I had pretty decent landings. I’ve never broken a bone but I sure got scared the hell out of me a few times. [Did you fall on to a deck or something like that?] Well, once I fell into a pile of wash sand that the masons had and it just happened to be in the right specific spot on that job site. It cushioned my fall. It was still pretty solid. I knew I hit something. After the wind was knocked out of me I was ok. Another time up in Weyawauga’s old folks home, I lost a ladder. Just a stupid, stupid thing. I lost a ladder and down I went. And again, it was more embarrassing than it hurt. 41:40 [Did you climb columns] Yeah, before OSHA started, it was established in 1974. That date sticks in my mind. I might be off a year or two but I know it was right in there. Prior to OSHA, it was very common for us to ride the ball down for lunch and you’d ride the ball up after lunch. And you’d have 3, 4, 5 guys...and you’d interlock arms and hold on to each other and a load line. One foot was on the ball and the other foot was in the air, wrapped around another guy’s leg. You’d ride the ball up, you’d ride the ball down. And if the crane wasn’t there, many times you’d have 40 pounds of bolt, plus your tools... Yeah, you’d literally climb 1-2 stories up to the job site. Sometimes more... For the most part, one or two stories usually did it. [Did it take a while to get the hang of that?] Well, most ironworkers make a specific type of sole on their shoe. I happen to have a pair of soles right now. They’re made of... It’s hard, its solid. It’s wedged. You got your whole foot on a wedged sole. But they had the right compound that would bite into iron. If you place your weight on the soul, then you’d find that it would grip the iron. If your soles are too hard, they won’t bite—they just skid off the steel. So again, as you interview or meet ironworkers or watch them in the field. They used to wear high tops, red wings. Red wings, very popular with ironworkers. I’m sure a couple of... I’m sure the Shoe Box in Black Earth will attest to that. They sell many of them. The nice part about them, all you had to do is call them up and they’d... Steve Schmidt...yeah...they’ll be in the mail. Send me a check when you get them. [That’s pretty good.] Yeah, they’re $100 boots. If you order a couple of pair, but Steve is very well liked and very respected because you didn’t have to drive to Black Earth. Just give him a call and boom, two days later, you’d have ‘em. [I worked with some ironworkers at the Smithsonian and I tried climbing columns with sneakers on I tried climbing...I couldn’t.] And then you saw how they were doing it. [Well, yeah. It’s like...Just like cat.] Well, if you swing your butt... If you watched them, all that weight is going on the sole in the web. So there’s your bite. So as you swing, up you go. Swing up and go... And after a while, you get where most people don’t even see that accent. But yeah, it’s all in the gripe, if you bite. That’s why if you have pocks in the iron, you can’t. But if you’ve got just red leaded iron or raw iron, good bite. And then it’s just upper body strength. You’re pulling a load, especially if you’ve put about 60 pounds of tools on. LAUGHTER  45:55 [Tool belt is important.] Oh yeah. [Do people make them or modify them at all?] Oh yeah. There’s a lot of belts... HE GETS ONE Here’s the only one I got left around here. I gave all my... This is the old side lanyard. This is what they call a bridge belt. You got your tools down and you’re above a ladder. If you fall or that, all you have to do...it’s like a parachute lanyard. Just pull on that... These are made by Klein. As you can see, the mechanism opens right up. So you loose, otherwise, you’d drown for sure. And again, this affectionately became known as a bridge belt bridge and it’s out. And there’s no buckle. HE DEMONSTRATES And here’s the adjustable. And before OSHA, this is where our 6 foot lanyard would go through the belt. They’re all make, model and serial number, each one is an individual belt. That’s the story and then there’s just a couple bolt bags on there now. Like I said, you’ll have to go to the hall if you want to photograph tools. I’m sure they’d be more than happy for you to come in there. 47:50 [Speaking of bridges, did you ever work on a rivet gang or...one of those?] I only worked on one rivet. They were pretty much out of the business by the time I come in. We went down to Rockford, Illinois, to do a small job at their plant. Since it was Rockford Bolt Company. The old guy that owned it, he had thousands of rivets that were never sold. So he decided that he would use some of those rivets. That was the only rivet job I ever worked on.. That’s before I became a blacksmith when I learned my heats. There’s a heat chart there on the... They are heated to a certain color. I can’t even remember. We had an old guy from Janesville that was the heater. He was heating and throwing. Boy, it’s been so long ago I can’t remember. [So that went over the trade at...?] Oh yeah. I want to say that the railroads...were still riveting at the end of the 60s. I’m fairly sure that most railroad bridges were still being riveted. Then one guy would have the rivet gun... They used tongs to put the rivet in the hole...air operated pneumatic rivet gun. You’d come up on the head. The other guy on the other side would have what they called a horse cock. He would back her...just pull the trigger and run and you might roll the gun so you get a nice round head. That’s all I can... I was the only one... I took a lot of rivets out... [laughs] 50:20 [When I saw you up on the square, we talked very briefly about Max and Kenny...] Elliot Funmaker. He was an ironworker too. He just got into... I just heard abut him on the news. Something about Elliot... Ho-Chunk Board or something like that. I believe Kenny is his dad. [I’m going to have to talk to him because he said a lot of his brothers are singers.] Yeah, they are performers in... [I’m going to work with him in mid-August at a festival in Dodgeville.] Great, great. [What can you tell me about... I think you said his dad was real quiet and Kenny...] Max was very quiet. Maybe two words a day, that would be a conversation. Kenny, you could get around and talk to Kenny quite a bit as I recall. [So did you work on some jobs with those guys?] Oh... The only thing I can remember... He worked on the McGregor, Iowa, rehab on the bridge down there, the box girder bridge, for American Bridge. If memory serves, I believe one of his duties was sharpening drills and he was pretty good at that. The only other one was we were doing a grocery store on the north side of Madison (USED TO BE EAGLES, THEN KOHLS NOW JUNGS). That was a structural job. Those are the only two times that I... Ladish Malt, on the make over down there... He wasn’t in the same crew that I was in... 52:45 [Let me ask about the rivalries with the other trades. What is the ironworkers sense of themselves in relation to the other trades and are there rivalries?] Well most of the tradesmen I  know...and it’s done in a friendly way... We kid with other trades. That’s why we call electricians “sparkies” and stuff like that. Brickies... But it’s usually the person. Once you humanize a person, no matter what they do. I feel as though once you humanize someone, you have a much better relationship with them. You start doing things out of spite, that doesn’t get you anywhere. Maybe short term but not long term. The one thing, I think historically, is that carpenters seem to think... As the saying goes, “There ain’t a trade out there that a carpenter doesn’t like.” Ok? To put it in a friendly way. They’ll encroach on your purview of work. Damn it – we have families to support and feed too. If we don’t have work, that’s pretty hard to do. Yeah, you get a little sharp with them when you find out that they’ve... It’s like... A carpenter... There ain’t one of ‘em that doesn’t have a wood puddler for concrete in their toolbox. So what does that tell you if you’re a cement finisher? I guess...that’s about all I want to say about that I think. 54:53 [You mentioned working for other locals... Have you boomed out much?] Well, during times of strikes. I was on the CAT plant, Caterpillar Plant, in Peoria during a strike. Some of us went over to Battle Creek Michigan on a nuclear plant during another strike. Worked in McHenry Illinois out of Local 498, which is Rockford. But most of the guys were from Local 1 out of Chicago. I worked down there on a hospital job with them. I worked out by O’Hare field a few times through Local 63. I got to know, like I say, some of the officials and that of Local 63. That certainly served me well. 512, Twin Cities because they border our local. Local 8 is Milwaukee. Local 90...Local 89, Davenport, Iowa, er no, Cedar Rapids. Anytime you get over by the river, most of those locals are going to be a little injection of both locals. And you get to know them. They live across the river there... [laughs]. You get places where you might get a job on the river that LaCrosse guys are all busy, all working. You need some men. You’re sitting in Madison... Do I want to drive 100 miles...? Nobody wants to fill the spot. The business manager may call Cedar Rapids. Talk to the business manager. “I hear you have guys out of work, on the bench., we’ve got a job over...” So that’s very common, very common. 57:00 [Some say ironworkers have a reputation that they like to drink?] Oh, I don’t know...I don’t know. Ya know... Personally, I don’t think we’re better at it or worse at it than some of the other trades. Painters like to drink. LAUGHTER I know that for a fact. So yeah, you can always point fingers but if guys like a beer, they like a beer. Yeah... It’s the nectar of the gods... 57:55 [What about topping out or anything when you finished a job... Can you talk about ceremonies or customs you might...] Well, on larger projects...yeah. Up on the paper mills up north, they make a real...especially if it’s big. The business school, when they finished that at the UW. Oh my... We were on GEF 1 uptown. They had a little deal, you go in there. But a lot of times they’ll have a leave-out beam or whatever that they’ll set to top it up. Historically, it’s the upper most member which doesn’t always happen because of the way things are constructed and that. But no matter how big the job or how small, there are usually... If it’s just a whoop-de-do and we’re done and whatever, that’s one thing. But an American flag is pretty prevalent on the job. We usually keep a couple of banners at the hall that we can use at topping out ceremonies. [What’s on the banners?] Just our local and ironworkers and that for the most part. But the other thing is, a lot of times we’ll sign the beam while we’re putting it in... Or the uppermost structural unit, pass it around. Operators, everybody gets on that. It’s an old... I think the  Druids are part of that or maybe the Norwegians...for many different reasons. 59:36 [I noticed that you have a miniature crane...] Yeah, well, that’s what happens when you get old and you have all that time... You start dabbling. Ever since I came into the trade, I’ve been fascinated with lattice boom cranes. Unfortunately, they’re beginning to be a thing of the past but, yeah... You listen to the old timers talk about different makes and machines and things like that. If you look out...if you work with them...it’s pretty hard not get to like cranes because they’re doing all the heavy stuff. And then again, I always look at how things were designed, structurally and engineering-wise, on the work. So, yeah. I dabble with that. I have one down here. HE GETS IT CAN’T HEAR WHAT’S BEING SAID, IN ANOTHER ROOM IN THE GARAGE MENTIONS THE “OLD MAN” AND THE “WHIP LINE” 01:02:30 Anyway, its just a little pastime or hobby of mine. I have a wood one up there that I did out of plastic. I got to crawler up there yet. [That’s cool.] People get a kick out of them. 01:02:50 [Do guys make miniatures of equipment or do you ever set up a mini...?] I don’t know of any other guy in the local that does that. I’m not saying there aren’t any. I just... Like I say, when you get older and you have more time on your hands, you can devote time to doing whatever you like. We used to have... Bill Maben... Oh no... But that guy was a fantastic wood carver. It would blow your mind to see what that man could do with a piece of wood. And I want to say his name was Grey. He was an operator. Pappy Brown from Pardeeville. He was a rigger. He was a rigger’s rigger. Unbelievable what he could do with those rope lines and stuff, hooking stuff up. And these are the guys you learn from. If you take the time... 01:03:52 [So rigging would be like setting up...?] Yeah, fixing lines. Well, you’re going to pick some. Every job ain’t the same. You’ll find the ironworkers, like Reynold’s Crane Service. They’re moving. And industrial moving. Those ironworkers are there all the time – full time. And they’re just really gifted at rigging. But that’s a whole...that’s a whole different part of our occupation too. It is all parts and that’s just one. Crane man... [Some of that has to carry over on working on sailing ships.] Yup, ships, sailing ships. Yes, many ironworkers came from... Because they had two things going. They could rig and they could get around tight. Take some of those old masted and schooners boy, you’re up off the ground. [And you’re moving.] And you’re moving and you’ve got to be constantly changing lines. I mean... They’re in salt water. They’re taking a beaten. They couldn’t have had a long life to ‘em. So they’re continually... Well, in the navy. Chief Bosun Mate. It’s amazing what those guys... A couple of them out in Truax Field. I don’t know if that’s a Seabee, flying or what’s out there flying. I wanted to tie up some boat bumpers. Have you ever seen those? [Oh, yes. Millers they call them.] Yeah. Yeah. And those guys... I didn’t know how to get started. That was my problem. I called out there... “Guys come out...” They made photocopies on the machine and everything. They were great guys. [So do you still know a lot of knots and so forth?] Oh yes. If you’re at the hall in their office, that knot board... LAUGHS [You made that.] Yeah. [Oh cool. My wife does a lot of work with...] Macrame. [...with commercial fishermen over the years. Some with coast guard people too. She’s looked into all kinds of knot work that fishermen have done. Folds or just ties.] There’s a book, I want to say it’s a UW book... 2001 knots. [Yeah, I’ve seen that...] It takes you a little while. Once you get into it and start it, it’s a lot easier.  01:06: [Some people do ‘em for tool handles, to just get a grip.] Oh yeah, its all about the application. Absolutely. A lot of times we’re putting something on the trailer and we have to latch on that. It all comes back. 01:07:20 [So at what point did you move out of the field into the apprenticeship?] We were just part time coordinators early on. And—WE TAKE A BREAK AND THEN COME BACK.] 01:07:40 The apprenticeship committee is made up of equal number of contractors and journeyman. Your usual response is, “What the hell do I know about being a coordinator...I’m an ironworker.” And they said, “Well, we’ve been observing you and all that... We want you to at least come in for an interview.” So I went in. It was only two days a week when I first started. I was working for Kupfer and I talked to the field superintendent, Rodney, and he said they’d work around that. I did that for probably two years or better. I was doing both work and that. We lost our instructor – he quit. And Scotty passed away from cancer. He was the instructor for many years, in the 60s...and 70s even. But then we had working with the tech school system in the state. They used to call it circuit instructors. That’s where Madison handled all the paperwork for their pay and benefits. And the other tech school areas, you know, they signed an agreement and they’d pay in but Madison would do the heavy lifting as far as the paperwork and that. And then that way you’d have a full load as an instructor. You’d have to travel to the students, thee students would not come to you. You were on the road most every day of the week. And the load was always changing because of the areas. You may teach in Chippewa Falls or somewhere up there for a couple of years. Then that would dry up but then they’d be adding ironworkers in Janesville or whatever. So I couldn’t find an instructor. I got a couple but after about two classes, they realized they were way in over their hands. They were like, “what’s prep?” LAUGHS And you know, these are four hour classes. This isn’t like a half hour here and you’re out of there... And so... They kept after me but finally, I said, “I can’t run the dang thing, and still work.” It’s just... Well, just give it a try. I don’t know... 2-3 months, I was in Wausau, Wisconsin Rapids, Stevens Point, Madison and LaCrosse. Finally I said, it ain’t going to happen. So what if we up your hours and... Well, okay. We’ll try that. So eventually, I worked 4 days a week as a coordinator. I could double up on some of the stuff because now I had one-on-one contact with the apprentices as well as instructing. I stayed instructing for 18 years. But if I had a couple of slack days or whatever, and there was a call in the hall... They shipped the stone in for the Kohl’s Center, the big W. I worked for International Erectors a few times so they requested me to weld that in place up there when they set it. That was a better part of a day so I was still on a regular basis but I was still working in the field. [So you were one of the first guys who became more or less full time apprenticeship?] Yes, that was, I was the first full time. Eventually it was five. As I got older and...LAUGHS They just put me on. 01:12:38 [What years did you do it for?] December 1979 was when I came on board and I retired in 2002. [You mentioned a guy named Scottie. What was his last name?] Seth Scott was the instructor back then. Then Bert Bitters was full time, working as the next instructor. [This is probably enough...we’ve gone on for about an hour and a quarter...]  01:13:15 [I can play some back to you and maybe make some notes and pictures, especially of these cranes and what you’re working on out here.] Well, these...I volunteer. I do a lot of custom garden work too. People over the years... Now that I’m retired, as soon as your... I’ve been out here 42 years now. And the farmers around here, their tractor, mold boards on their plows and stuff, they know I’m a welder. They’ve become very friendly. [A “runaway” every once in a awhile?] LAUGHS Yeah, well if you’re in rocks and stuff like that, it’s pretty easy to bust up a mold board and a price of a mold board is...so...yeah... I’ve done quite a bit of that. Or machinery breaks down. I do that for them. Pretty much on a free basis. Good neighbor policy. And then about ...the late 80s. We started with the light show up at Warner Park on the northside [of Madison]. I don’t know if you’re familiar with that or not. [I’ve been there many times.] Those we tried to do 3 dimensional and put a lot of work into it. We’d use apprentice classes to be involved with that...which is good. It’s a learning thing and... Math problems to work out. So we made just about everything up there, 3 dimensional. Then all of a sudden, everyone got their butt up in a tail spin and they discontinued it. Then next regime came in and they were lukewarm about trying to get something started again. The contractors were stepping up and said, “Yeah, that was... We got a lot of PR out of that. It was good for our industry.” So...for about 2-3 years, they rented. Out of Upper New York, someplace where they made these displays. They were renters and the bill was in the 10s of $1,000s of dollars. And why don’t you guys...wait... They’re not even yours. You’re just renting them. They’re done. And they decided...well...yeah... So they got rid of the rental but they bought two to keep. Ever since then...and then they approached me and they forgot...that I was involved with the old one. They talked to Freddie Brown, the electrician instructor... And Fred said, “Yeah...through the classes...Ed set these things up. They’re great. What the hell. All we got to pay for is the material.” So the got ahold of me and talked me about the possibilities. And I said, “Tell you what. You buy the material. Tell me what you want. I’m retired, I have time. I can make time. I’ll just make them up for you. Just come and get them.” And they were like, “Hey, great! What a deal.” So the last 5-6 years, I’ve been... These are the last two...seven I’ve made this year. I did the Monona [Terrace] Frank Lloyd Wright building. I did a castle. I’ve got them on the clip board up there. I did a Snoopy bi-plane. Similar in size, 20-25 feet. So these will last too unless they come up with another drawing. You know. I feel like I’m giving back something to the community. Am I helping feed the poop and starving? No, they’ve got food banks. What talent do I have that I can...? So that’s when I figured... And my mother was in an assisted living place before she passed away and I know that she looked forward... Every winter they’d take a bus and go see these displays. All the elderly just loved it. Little kids... It’s not that I don’t care about the regular people but... They’re on their own. But the old and the young, well, this is something I can give back to them. Good for me and good for them. So it works really well. But... I have people... 1:18:43 Our mill race out there. It just finished its drying. I do a lot of...plant stands, garden... Anything that has to do with flowers and gardening. I’m always looking for that. Row markers, tools, you name it. [Well, I think that’s great. I’ve got some great stuff here.]
Ironworkers;Craig Satalic and Al Bass;1951;2011;CounterNo./Time Topic00:01-[This is Bucky Halker and I’m here at Local 1 of the Ironworkers and I’m here interviewing two veteran ironworkers today. Why don’t you give me your name first.] Craig Satalic.(now B)                [And your nickname is...] Beaver. [And what year were you born?] 1955. [Here in the Chicago area...?] Yes. [Suburb? City?] Chicago. [Right in the city.] What neighborhood?] Tenth Ward, southeast side. [Oh, ok. Was that a Croatian neighborhood at the time?] It was mixed. [What else?] Polish, Croatian. A: Italian. B: Italian. There was a little bit of everything. [Yeah.] A: Hail Lily [?]. Laugh. [Did you go to school in that neighborhood...] Yes. [...and grow up there too?] Yes. [What high school did you go to?] Mendel High School in Roseland. [Ok. And your name, sir?] Al Bass. [And Al, what year were you born?] 1944. [And where, in Chicago or...?] Montgomery, West Virginia. [Montgomery, West Virginia. Wow.] Yeah. My Dad was a coal miner. [Ahh, I was going to ask. And then how did you get up here to Chicago?] Economy. The mines went down. I was 8 years old when my family moved to Chicago. My father went to work in the steel mills. [And what neighborhood?] Southeast Side. [Southeast Side. What mill?] Republic Steel. [Yeah, that was a big one down there.] Yeah. [Did you go to school down in that area or...?] Yeah, went to grammar school at Taylor, that’s right there at 99th Street. And then I went to Chicago Vocational High School. [Did you get trained as an ironworker there at the vocational school...or...?] No. I was trained... My smith use class which was the vocational class was machine shop. [And then, how did you actually get into ironworking?]. A: Well, I come from the era of where they drafted the whole neighborhood. And...so I was in the military. And when we got out in ’67, I went back to my old job at General Mills, and I had a wife and kids. So I was working two jobs. So nobody seen me. A friend of mine was getting married and they wanted to have a bachelor party and I bought a house. They were all apprentice ironworkers. And they says, “Ahh, that’s it. You’ve got to be an ironworker.” They told me about it, signed me up, and I went and took the test. And I got called as an apprentice ironworker. [And did you do one of those indentured apprenticeships or did you kind of wander around inside... Because some of the guys that I talked, like in Chicago, worked like 18 years for the same employer. They did their whole apprenticeship going...with the one they were working.] I mostly served one company during my apprenticeship, but I worked all facets of the trade. Of course, in Local 1, you’re indentured to the local, not to a company. So if they don’t have work, then you move right on to find the right place to find work. [What year did you start working?] October, 1968. [And what was going on in the city? What big building sites did you...?] McCormick Place. Sears. Hancock. All the big... Standard Oil. What do you call it now, Beaver? B: Sears? A: No, Standard Oil. What’s it called? B: Amoco Building? A: Something like that. All the major structures were gone and that’s why they were taking a lot of apprentices. I personally went to...the old McCormick Place. The other one that burned down.4:05 [How did you get started? How did you go from your neighborhood to end up with the ironworkers?] B: My Grandfather was an ironworker. My father was an ironworker. I’m third generation ironworker. [Wow. And were they all in Local 1, or...?] Yes. [Did you ever talk to your Grandfather about this?] Never knew my Grandfather. [Your Dad, I’m sure, talked to you about things.] My Dad, yes. [Was he the head of...or a business agent or an officer in the local?] He became the business agent in 1979 and I became the business agent when he retiredin 1993. [You went to college, is that what you said?] Yeah, I went to college. I graduated from high school in 1973. Got a four year degree in accounting and a minor in management. Two months later, I took the ironworkers test. [And did you just go...] LAUGHING [Why...why would you...?] A: Yeah, my Dad was pissed. LAUGHTER B: Father was very upset.... VERY upset. [Because he thought you wasted four years of college?] A: No, money. B: Wasting all of his money, yes...yes... [Did he eventually realized that having an accounting background did have some value with the union at some point or...?] No, not really. He didn’t really care about it. [And what about you? Did you think it earned some roll? I would think that that it would.] What he did wrong was... Work was good at the time and in the summers, I would work in a steel mill as an ironworker., on straight paper, and I really liked it. So... When I had the opportunity to take the apprentice test, I took it. I became an apprentice and then a journeyman ironworker. [And what year did you actually join the union then?] ’78. [And were you... That was before you were working full time or when you started working full time?] I started full time as an ironworker in September of ‘78. [And what...at the iron mill or at steel mill?] I went all over. I went all over at that time. [Any of the big jobs in your hometown?] Yes. Northwest Train Station. Madison Plaza. Mostly high rise. I worked down town my whole...15 years that I had the tools on, I worked down town. That’s where all the money was, really. Worked in the Ford Plant, on shut downs and stuff like that. Worked in the steel mills when the steel mills were going but the steel mills died, what in about ‘84, ‘ 85? So then there were no more steel mills that were...but I did worked quite a bit in the steel mills when I first became indentured in the ironworkers. [Were there a lot of ironworkers in the steel mills back then?] Oh my God, yes. Four hundred or better. [Were you working on machinery? What kind of stuff were you building...? Things that they needed to get done?] Conveyers, hoppers, furnaces, everything. Beefing up welding, beefing up sheeting. A: General maintenance. Everything. Especially US Steel. US Steel was... American Bridge was their subsidiary so American Bridge did all of their structural. [Did United Steel Workers, did you guys ever have any little jurisdictional tiffs with them over stuff?] B: No, not with me. I don’t know about you, Al. A: They didn’t really want to work. LAUGHTER So they let us do whatever we wanted. Really. I think that’s why the mills kind of died out here. It’s because they had such good conditions. I mean, some of my friends, after ten years, they were getting 5-6 weeks paid vacation. A: 13. B: Longer than that, they would get... A: 13 weeks. Those were the days. Yeah.8:13 [How did you get from...working, you know, in the trade coming up...] Through my father. My father was a business agent before me. He became a business agent in 1980 I think and then he retired in 1993. And I ran for the election in 1993 and I’ve been...business agent up until March of this year. And the guy that was a business manager, he moved up to the international and I was appointed. And then I ran in June and I won so I’ll be their business manager for the next three years, until 2014. [What’s your primary job as business agent, doing the business management stuff. What is it that you have to do for the workers and the union?] Handle grievances, put in the work. [Do you have to go to a lot of job sites?] I do. I try to keephands on. The more people see you on the job, the less problems you have. A: With employers. B: With employers, yes...if they know you’re going to be around. If they know you’re not around, they’ll try and cheat and do whatever they want to do. But if they know you’re around, you know... [What kind of cheating?] Work shorthanded. Breaking union rules. Breaking our union rules. So... A: Other people doing our work. [Other nonunion members or union members...?] Union members. It’s even worse now that the economy is very slow. Everybody’s stealing work from everybody. [So is it, like, the laborers’ unions or...?] A: Laborers, the carpenters... [I’m glad I didn’t wear my laborers jacket today. Laughter. I was afraid of that.] B: Mostly the laborers, not the carpenters. And with the man lifts and stuff like that. You know, when we first got in, there was never man lifts. You worked off floats or you walked the iron. And now with all the subpart Rs and this and that and OSHA, and most people work out of the man lifts. So the work that we used to do for the electricians and the pipefitters and the sheet metal, they’re doing their own work instead of us doing their work. We would set the structure that would hold the piping for the pipefitters or the piping for the electricians or the duct work for the sheet metal. And we would always get that because they were...they... It became their trade because they were scared...they didn’t want to go on the open iron. And now that we have the man lifts, which are safer, but we’re losing some of the work that way too.11:13 [So how did you... You came up here and started working and how did you end up getting involved in all the union activity and...? What was your...] A: Well, originally, I was recruited to being an instructor for an outside local. I was doing a nuclear power plant in Braidwood, which is a...at the time was Kankakee. They’ve been absorbed since then [the union local]. And I was approached by two individuals that...worked for me in the gang. And the question was... Would you teach an apprenticeship class for us? I said sure. What do I do? Then a couple of weeks later and he says, “I need a resume.” And I said, “For what?” I filled out a resume.” He says, “Ok. Wednesday come to dinner with me and I’ll take you to... The Trustees want to meet you.” I says, “Charlie, what’s going on?” He says, “No, no. It’s just a formality and anybody that has anything to do with it.” So I’m sitting there, having dinner with them. And he says to me, “You do realize there’s seven people from our local want this job.” I says, “What job?” He says, “The instructor for our apprenticeship.” I’m out of Local 1. This is a different local. I says, “Charlie, I can’t do this.” He says, “Follow me to the hall.” I actually headed home and I think, ahh, Charlie’s a good guy. So I go to the hall. Sure enough, Kenny Dvorak, a whole bunch of people there to get the job. And he says, “Oh, Al’s here. Won’t do any good. You’ve got the furthest to go.” So he asked me questions and stuff and I leave. The next day they says you got the job. Now this is...in like, January or February. So when international came in. At the time the executive director was Ray Robinson. [That’s a local guy, wasn’t it?] Of 63, yeah. And he... I went over all the manuals, picked the ones I wanted. Gave ‘em to him. So September I had a whole three year program detailed out. I had good training in the military. In the military, I was in an elite unit, we’ll call it. I was a Green Beret. But a Green Beret is...has all of the capabilities that everybody talks about but their main objective is that they are...glorified school teachers. They have to teach insurgents or they have to teachconventional forces. So I had extensive training in how to set up classes and give classes, which benefited me to set up that apprenticeship. And I taught there for four years, but the coordinator at the time here...told me...he had some six indentured apprentices that never had re-enforcing rods. Would I come in and teach them? He was in the class, okay? [He means Satalic.] LAUGHTER [Was he your best student?] Ahh, we won’t get into that, OK? LAUGHTER But he still owes me. That’s right. He don’t know it. I still got his test scores, see? LAUGHTER. Well, up until I have his test scores. But I came in and started teaching. Then I taught here for 23 years, 2-3 nights a week. And then when...the coordinator at the time retired, they offered me and appointed me the job of coordinator. I’ve been the coordinator for 13 years now.15:04 [Do you have a certain number of students...like... Do you have classes that come through? How long does the apprenticeship program last for a certain group of students?] Three years. It’s a... An apprenticeship is a comprehensive... The definition of an apprenticeship is a comprehensive program of on the job training and running the school curriculum. This school gets them 802 1⁄2 hours in three years. The job gets him 6000 hours. So between the two is how we turn out the journeymen. Actually, our apprentices... If you compute the hours that they spend on the job and related school curriculum, they put as much or more time into their education to get their degree, which is journeyman ironworker, as any college degree person. Of course... 30 some years I’ve been involved in the apprenticeship and I truly believe if a guy serves an apprenticeship and takes it serious, he has put so much effort in, he is a professional. He’s not a day worker. He’s nothing. When he gets that green card that says, “JIW” and we have the backup to show it, I’ll show any college professor what they’ve had to put in to get that degree. I consider the degree, not a journeyman ironworker’s card, which is a degree.6:41 [So when they first start in the apprentice program and they’re working on the job, do they work just a couple days a week and then take classes or...] Our program is set up for night classes. They work and then they come a minimum of two nights a week. [And that’s even when they’re working a regular work week on the job?] Oh yes. Our classes are from 5 to 8, three hours. They come two nights so there’s six hours a week in the class. When they take welding, they are there 9 hours a week, three nights a week. Two nights in the welding booth, one night in a theory class. [So what skills do you cover over the course of those...that three year program, in the classroom when you cover welding. Obviously that’s...] The core curriculum subjects are structural steel erection. That’s 120 hour course. Re-enforcing and post tensioning: That’s 120 hour course. That is what the majority of the work is. They also take a 60 hour metal building class. A 60 hour pre-cast class. They take 180 hour welding class. Metal buildings, then all the safety. They get a 10 hour OSHA, 32 hour lead class. A 40 hour hazmat, hazard materials class. Subpart R class which is 12 hours. They get a 24 hour scaffold, erect, or dismantler class. Our students actually get... If you count the curriculum that is in every manual, they get over 240 hours of dedicated safety training which is, now a days, what everybody wants to start with. In fact, when you go, I’ll show you all the manuals and stuff that they have to cover during the three year... I got ‘em all on the wall so...18:40 [So what’s the biggest challenge you’re facing these days? I mean, we have a bad economy, but let’s say over the last 10-15 years, what have been some of the big or newer issues you have today?] B: Well, the biggest issue I had to face comes in June when we have a new contract. [And is that a city wide contract? How do you guys negotiate?] We negotiate with the Associated Ateel Erectors. It’s mostly...probably about 80% of our contractors belong to it. And I’ll have five or six people to negotiate and we’ll have eight more, which is five men. Then we have a recording secretary. And Jim, who’ve you met, is the trustee. And three other BA and we’ll negotiate our new contract. [Is that with just Local 1 or is 63 with it?] No, just Local 1. We negotiate our contract and usually 63 follows in our footsteps. It’s kind of like we’re like the top dog. They see what we’re going to get and then they have their own associated erector, which is called the Urban League or something... Al? Urban Iron League? A: Something like that. [Now the erectors, one time I know in Chicago which was in your Grandfather’s era, were not so sympathetic towards working with the unions. Do you find them generally receptive? Or in this economy, is it hard?] Well... [...hostile and push the buttons...or...?] All the problem we have now is the price of everything. It takes over $100 to put a journeyman ironworker, $100 an hour with the insurance and...the pay scale and the benefits and everything like that. But the Midwest, especially Chicago, we are very fortunate. We have a Democratic Congress. We’ve got a Democratic Governor. We’ve got a Democratic Senate. So that means a lot. [It makes things easier for you guys.] Right. [Well, I mean, is it easier, too, for contractors to pass on, say, the higher cost of labor everything and everything to the developers? I mean, is that...] TOGETHER: That’s what usually... [...as opposed to working in Alabama or something if they were putting up something there?] Oh, it’s probably half. But the quality of work, like Al had mentioned, with our journeymen ironworkers coming out of this program. The quality, there is no better ironworker. Now I could be prejudice, but there is no better ironworkers than the ones that go through his apprenticeship and the workers here in Local #1. A: Well, we have a big burden, see? Our local is #1. LAUGHTER [I know, I know.] B: I don’t think anybody’s as proud or more proud than Al, but I’am really proud. I’m proud. I mean, I worked around all these high risers and I see what the hard work that goes into these. And the qualified people... And years ago, I’ve been an apprentice trustee, when we used to interview the kids going through, you know, some of them were lucky if they had a little college. Now, what do we have, Al? 30% of them have degrees. We have a smarter, well, I don’t know about smarter with the ironworkers...but they, they have degrees. Most of the people have degrees. Years ago, guys that were putting up buildings, they were lucky to make it out of grammar school. And they were skilled. They were very skilled. And, you know, even with OSHA’s putting this, we are still the #1 skilled craft in Chicago.22:40 [Now did you guys go out in your ironworking careers to work on other sites outside your local? Did you go on the tramp, so to speak as they used to say?] I don’t know about Al. I worked in Indiana. I worked in Joliet. I mean, locally, but out of our local. And I worked in Kankakee. And that’s about it. Locally. [What about you, Al?] A: I did a big power plant inJoliet territory. That’s Collins Station. And I did Braidwood which is... One of the reasons Local 1 ironworkers are...well respected all over the nation. It’s that. That is the best training facility in the world. [Points to apprentice training building.] Tall buildings. Used to be steel mills. Every facet of ironworker was... ironworking was available for ironworkers to be work on or be trained on. You go in other areas... They got three story adobe brick buildings with bar joists. I mean... I don’t mean it derogatory that they don’t know how to do it but if you set them down on something like the Sears or the Trump and they are in awe. They have no idea what to do. They’re not accustomed to it but where our guys, it’s second nature to them. Especially over time. I mean... Right there is New York City. Major metropolitan areas is where the true tradesmen come from. You have other areas, they didn’t have the opportunity or the facility to train for it. So...24:29 B: At a convention, we had a convention here in Chicago this past August. Most of the, probably 95% of the locals were in awe of our skyline. They had never seen anything like that before. I mean, you go to Boston, you go to Washington... The highest buildings are maybe 12- 15 floors. You don’t see 60-70 story buildings, 80 stories. The Sears is so big, the Hancock. And that’s hard working... And putting those buildings up isn’t like putting up buildings now. Most of them are built with guide derricks. There wasn’t the conventional cranes that we have now to make it easier for our guys. There was, there was a lot more harder work. Al worked on some of the derricks. I was able to work on some of them the first 4-5 years, but then they come out with the convention cranes that they put the cranes on the side or in the middle and you set the derricks up to take the cranes down now. The cranes take themselves down now. They got...these 500 ton cranes can go 300 somethin’ feet, right up... It just changed this whole... It’s all changed, you know? But the skill there, like I said and I keep repeating it. It’s still there for the ironworkers.25:57 Al: The last job I know that they actually used the guide derrick was Harris Bank. I had it from the foundation to the 23rd or 28th floor and then I went out to Collins Station. But Bethlehem Steel and the suite, it was the guide derrick to put that up. And then after that, it went to that. When we were talking about was the Chicago skyline. I’m sure you’ve been to New York, right? [Yeah.] Awesome. Huge. No character. Every one of our buildings, 95% of the buildings have character. New York, that’s it. They have some unique buildings, but every one of our buildings is different. B: Every one of them. A: It is. It is a testament to design.26:50 [So let’s talk about safety for a minute. You guys both saw changes in the safety, especially with you Al, in your career, but maybe you guys could just talk about that...because I got these pictures of some of these guys on the Hancock Building, it’s like he’s got street shoes on, shorts and T-shirt. He’s hanging on beams. He’s not tied off at all. But maybe you guys could say a few words about that.] A: It has definitely cut down on catastrophic injuries. And...everybody strives for safety. This 100% tie off? I don’t want to get in trouble here... OSHA...OK. [You won’t get into trouble because some people have said incredible things whenI ask about safety. Especially the old guys. They all complained about the safety stuff, you know.] AL: Synrac [?], that’s what OSCHA, spent 11 or 14 years, coming up with structural steel erections Subpart R. Now originally OSHA wanted to have a six-foot tie rule. They negotiated. They gave our connecters 15-30 foot. I mean, it’s ironworkers. You have to be able to do the job. They finally passed it. Give our connecters 15-30 foot. Didn’t make any difference. All the insurance companies said that the GC’s, the general contractors, everybody six-foot tie offs. 100% tie offs. In fact, when safety people would come into my office, I go ballistic on them. I say, “You know something? I have a 12 hour subpart R structural steel erection, mandated that I give to my students. Teach OSHA. I’m wasted my time. I spent 12 hours for nothing. They go out on your job, six-foot tie rule. To hell with OSHA. I just hope they don’t get to where these people that’s never stuck a bolt or tied a rod in their life...never ironworked... B: Set policy. A: ...gonna to tell us how we do our job. I just hope they don’t go to firemen and they say, “Ok. I don’t care if one of the children are dying, you can’t go within 200 foot of that fire.“ Ironworking... Especially on an erection floor of a super structure. That’s ironworker territory. Nobody else should be around. Now... It’s a hostile environment. Now I don’t mean arguing or fighting. I’m talking about the possibility of danger from erection, from crane swinging, load swinging, holes, putting cable and stuff up. It takes a unique aggressive individual to be an ironworker, to work in that hostile environment. You get accustomed to it, all right? And for somebody to walk up from down there and say, “All right. Everybody’s got to wear a vest up here.” I’m going to get in trouble. On the 40th floor, you got to wear a vest and you can’t turn your hard hat around.30:31 [So is it insurance companies that are really driving this and rather than the government or is it both of ‘em?] B: Well, I see it...with being out in the field...on jobs...like I mentioned before, that the fatalities have really...because of the safety... But with these man lifts...there’s guys screwing their necks up...breaking fingers, breaking hands, breaking arms, working out of a lift that you wouldn’t have if you were on open iron. There was a skill...there was a skill back then. And, it separated the men from the boys. I mean, if you weren’t comfortable walking steel, you weren’t comfortable climbing up a wall, hooking on, and tying rebar or anything like that. You couldn’t be an ironworker. There was no place for you. Now...I see that... I mean, we’ve had some injuries, career ending injuries with guys. They forgot and they broke vertebras in their neck and everything. It has taken a lot of the skill out of our trade. And yes, has it has cut down on fatalities. Yes. There are always are... For me personally, we just had a fatality in February, at the Shrine Tower. It fell and one of our guys got caught underneath. Accidents are accidents...and I believe in that. If there’s, you know... Can you count down on accidents?Yes you can cut down on the accidents. But there’s always...you know. They always say, zero...? You know what? God bless ‘em if they can see that. I’ve been around 33 years and Al’s been around longer than me. Things happen. It happens fast. It can happen really, really fast. A: Nobody gets hurt. Very few people have ever been hurt, injured maimed or killed when a catastrophic happening. Somebody does something stupid, okay? And you can’t train against stupid. B: You’re right, Al. It’s 100% right. A: It’s...look... B: I mean, we used to work... Iused to be more comfortable... To this day, I see people putting cable up and I see people working out of these lifts and... On a skyway project, this was about 10 years ago... A contractor had floats. You worked off a float. You’d tie a float... The runners would go out 300 feet in one of them snorkels... B: Oh my God. A: I would feel a heck of a...more comfortable working on a float 300 feet up in the air. [Yeah.] Then every time you moved, it would bob up and down. I mean... And it took some of the skill away. The younger guys, and we don’t teach it, know more because no one uses floats but Al, you know... A: I know. B: Floats was the #1 tools and then they came out with some angel wings which was similar, but was already made up. And now they use snorkel or man lifts. A: In lower buildings. I mean, you build the Sears, you’re not going to be working off snorkels, right? You’re going to be ironworkin’... So... B: We used to use needle beams and plank. Doing the road work. Sitting on the roads, bridges. You don’t see that no more. A: Sears... I worked on Sears from 28 to 104. And American Bridge had a 25-man plank gang. They planked the erection floors and now they’re putting in the decking in, right? And they come out. But they...I mean, that was three inch plank. Some of it was 40 foot long. LAUGHTER. Guys pick them up, carry them, they plank the floors, they come and erect it. Then they got to take the plank out and send it up to the next one. You don’t see planking any more. Which is probably good. B: Everything’s changed though. We’ve gone through. Al’s been through changes. I’ve been through changes as a business agent, as an ironworker. Lots of the changes are good. Some of the changes aren’t.35:16 A: I went into a rampage but a lot of the safety that come out has been beneficial. It’s the other parts that they...I feel like they went way beyond. Like I said, it’s cut down on...a lot of catastrophic things. B: Your connecters are probably your elite... They’re the best physical shape. They’re more comfortable running on iron like monkeys on a tree limb than being tied off. They have a better chance of falling trying to tie off... I mean, safety regulations, than if they were on their own. Al knows that. A: Like I said, 15-30 foot. They agreed with...the whole committee agreed connectors have to be free to move. [Yeah.] B: Yeah, so... The feeling that I, Me and Al agree. Safety is great and whenever, but sometimes safety kills. That’s the way I look at it. In that formula, you’re killing people on safety but over and above. A: Six foot tie rule... I’m trying to think of a percentage. I’ll go low... 60% of tie offs at 6 foot is eye wash. The damn lanyards? Use six foot long. Ok? You’re tied off here and you fall, it’s eye wash but it means, hey... If its 100% tie off, then you better do it. It’s... You can’t even go on a ladder. GIGGLE You’d probably get fined by a general contractor working around your house if they had those rules. I know a step ladder, you can’t... B: Don’t stand on the top of the step. If done it. I just did it this weekend. LAUGHTER A: I’m a safety guy. With those hips, don’t you be kind, don’t you be going on no damn ladder. B: I know... A: Give me a pen, I’ve got to sight ‘em [for safety violation]... LAUGHTER37:43 [So what about fun on the job? Do you guys still have as much fun as they used to...? These old guys all said they loved their jobs. Do the younger guys still love their jobs too?] B: I had fun. Yeah. And I know Al had fun because you work with the same people most of thetime and I was with the same guys. Some jobs had fun and some jobs are real serious, from me going on jobs. But it was a ball. It was something... You’d pick on somebody all day and everybody... It would be fun. It would make the day go by. [Did you guys play jokes on each other at all?] B: Yes. A: Well, we bring new apprentices in. First orientation class, I tell ‘em... If you’re sensitive, you’ve pick the wrong trade. I’m telling you, ironworkers are a true brotherhood, but among themselves, don’t tell them anything about your personal life, anything that bothers you because they will beat you to death with it. They all come in... I says, “You’re all going to end up with some nickname that you’re not particularly going to like because you did something.” I says, “But push comes to shove, they’ve got your back on anything. But don’t...” And that’s what was fun. All the time. First of all, ironworkin’ is the only trade that has worker in its name. If you don’t want to work hard for a living, become an electrician. Ok? I mean, think about it. What trade other than us has worker in its name? There are no easy jobs. I’m giving you my spiel. B: Well, we had fun. A: Always did. B: We’d kid each other and if you showed you were thin skinned, that was the biggest mistake you ever made in your life. If you let them think it was bothering you... I recently got a call about six months ago. I had a guy call me and said that the foreman yelled at him. LAUGHTER And I laughed. I laughed and I told him about it and he laughed. I mean... You get yelled at a lot but that’s how you become a good ironworker. Because if you did something wrong, they would scream at you. And if they screamed at you, you won’t do it again because they embarrassed you. But if you tell somebody, “Don’t do that again,” he’s gonna do it again. And that’s how was broke in and Al was broke in with some Irish guys. Some Irish guys, they would beat you to death. I mean...and Al knows that and I know that. A: My old gang, the crew used to work for me years ago when I was still at 500 West Monroe . I had a grown man, 45 years old, come up to me literally with tears in his eyes, saying, “Al, you gotta tell these guys to lay off of me.” I says, “What? I’m the boss. They do the same thing to me. You just have to get it back to them. You can’t let it bother you.” Ah, they used to beat it into you, you gotta give it back. And that’s when it was fun.41:20 [Did you ever play tricks on each other besides the verbal games and harassment?] B: We’d hide tools and stuff like that. A: Put chalk in their gloves. LAUGHTER I walked around one time with water cups like this, stuck to the top of my hard hat. B: Yeah, he didn’t know it was happening. A: No, they snuck up behind me and I walked around for about 15 minutes with those cups. Somebody looked at me and said, “Al, look at your hat.” And whoosh... Yeah, that’s... B: The guys are more serious now. I mean, I feel it when I see. I go up and I start teasing them, and they look at me, do you know what I mean? I got a nephew and he’d come out of a trailer with a cup of coffee. I said, “Just because you’re related to the business agent, you don’t need to have another cup of coffee.” Well, I got the dirtiest look and I was just teasing him. And he told me... A: Which one was this? B: Lucas. A: Oh...Luke... I threw shots at him all the time... B: And he says, “Uncle Beav... You embarrassed me in front of everybody.” And it wasn’t...it was just to have fun. But...so...42:43 A: I decided...I was going to tell you before this coordinator, it was getting to the point where it wasn’t that much fun anymore. I remember I had some carpenters... I was doing a little 9-story hotel. They started in the hole and they’re all young and they can’t frame nothing and my second day, I went ballistic on them. “Did Stanley Garage have a lay off? Where the hell did you guys come from?” And I was raring up on them... “You want me to do it myself?” And the kid looks at me and says, “Al, I think you need a hug.” LAUGHTER I laughed. “What did you just say to me?” “Yeah, let’s have a group hug this morning.” Get... LAUGHTER B:I can see some of them guys saying that. A: Oh, they were all Bible thumpers from some church. I don’t know. LAUGHTER B: Was it Davillas? A: No, they were a framing outfit for a little while. Chicago something. Not Chicago Deck or anything. They didn’t have a clue. But that guy looked at me, “I think you need a hug.”44:02 [Is your work force getting more diverse like the city itself? I mean, do you get more Hispanic guys coming through the apprenticeship or African American guys coming in? Is it still predominantly...?] B: The apprenticeship is, what, about 30-35% African [American]. It’s been like that... There might be... A: We make an effort to maintain diversity. Hmm... We had...I don’t know, 5 or 6 years ago or so, we had a run...9 years ago, we had a big influx of...a lot of Hispanics came. They were good, but we’ve always maintained diversity with African Americans. We tried with women but... It takes a very unique man to be an ironworker. It takes way beyond for a woman to be an ironworker. I’ve had women asked me, “Well, what do women ironworkers do?” I says, “We don’t have none. All we have is ironworkers. We don’t consider them women, men or nothing. They’re ironworkers.” You can’t ironwork, there isn’t a job specifically for a woman ironworker. Now, we got some that can really do the job. B: And they’re not fragile. A lot of the women we get are fragile and they ended up...five, maybe six years...and it’s just too much for them. A: It is. B: And then we got some that are great. It’s just... But we’ve got some men too, that work 5 or 6 years and it’s too much work. A: But percentage wise, I always get gigged by the government because I don’t have...the percentage or projected amount that I’m supposed to have. And I tell ‘em, “What do we have...2800, 2068 people apply and I think... [To the apprenticeship program?] Yeah, the last time I gave a test, 35 women applied. [Yeah, that’s low.] And I’ve been in meetings with all the concerned groups, the reverends...and I actually had women get up and say, “I don’t want to be an ironworker.” I mean, it’s a very demanding job. It’s...like a linebacker. B: And the laborers, like to put the women on the flags and stuff like that. Electrician, it’s a little less strenuous job. You know... But ironworking, if you tying rebar and you’re with #11, just because you’re a woman and an ironworker, like Al said, you pick that #11 bar up just like a male would have to do it. There is no leeway.47:10 A: I’m going to get in trouble here again but... That stuff about women only being flagged for laborers... If there is an easy job in construction, especially when it comes to ironworking, it’s extremely difficult to make a pension, age pension in ironworking. It’s a very physically demanding job that’s very difficult to work until your 62 years old, to draw a pension.And if there is a lighter duty job, that’s the person that’s gotta get it... the one that’s put 30 years in, trying to get to his pension. Not... B: I agree. A: ...somebody that... “because you’ve got to give me that job.” Uh uh. I mean, we’re union. We have to insure that legitimate people that are getting older and it’s a physically demanding job, they’ve paid their dues. They are the ones that should get those lighter work.48:23 [Do you have any American Indian students?] A: Yes. The one that came in...that actually went through the American Indian Program. Murray is his name. Heck, his father is a Local #1 ironworker, but he went through the Indian program. B: Paul went through the same thing. Didn’t Paul? A: Yeah, he might have. Yeah. [Yeah, I heard he was a guy that went through the...] Ross. [Yeah.] B: Jim Stanley? A: Yeah. Oh, the kid. [His relatives are from where I grew up. I grew up in Northern Wisconsin and his family is from that area.]49:00 A: You gotta do something about that grey hair. LAUGHTER [Yeah, I know.Shouldn’t we though? That’s what my wife says. That’s what my wife said this morning. Well, it’s getting thinner, I can tell you. I don’t know about yours.] A: My wife says, “Can’t you dye your hair? I don’t like to be married to an old man.” [That’s pretty good. That’s a helluv an answer. I can’t see the back side of it, you know?] A: How old was you when you started going grey? [About 17-18 years old.] A: 16 years old I started getting grey hair. It’s genetic. [I’ve got two sisters who are completely white. I have one brother, though, and he’s got nothing. Head full of hair and still brown.] Older or younger? [He’s younger, but he’s not gonna... He’s definitely...] They used up all the genes on you. LAUGHTER [Yeah, I think so.]49:46 [One more question here...and then if you guys want to chat about anything, we’ll just leave it on the tape here. But I wanted to ask you guys about the labor movement today and,you know, obviously it’s not in great shape. I guess the ironworkers are doing ok but the movement as a whole is having its problems. But I mean, what do you see in the future? What do you think it’s got to do to try to, you know, get more workers involved or maybe help them out?] B: They need to get on board... The Republicans need to get on board with Obama. People, middle class people like ironworkers and all the building trades in Chicago, they spend money. When they spend money, stores make money. When stores make money, they hire people. If they start with the bridges and stuff that they want to do and the infrastructure, you’re going to see a lot more work, especially in the bigger cities. Because there are just so many bridges here in Illinois and in our district, in Local 1’s jurisdiction, they’re shot. And if you got to New York, I personally haven’t been in New York, but I know in New York, every other street, the bridge is down because they let the infrastructure go. And that’s... And we got Bascule Bridges. Many areas don’t have Basculel Bridges. We have Bascule Bridges all over the city of Chicago and they are big jobs and they need to be fixed. Where me and Al live, we used to live, there are Baskill Bridges there and I mean... It’s just...it’s terrible. They don’t maintain them. It might take them 30 minutes to close bridge once it’s open because they’re not lined up right. But we need the Republicans to get on board with this thing with Obama so we can put the American peopleback to work. [What about you Al, what do you think the movement needs to do?] A: We need positive information about unions. When was the last time nationally newspaper... When was the last time you heard anything positive about a union? [I can’t remember.] Okay. Now, and that’s the problem unions have is if the people being want to join the union did not grow up in a union environment. Their education has been all the negative things said about unions. From corrupt officials now to bargaining, alright? Now...you always got problems with officials, just like Enron, just like banks, just like Wall Street, okay? I only seen it once, when the World Trade Center went down. There was an interview with a fireman and an ironworker about the tragedy. The ironworker was there as a volunteer and they gave a statement. He turned to walk away, he looked back at the thing, and he says, “See President Bush, unions aren’t so bad after all.” One time they showed it. The nation’s gotta realize that everybody that rushed to the World Trade Center, everybody, was union. It was the union brotherhood that went there. It wasn’t Wall Street. It wasn’t the businesses around there. It wasn’t the banks. The unions went out and commandeered buses to take their people there. Not to get paid or nothing, to help. The firemen are union. The ironworkers are union. All them people... It was union people that rushed to try to do something. Everybody else stood back and watched. That is an absolute positive message of us, the rank and file, what we are. Stop picking out only the negative things. Think about the middle class that have a good life from it. You deserve a legitimate wage. I’ll start sounding like a Baptist preacher here in a minute. I think we need more positive news coverage of unions. They talk about all the volunteers. Why couldn’t they say, “Everybody there was union.” Why couldn’t they say that? Oh my God because somebody’s controlling them. Ahhh... Sorry... I go into rampages some time.[Any other thing you guys want to say? The lights on...you can talk about whatever it is you...] B: I want to thank you for taking your time to interview my co-worker Al and myself.A: One more thing about the unions. [All right.] I keep talking about professionalism. One of the reasons Chicago has maintained a big market share. We’re the last bastion, the last fortress in the country of controlled union tradesmen. But we supply the product. There’s no union contractor that minds paying the price if he gets the product. That’s a fact. In Chicago, believe it or not, our contractors like this union environment. You know why? They all bid our package. They all bid our wage. If they start closing their doors, what replaces them, they can’t compete. So they would prefer it to stay union, if they’re signatory to us, because they want to use that wage package as their bid package. So as long as we supply a professional product to them, we’re viable. That’s one of the reasons we’re the last ones there. All right, I’ll shut up now.[Thanks so much. I really appreciate it. It’s been great to talk to both of you] END: 56:39
Ironworkers;Richard “Rich” Rowe;1952;2011;Counter No./Time Topic Audio Interview Contents    00:01 Introduction: I’m Bucky Halker and . . . . ______ [Rich, just to start, why don’t you tell me when you were born, where you born....personal and family background so we have that.] I’m a lifelong Chicagoan. I was born at Columbus Hospital in Lincoln Park in May of 1952. I grew up on the west side of Chicago in the Garfield Park neighborhood. My family has been in the Chicago area since the Civil War. Most of them lived in the southwest side of the city, in Clearing, Illinois, which was incorporated into the city in the 20s or 30s. I still have quite a few family members in the Chicago area. I became an ironworker in 1970 when I graduated high school. My girlfriend at the time thought it was a good idea to get married. I was looking for a job and I was fortunate enough that an uncle of mine was an ironworker and he recommended that I take the test for the apprenticeship. I had no idea what ironworkers did. He said that they buildings and I said I didn’t know anything about that. And he says, “that’s what you go to an apprenticeship for. They teach you.” I took the test in 1970 and I was fortunate enough to get in. Its been my career ever since. This is my 41st year as an ironworker. 1:37 [In all that time... Tell me about maybe your first job and what you did and some of the stuff after that. How you ended up where you are now.] I remember my first job was working at the IBM Building. It was being erected on the corner of State Street and the Chicago River. It was a Mies van der Rohe building. I was working at the curtain wall gang. Curtain wall is basically the metal skin on the exterior of the building. We were installing the metal panels and frames and later glaziers would come in and put the glass in it and create the exterior wall of the building. On my first day, they took me up in the elevator and the elevator door opened up. The elevator being on the exterior of the building – the man hoist. It went up about 30 floors. They opened up the doors of the elevator. There was a plank going from the elevator to a beam. I was 18 years old, it was my first day...and, you know. I kind of froze there for a minute. Everyone was behind me and they were saying, “Come on, kid...let’s go, let’s go.” And so I reckoned I might as well do it and I did it. It is definitely something that anybody in their right mind anyway could just jump in right away. But you get used to doing that. Eventually, I actually liked working up high. You always had to be aware of where you were at. You have to be conscious of your surroundings. But other than that, it is quite thrilling. On some days, quite pleasant and on other days, not too pleasant at all. [Because of weather...] Because of weather, wind, and everything else. But if it’s a nice day and its beautiful out, there’s no place you’d rather be. Other times. January when it’s was windy or snowing or sleeting. It could be pretty miserable. [Are there any rules that regulate that, like with the wind? Or do you just play it by ear?] We have... Ever since I’ve been an ironworker, contractually – in our union contract, CBA there is a two-hour show up time. If you show up on the job and you’re ready to work, you’re paid for two hours. Quite often you go to work and if it’s raining sideways and it’s pretty windy, you get your two hours pay and go home. Quite often in the late fall, early spring and quite often in the winter too, you may show up for work five days a week and not work any days. You get a check for five twos, for ten hours, just for showing up. 4:13 [After that first job, what’s your...sort of...working occupational history since then?] I started ironworking in 1970 and we were in a little building boom. So all throughout my apprenticeship I stayed employed and I worked basically in the Loop area. It was one high rise project to another. I worked on Sears Tower for a good part of my apprenticeship. It seemed like right after Sears Tower was completed, as is the nature of the construction industry, we went into a bust period. So we were booming through the early part of the 70s and late 1974-75, there was a major bust. There wasn’t any work in the Chicago area. By this time, I had became a journeyman and I was at the bottom of the out-of-work list. There were hundreds of guys out of work. My work prospects didn’t look too good. A couple of friends I had been working with said “We’re gonna boom out.” And I said, “What’s that?” I had never worked outside of Chicago or worked outside of the Loop. And they said, “We’re going to boom out. They’re building powerhouses down South and there’s some bridges going on. We’re going to try to go to some of these different locals and get some work.” And I said, “I never did that before.” So by the time you figure it out, you know. So we boomed out and I spent the next couple of years just going from different locals in Southern Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, trying to stay somewhat within driving distance of Chicago so I could still see my kid and my family. For a couple of years, we boomed out with a little trailer and traveled around from job site to job site. We built bridges and powerhouses. We worked in Atlantic City when they were building casinos. Worked in Boston when they were boomin’. A lot of times a big part of my work in life, especially in other parts of the country, you have to travel around if you want to keep working. 6:15 [When you go out to a different local’s area, when you were traveling around, did you get adjust pretty quickly with guys you didn’t know? When you were in Chicago, did you know a lot of the guys you were working with?] It is amazing how fast ironworkers assimilate into the gang. You have to know your craft. Once they understand you know what you’re doing and you’re not going to get them hurt. Once you prove to them that you know what you’re doing and you can handle your job... A lot of times guys that you’re working with, especially these areas that are booming, a lot of them are from different locals too and they’re not living in the area, so after work they have no place to go but back to their motel room or trailer or whatever they’re living in. So you develop friendships with these people. You end up having quite a lot of fun. You sit around at night and tell stories and you get along really quick. Everyone gets tied in to the boomers’ rumors because they have a brother-in-law that’s working over here or over there. They have leaders...and there’s an outage in a powerhouse and they’ll need 100 guys for two weeks. You work 7 12s for two weeks or whatever. So you get into these boomers  rumors...who travel around. It was a good part of my life. I really enjoyed it. I haven’t done it now for almost 30 years, I don’t do it now. But for a period of time, I really enjoyed it. 7:50 [When you did that, did you do the curtain stuff mostly? What other kind of work or tasks...I should say...] No... Actually, you’ll get the bottom of the barrel work. The local hands, rightfully so, will get the better jobs. It’s their territory, it’s their local, and they should get that. So they’ll get the better jobs. The other jobs that are hard to man in boom periods are the ones the boomers would get. So you sometimes get some pretty lousy jobs, but it was all work. But you’re not working, you need a check. You take whatever they give you. 8:25 [You mentioned your uncle helped you get a job here. Were there still . . . You started in 1970. Were there still a lot of old timers left, from the New Deal era from the 40s and 50s, in those days?] Absolutely. Quite a few guys that came in before WWII and then they went off and were in the service. They came back after the war so quite a few guys were in during that area. I actually worked with one fellow, when I started, was probably in his 70s. He probably should have retired years before that but didn’t. He was actually in the local in his 20s...even in his teens. We had quite a few... We actually have one fellow now. He is the father of our apprentice worker here. He’s 95 or 96 and he’s been for 75 years or so. He started when he was a kid. So he’s been a member for many many years. 9:30 [Did ethnicity, was that involved in the ironworkers here in Chicago? Were there a lot of Italians or Germans? I know there were Indians. Maybe you can talk about the Indian/Native American thing...] Well, in Chicago, there’s three ironworker locals. Each one of them pretty much came out of different ethnic groups. My particular local...in the architectural ironworkers union in Chicago... We came out of originally the foundries. After the Chicago fire, it was decided that the city should be built fire proof. A big part of that was getting away from wooden stairs, trying to make as much of the building – especially in the commercial district, the main part of the city that burnt down. So they were trying to put as many fire proof components into the building as possible. Fire proof component being either masonry or cast iron at that time. The architectural ironworkers were the ones that were installing the cast irons. So quite often these same workers would work in the foundry, creating the pieces, making the castings, pouring the castings of stairs and store fronts and interior columns and things like that. Then they would go out into the field and install them. Around these shops, the workers started organizing small unions just for their own protection. Winslow Brothers Foundry was one of the first big shops that we founded. The Winslow Brothers Foundry did the façade on Louie Sullivan’s Carson- Pirie-Scott building on corner of State Street and Madison, that has recently been restored and rehabbed and everything. Winslow Brothers Foundry did the original cast iron store front. That was one of the early shops that we organized. 11:22 When word came that Chicago was going to host the World Columbian Exposition in 1893, word came down about 1890 that we had this competition in 1890, 1891. All these little  shop unions decided to band together and they founded the Architectural Ironworkers Union of Chicago. That union had 1500 members. They had so many members that they split it up into three separate locals. They were an independent union, not affiliated with anyone. They were the Architectural Ironworkers Union of Chicago and they had three locals. One local conducted their business in English, one in German, and one in Bohemian. So you had three separate locals under the one umbrella that was not affiliated. They went on strike of the 8 hour day in 1892. And they were crushed. They lost the strike. They were crushed. It was reorganized in 1893 under a fellow of O.H. Hill. This time, again we went on strike. And this was during the building of the World Columbian Exposition. That was ironworkers working on the big Ferris wheel, W. Ferris’ observation wheel that he called it. They were working on the Ferris wheel and all the different buildings for the World Columbian Expedition. And this time, we won recognition for a union and we won the 8 hour day. We won recognition from a consortium of, let’s say, of contractors called the Iron League of Chicago. This is still the same group that we negotiate with today. We’ve had recognition since 1893. At that time we affiliated with a group called the United Metal Workers. The United Metal Workers would later go on to 1905 to be one of the founding organizations in the Industrial Workers of the World. And Charles O. Sherman, the president of United Metal Workers, became the first and only president of the IWW, of the Industrial Workers of the World. Later he would step down. They has a schism in the IWW and they never had a president again. The general secretary was kind of recognized as the leader of the group. We are affiliated with the United Metal Workers for a period of time. Right around this time, they started designing buildings with a skeletal framework made out of steel. Before steel was available, cast iron is not suitable to be used as a beam. Cast iron can only be used in compression. [Because it’s brittle?] Because it’s brittle and has very little tensile strength. It’s a very strong metal and because its brittle, it has a very high carbon content. It can only be used in the form of an arch or in compression. It cannot be used horizontally, like for a beam. So it really wasn’t available until steel started being produced in vast quantities like Carnegie’s blast furnace and open hearth furnaces and Bessemer furnaces. Once steel started becoming more readily available for architectural use or for structural use and it was used in rails primarily. Once they started being used to roll beams. They could start to design railroad bridges, anything using steel, we started seeing it being used in a structural framework for building. A Chicago architect by the name of William Le Baron Jenney designed the first structural skeletal building on the corner of LaSalle and Adams called the Home Insurance Company. It was a 10 story building. What this did was, because now the external walls were no longer load bearing, they could be a lot thinner, the masonry walls. And you didn’t have to have very thick masonry low bearing columns on the interior of the building. You could have very narrow steel columns or cast columns. So this opened up a lot of floor space and made the building a lot more attractive to developers because they basically had a lot more available square footage. So this was a innovation of the construction industry that went off like wild fire. Once this took off, everybody wanted their buildings built from structural framework. This put a great demand for workers with those kinds of skills. So railroad bridge builders were brought in from all over the country because they were using a very similar technology on railroad bridges.  They were brought in to work on these new skeletal structures. Across the country this created a kind of jurisdictional differences with ironworkers that were already there, working with cast iron. Cast iron stairs, store fronts and columns. 16:12 So this group of structural ironworkers kind of formed their own union in Chicago called the Building Construction Men’s Union. They were in conflict with the Architectural Ironworkers Union over jurisdiction. This group eventually affiliated with six other unions in Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Buffalo, New York, what am I missing, Chicago...Boston. One other one. They met in Pittsburgh in 1896 and they founded the International Association of Bridge and Structural Ironworkers. The reason why they affiliated was that primarily, their main employer was the United States Steel and the American Bridge Company. No matter what city they worked in, they ended up working for the same employer. They felt that if they were to get any kind of recognition or any kind of decent wages or decent working conditions, that they had to speak in one voice to United States Steel. So they formed that association in 1896. Architectural Ironworkers throughout the country, like in New York and Chicago and other places, they affiliated with the United Metal Workers. Eventually, they left the United Metal Workers, these locals, in about 1902 and they affiliated with the International Association of Bridge and Structural Ironworkers in 1903, for the most part. Then later in 1914, we changed the name of our organization from the International Association of Bridge and Structural Ironworkers to the International Association of Bridge, Structural and Metal Ironworkers. Is that too wordy? [No.] Laughter [I won’t remember it, but you did, so that’s good!] 18:00 [You were starting, because you mentioned Bohemian and all that. I’m sure that died out in 1907 but were there still a lot of Polish guys and Italian guys...?] Definitely in the trades. In Chicago you pretty much could still see a lot of that in 1970. A lot of the terrazzo workers that were Italians. They all spoke Italian, so they were very ethnically Italian. We still had a lot of Bohemian and Swedes in our local. In Local 1 ironworkers, there are a lot of Irish. There will be a lot of Germans in our local. The building trades are still very strong ethnic groups. By this time, obviously, that’s all... [Yeah.] 18:55 [How does racial, gender, whatever play out in the union?] It’s a non-issue now. Thank God we’ve finally come to that point. When I started in 1970 it was still a major issue. Civil Rights Act was just passed in 1964 and building trades fought compliance for quite a while. It wasn’t just my trade but all the trades fought compliance. Special programs had to be set up to assimilate minorities into the different building trades. They were basically barred from up to that point. For a few years, there was a little growing pain. When you get on a job and you work with a guy regardless of ethnicity and you’re working together... When you had your partner that you were working with, you know, you work and you talk. One thing about the building trades, you can do your job and do it well. You can talk about different things. So whatever your subjects are, whether sports or motorcycles or whatever...you can do this while you’re doing your job. You get to know your partner very well. After some initial growing pains,  especially with the older guys. But the younger guys, the minorities assimilated in quite quickly. By the late 70s, it wasn’t an issue. You never heard any derogatory comments or racial slurs. Very very rarely by the late 70s. We were just guys trying doing their job and trying to do the same thing and support your family. [Do you get a lot of Latino workers coming in to your apprentices program now?] We got a lot of Latino workers coming in here so now there’s a Spanish program now. Especially now. One factor, one aspect of our craft... We represent fence erectors so all of those miles of rot iron fences that Mayor Daley loved....around all the parks and all the businesses. We put the vast majority of that up. The chain link fence and the guard rails on the expressways, any security fence or barbed wire anything like that. It was our guys that did all that. And in that one part of the craft, there are quite a few Hispanics. Not for any other reason than that a guy would get a job and the boss would say, “Hey, you’re a pretty good worker. Are there any more like you at home?” And they’d say, “As a matter of fact, there are.” So they would take one part of the craft and quite a few Hispanics are in that end of our business. And also on the other, all aspects of the craft. We feel . . . we’re kind of proud and think that we’re diverse, ethnically diverse. We try to represent Chicago in every way. 20:05 [I know you mentioned this to me before but you have this Native American, Indian in your program, in your local... Could you talk about how that and how it got started?] That has been in effect for about 40 years. As I recall it was during the building of the Alaskan pipeline. The Alaskan pipeline went through Native American land, indigenous people’s land, they certainly wanted a piece of the action and rightfully so. So to give these people from various tribes up there and the training that was needed, programs were set up for pipe fitters, ironworkers and other people to get them the training they need to work on these jobs. The ironworkers were just one craft that went up and offered this training. Since that time, the ironworkers pretty much grabbed the bull by the horns and taken ownership of training for Native Americans. Ever since then, we’ve had a program with them. It’s been primarily in the Midwest for years, headquartered up in Wisconsin and down in Indiana. Ever since then, it has been with our local here, Local 63 in Chicago. It is funded through a grant with the Department of the Interior of Indian Affairs. They have a small training staff. They have two full time trainers and one administrative assistant. What they do is they go to tribes throughout the United States and tell them what’s available. All these different tribes from out west and out south and up north...tribes will send in people who think they want to do this and they come for the training program. They are put in hotels. All their meals are paid for. They attend a 12-week training program. In that 12 weeks, they go through a very intensive program. They learn about safety on the job. They are exposed at the different aspects of the tying rods, of building structural buildings. Welding, reading blue prints, cutting iron with a torch, burning we call it. They are exposed to all these different aspects of the craft. In 12 weeks, 40 hours a week training... And then they are assimilated into apprenticeship programs throughout the country of second year apprentices. So it’s a very good deal for the locals because they get an apprentice that already has a very, very high degree of classroom training and then a hands-on training.  Then it’s a deal for the contractors who hire them because they get somebody who is highly skilled at second year apprentice wages. So it has been a very successful program for forty years. For the last several years, and I’m talking 20 years or so, they’ve been having 100% placement, of all the candidates that come through. Right now we’re in an economic bust in the construction industry and we’re not able to place them. But still they certificates of training and when the economy does pick up and demand does pick up. These men and women will be available. 25:25 [I wanted to ask you about whether... When you first got a job or... Do guys play jokes on the workers when they first...] Well, yeah, that’s fairly typical. When a green guy comes on the job and you always ask him for the left handed monkey wrench and all that. Typical old stuff. They always... There’s always that, ball busting. A lot of that goes on. Sometimes a little merciless. A guy takes it a little bit too seriously and they see they’re getting to him. They don’t let up. We all have a story to tell, you know, about getting started. My first day on the job, the boss told me to go and get a matched set of chokers. And I was like, “ok”. I didn’t know what a choker was. I had no idea. So I asked someone else what a choker was and he said, “well, it’s like wire rope with an eye on the end of it .” So I said where are they and he said “they’re over in that box.” So it’s a big tool box, a gang box, they call it. I open it up and it’s just a snarl of all these wire rope chokers and they’re tied into each other and everything. “And he wants a matched set.” So I’m pulling these things out, pulling out this fairly large choker and it’s all kinked up. And its all stuck underneath all the other ones. It finally comes out and whips back and hits him right in the chops. I’m trying to hurry back to this guy because he’s kind of in a bind and he needs a matched set of chokers. I finally get it out, with a fat lip and I’m bleedin’ on my first day. And he looks at me and says, “Boy, you’re going to be one hell of an ironworker.” And I took it to heart. I was 18 and it kind of hurt my feelings and... And I made up my mind that I was going to be a good ironworker. And I ended up being the apprentice of the year by the time I graduated. Made this my life and since then I’ve worked as a foreman, a general foreman, a superintendent, and now I’ve been a business agent at my Local for 16 years. 27:25 [How did you move into that business agent job? What’s entailed with that? That’s a different than being on the job site.] Well, like I say, I started in 1970. I served in a four year apprenticeship. I was apprentice of the year. By that time, the bottom fell out in the Chicago out so I boomed out. I worked structural, tied rods, and machinery moving, anything I had to do. When work picked up back in Chicago, and I came back. I was a pretty seasoned ironworker. I quickly worked my way into a foreman position, kind of a job of a pusher. Then a general foreman, which means you ran several gangs. I ended up being superintendent of everyone working for a particular company. I had worked in those positions either as a general foreman or a superintendent for almost 25 years. But in 1986, something was happening in Chicago. That was the 100th anniversary of the Haymarket. I knew, just being a Chicagoan, I’ve heard the words, “Haymarket Riot” but I really didn’t know what it was about. I was working in a job downtown and the police was getting geared up in their riot gear. Wearing their helmets and all that. Then all these radicals, hippies, freaks, everybody came to Chicago. But also at the same  time, so was Lane Kirkland, president of the AFL-CIO, and all these other people, and Studs Terkel, who I really liked, and making speeches and everything. I had to find out what Haymarket was all about. So one day during lunch I was walking down Wabash and I actually went into the Kroch and Brentano Bookstore and there was a little red book there called “Haymarket Revisited” by a fellow named William J. Adelman. So it’s lunch time and I pick up the book and I start reading it. I find out that this is a labor issue. This is about unions. So I’m reading this book and by the time I come near the end of the book, they’re talking about the dedication of the martyrs’ monument in Waldheim Cemetery in 1892. It says that the speaker’s dais was a draped with the crimson banner of the Architectural Ironworkers Union of Chicago, Local #2. I’ve never heard of this group before. And I go, “what is this??” I’m local 63 and we were founded... We became Local 63 in 1903 and this is in 1892. So...I’m like blown away by reading what the Haymarket is really about. And my local was involved in that with the union. 30:02 So I’m looking at my watch and it’s 2 o’clock in the afternoon. I have half an hour for lunch. So I just pulled a “nooner” in a bookstore. And I’m the guy loving the chair and I’m the superintendent. So I made up my mind that I’m going to write a letter to the fellow who wrote the book to inquire more about this. So I see in the back in the book that he’s a professor at the University of Illinois. So I called the university...I just want to get his address so I can write him a letter. I called the university and I said, “Do you have a William J. Adelman there?” And she said, “Please hold.” She put me on hold and the music is playing... And then a guy picks up the phone and says, “Adelman.” And I’m like, holy cow. All I wanted was the guy’s address so I could write him a letter. I don’t know what to ask him. He ends up being the nicest guy in the world and I’m talking to him. He says, “You know, he says, I give tours every year...he says...the first Sunday in May. We do a tour of Haymarket Square and go to the courthouse where the trial and execution was. Then we go out to Waldheim Cemetery. I told him I would love to do that. And he said, “Well, you’re invited.” And I thanked him. I went on the tour with him and actually became very good friends with the guy. It was because of him and that little red book that I started studying labor history in 1986, the hundredth anniversary of Haymarket. [Yeah, Bill was a great guy.] He was the best. We eventually started organizing tours just for us. We’d have our apprentices and Bill would give us a tour of the Haymarket Square and the courthouse and we’d go out to Waldheim. And then we’d all go out for beer and pizza afterwards. Ended up being a good friend right up until he died. 31:43 [Did you ever have to go on strike?] Yeah... We’ve gone on strike for contract recently, with our fence erectors. We were on strike for about a week. That was maybe 4 years ago. We had to take our fence erectors out on strike. We work under a different contract. On the building side? The guys on the other contracts work on the buildings. We haven’t been on strike since 1968. But as a business agent, I have been on strike several times over nonunion contractors working on a union job. Let’s say that the job is primarily union, 70% union, something like that. A nonunion contractor will come in and do my phase of the work. We will go on strike. We will picket those jobs were recognition. [How often do you have those strikes? They’re  pretty localized, obviously.] They were pretty localized. They’re one job site and in my 16 years as a business agent, I found pretty much if I can’t get it done in 2-3 days, it’s not going to get done. I’ve had some pickets that have been up for six months. We picketed a particular development, the condominium tower or something like that. They were picketed for six months. We knew it was going to be a loser, but what we tried to do is put a little economic hurt on the developer...hopefully that in the next time he would choose an easier path. [But in general...in Chicago, employers have been pretty good at working with the ironworkers’ union.] Yeah, Chicago is still pretty much a union town. I talk to ironworkers all over the country and they say how fortunate we are to control as much...I don’t know if control is a good word...but to enjoy as much of the market as we do. But it’s through hard work. I’m not just saying our generation... I mean, we’re standing up against some pretty tall shoulders. Guys that did the work in the 1900s at the turn of the century. All through the hard times in the Depression. We are standing on their shoulders, and we’re holding on to what these guys fought for. Chicago is still in good strong union market in the construction industry. 34:17 [You separate from the employers do you ever have conflicts with other unions, building trades or jurisdictional disputes?] Unfortunately, the way the building trades were set up, going all the way back to Samuel Gompers’ vision, that everyone would have their particular craft and there would be peace in the industry. But technology is constantly changing and as things evolve in the construction industry, new technologies come on almost daily. There’s a lot of inner craft design that has nothing to do with any particular union. But there’s inner craft design where something was someone else’s job yesterday is all of a sudden is unitized into another piece of work. Now who’s job is it to install this? Quite often, work will be assigned to one craft who are reluctant to give it up, and rightfully so because they are looking out for jobs for their members. So jurisdictional arguments almost happen daily in the construction industry in Chicago. We have something set up called the Joint Board for the Settlement of Jurisdictional Disputes and it is usually the final step with business agents and business managers who cannot resolve a jurisdictional dispute. You would build a case pretty much the same way you would build a legal case. You build a case arguing why you believe this work belongs to your craft. And then you have to present it to an arbitrator. Then the arbitrator has three days to make a final decision, as to who is going to be awarded this work, retain the work, or the other craft will have to give it up in the end. Yes, unfortunately, jurisdiction is a daily reality in the construction industry. 36:16 [You said you started working in 1970 so you kind of came in the OSHA era.] Yeah, I was pre-OSHA. [Maybe you could comment a bit about how the changes you’ve seen about safety on the job during your time.] Incredible, Big changes. When I started, Chicago had one safety inspector and his name was Shut ‘em Down Schultz. Laughter. Schultz would come out and... I heard rumors that Schultz was taken care of and your job was good. I don’t know if any of that is true. But Shut ‘em Down Schultz would come on your job and you’d look around and if he deemed it unsafe, he would shut the job down. He was appointed, I think, by the City of  Chicago. That was it. That’s pretty much the extent of safety oversight. Contractors were more, at that time, more or less held in check by their insurance companies. If your workman’s comp rates were too high, you were out of business. So if there was any safety on the job, it was the contractor looking out out more than anybody else. He wanted to keep his insurance rates in check. We never wore body harnesses like they do today. We never had any kind of restraint, shock-absorbing restraint cables. We just wore belts and just a rote and a belt to tie it off to. It wouldn’t really do anything for you. You never fell off. We wore hard hats, but safety glasses weren’t mandatory. In a lot of places, they weren’t mandatory. We never wore any respirators in all kinds of environments. I worked a lot of asbestos-rich environments. No one ever really said anything about that. One of my first jobs as an apprentice was shaking out or distributing the asbestos blankets to the welder setting. The welders, if they were doing overhead welding, or if they had to lay down and work overhead. They would put this asbestos blanket over them. It was my job to shake out these blankets and put the asbestos blankets on the welders. And then shortly after that, this whole asbestos thing blew up. Asbestos was off the job...but you still have that if you work in older buildings. It took a long, long time for people got really aware of asbestos problems. 39:00 [Are the workers more aware of all the safety stuff now, more active, pro-active?] Oh absolutely, right now its not required by law but I’m thinking it will be. At the very least, contractors will demand it. All apprentices go through OSHA training and we’ve been doing it for quite a while. Apprentices go through OSHA training for years hazmat training with hazardous materials. It’s much safer now. Night and day. Yeah. Things were wide open. Jobs were dangerous. Construction is dangerous. You have to be very aware where you were all the time. There were open shafts on jobs...high rise open shafts. Quite often you’d get a floor where there were no safety cables at all, leading down. Maybe they were never put yet once you were high enough. You had to be constantly aware where you were and what you were doing. 40:03 [Were you ever injured on the job?] I’m one of those guys. I’ve had 18 broken bones in my life and I’ve never broken one on the job. I was on one job, gateway 3, and I just started. It was the day after Easter – the Monday after Easter in 1971. Over that weekend, they had jumped a skip, they call it. As a building goes, you have to raise the elevators up so they jumped the skips on the weekend. So they raised the elevators up and our shanty was on the 6th floor so usually we would walk up to 6th in the morning and change in our clothes and everything and then we would get on the man hoist, skip to the top of the building. We were one of the first loads to get on the skip. As we were getting on, the elevator started creeping down. The operating engineer tried to control it. He saw that he couldn’t control it so he says “guys were going down so bend our knees.” He closed the doors really quick. The operating engineer was really cool. This elevator fell six floors, all the way down. There are springs down at the bottom. You hit the springs. So we all bent our knees and hit the springs. Everybody made it pretty good. The elevator bounced up several feet. By this time, everyone fell over and when it came down the second time, everyone was flat on their back. A lot of guys got hurt. It  ended some careers. I was 19 years old and in good shape. I played sports in high school. I didn’t get hurt too bad. I messed up my back a little bit. To this day, I have back spasms. I didn’t get it as bad as some of the guys. That’s about the closest I got to getting hurt really bad. I got stitches and banged up but not much... Fortunately. Knock on wood. [It still seems like a high risk job compared to most occupations.] I tell you, every year we end up... It’s gotten a lot better but a guy will get a career ending injury. And something will happen to him. My particular local, last year we had two on the job fatalities. That was the worst year in a long time. Thank God that doesn’t happen all the time. Last year was exceptional. Two guys got killed on the job and that’s cause for alarm. I went to the hospital because I heard a guy got hurt. By the time I got to the hospital, he had already passed. His whole family was there. It was very hard. I’m their union rep... The wife kept calling me to find out what happened. Get to the bottom went out. It was a terrible accident. 42:46 [Are there a lot of customs that ironworkers have or aware of? I know there are topping off ceremonies they do and the Harley Davidson on the top of Trump Tower. That was Local 1.] No, no, no. That was my guys. Yeah. These guys took all their bikes up and had been working good several years for us. A lot of guys had some nice looking bikes. They took them up to the top of Trump Tower. They had the whole city beyond them and the Trump Tower and it was a beautiful photo. They probably shouldn’t have taken their bikes up there. If the general contractor would have found out.... It was a great photograph. Topping off ceremonies, as far as at the Evergreen Tree and the white beam. That’s our brother local, Local #1, and that’s their tradition and big ceremony with them. But also with us. When you get near the end of a job, you know that your job is going to be over. When you get to the top floor you start laying off. So you’re working with a bunch of guys, especially on a big job and you’re with these guys for almost a year, 9 months a year. You know guys are going to start getting laid off. You have a little celebration. 44:09 [Do guys in your union have special clothing that they wear or build things on their own? I noticed when I was walking through the Union Hall, for example, I saw some stuff from the American Indians had cut out of metal and some Indian flags from different nations. Are there articles of clothing, things like that that you’ve customized? Helmets or something like that?] Yeah, a lot of guys will wear the MSA hard hat that originally workers in the mills would wear these. They’re made out of fiberglass. They were better to work with in the mills in a lot of high heat because they wouldn’t melt like plastic one and they wouldn’t get too hot like a metal one. So the fiberglass hard hat was popular with ironworkers working in mills, primarily with American Bridge. So ironworkers throughout the country started to cut back. Quite often you’ll see iron workers wearing brown hard hats made out of fiberglass material. Made by a company called MSA. Anybody can buy these now with the other trades. But primarily you would see them in the ironworkers. Structural ironworkers, the iconic spud wrenches, they wear the belt with the spuds. They always used to say that you’d hear an ironworker before you see him because as they walk, the spuds would clang together. So you knew the ironworkers were  around on a structural job because of the spud wrenches. Everyone has to wear durable clothing. Obviously you can’t wear shorts on the job, things like that. You have to wear boots. Heavy jeans. Heavy jackets. Carhartt jackets that have been worn for many years. You shouldn’t wear clothing that is ragged or too baggy or anything like that. I know the fashion with a lot of younger guys is baggy jeans. The older guys, especially you’ll see apprentices and you’ll see them wearing baggy jeans and we’d tell ‘em, “that’s not wise because you’re going to get hung up on something that you might get hung up on and it might take you away.” So you should wear good fitting, durable clothing. If you’re smart. You got to get stung a couple of times before you get smart. 46:33 [One more thing and then if there’s something else you want to talk about, feel free but... A couple of times the issue of drinking has come up and you noticed from the DVD, my colleague, Jim Leary, stuck a few drinking stories into that DVD... You told me about another program that actually is anti-drinking program. Maybe could you make a comment on that. People have told a lot of stories about drinking. That’s true about a lot of blue collar trades. Its not unusual.] And it certainly was a part of the ironworker culture for many, many years. Were there contributory accidents? I mean... I don’t know but let’s say now that’s something we are aware of in the industry. We cannot tolerate it. The ironworkers initiated a program that’s probably close to ten years old called IMPACT. It’s a jointly managed between labor and management. It covers a lot of aspects of promoting the iron worker industry. We make sure that we have very a collective, highly skilled and viable workforce. One aspect of IMPACT is mandatory drug testing. So every union hall in the country, we cannot dispatch a man unless he has been IMPACT drug tested. Quite often on construction sites, each general contractor will demand that you also test on site. It has become a very, very big factor in the modern construction industry, drug testing. Especially the union sector, it is something we pride ourselves on, we’re a highly productive, skilled sober workforce. Even though guys might still go out and have a beer after work, it’s pretty much gone having a beer at lunch. That aspect of the craft has gone. If a fellow has too many beers at night and you come to work the next day, you probably would be sent home. And that would be just the alcohol part of it. As far as any other substance abuse, marijuana or whatever. That’s pretty much gone now. [I can’t imagine getting high and going to work.] It was there. In the 70s. Late 60s, early 70s. It was certainly there. Not just the ironworkers. It was there with all the crafts. I don’t deny it. There was a problem and it had to be addressed. I think it was successfully addressed. I go on construction sites pretty much every day and I don’t see anything close to any kind of evidence that that’s there. Ironworkers try to be at the forefront with that. With our IMPACT program. Our International Association and we’re very proud of it. They use that as a tool and an instrument when they go to promote our craft to union contractors, why they want to hire ironworkers. We want to be productive. We want to be highly skilled. We want to be reliable. And contractors are, after all, are our partners. We want a decent wage. We want decent working conditions. We want a safe worksite and the contractors as a quid pro quo they want a productive workforce that going to go out there and keep them in business. We try to work in partnership with them and  we understand what they need and they understand what we need. Hopefully, we try to meet there in the middle and give them product that they need and in turn they give us a decent living. 50:37 [One more thing that I thought about because you talked about teaching, obviously you have a strong sense of the industry or the labor industry in general. Are the members, the rank and file, do they have a strong sense of tradition? You’re active in promoting that maybe you could talk about that too and why you think it’s maybe important that they do know that.] I think it is important. In 1996, our international union celebrated their 100th anniversary. We had a convention in Las Vegas and everything. One of the commemoratives that was given out to the delegates of the convention was a history book. A member of our local union, Ray Robinson, worked together with William Adelman, and other people. They put together a history of the ironworkers union for the 100th anniversary, a 100th anniversary history book. The book proved to be so successful that Raymond Robinson, he was general vice president, and he was also the international director of apprenticeship training for the United States and Canada. He wanted to put together a history course around the book. He knew I was a history buff and he asked if I’d be interested. Since that time, we started teaching history to apprentice instructors, throughout the United States and Canada, since 1997, with the idea being that every apprentice instructor will take this history class at a training seminar that we hold once a year. They would go back and teach labor history to their apprentices. So the international association is actively pursuing that, that we teach labor history, not just the history of the ironworkers, but labor history, to our apprentices all throughout the United States and Canada. We’ve been doing that for 15 years now. [And the members, the guys and women who are showing up for this, are they enjoying it?]. Very much. I always have good classes whenever I teach. Everybody can’t believe that they never heard that before. I like to use a quote from Les Orear that I’ve heard several times. He says, “You know, your entire lives, you’ve learned the history of the Great White Man who own and run our country, and now you’re going to learn about the people who actually built it. So they enjoy it. [Anything else you want to talk about? I’m kind of out. We’ve done our hour and I think we’ve got a lot of information ] Well, good we can always do more. [Thanks a lot Rich. I really appreciate all this.] Okay, Buck! END: 52:14
Ironworkers;Sharon and Richard Sisson;1950;2011;[Sharon, why don’t you give me your full name.] Sharon Sisson. [And where were you born?] I was born in Chicago, right here. [Where abouts?] Michael Reese Hospital. [You grew up in what neighborhood?] Ahh, we grew up near what used to be Cabrini Green until I was about 2. Then my parents moved to Joliet. I lived there until I was older and moved out of the home. [Is that where you went to school...] Yes. [...started grade school and all?] Grade school and high None            school at Joliet. [Ok. We’ve got another ironworker here. Why don’t you tell me your name.] My name is Richard Sisson. I’m Sharon’s husband. I’ve been an ironworker since 1973. I started out in the apprenticeship. My grandfather’s admonition to... “Join the ironworkers, kid.” And ahh... Born in Chicago in 1950. Christmas Eve. I grew up in the Calvin Park neighborhood most of my childhood. Went to Berry Elementary School and Albert G. Lane Technical High School, which was an all-male high school at the time. I kind of honed my drafting skills that paid off later in life, as far as blue-print reading, I think as I developed into an ironworker. [Sure.] So... I went to college for three years, three different colleges in Chicago. But...ahh...I wound up going to a four year apprenticeship for my graduate studies, shall I say, and became a journeyman ironworker. And ahh...I still claim to be an ironworker to this day. 1:56 [How did you get into the ironworking, Sharon? You grew up in Joliet.] They had a sign at the unemployment office. [A sign at the unemployment office?] Laughter [What did it say?] They were looking for people to fill a test slot that they had. [Was that at the Joliet Local or...was it down...] No, it was at 63. I was married to a different ironworker at that time. And I went down there, took the test. It was a year between the time that I took the test until I get a job. [Yeah. And did you do... I’ve heard some of the workers talk about an indentured apprenticeship. Did you do something like that?] Hmm, no. It wasn’t indentured. I served four years in school and... [Yeah, oh, and then came out...] then came to apprenticeship school. So I started as an apprentice through the school program. Only the indentured guys were old guys. [Older guys, oh. You did the indentured?] R: I went to school. S: Well, he went to school too. R: Yeah... But, I never had stuff with one contractor for too long which was good for anybody and everybody who had to gain experience. You had to bounce around to...from employer to employer to really... And absorb all the intricacies of the business because it’s a vast field of knowledge that you gain over years of...if you want to... There are some people who just have blinders on and want to stay good at one thing and can’t even be good at that. But I chose to try and get as much knowledge about the trade that I could. S: You have a lot of options as apprentices. You had to go where the apprentice coordinator sends you. Although there were a good amount of apprentices that serve their entire four-year apprentice with one company. A company kept on working so they stayed. If you never got laid off, the apprentice coordinator never made you leave. I personally think that they serve so many months with, like he said, different contractors. It’s just to see everything. Otherwise, you have one guy that did curtain rods his entire life, doesn’t know anything about anything else. [Yeah. And you go through the apprenticeship program, you have to learn all of these different sets of skills, right?] S: Right, you get it in school but you get no hands on if you don’t move company to company. So, like I said, there was a good portion of guys that came through the apprentice program when I was a student there and they served their apprentice with one company doing one thing. 4:11 [Yeah, so your first job, what did you do?] S: I worked on skylights at O’Hare in the maintenance building. [Now was that a long...because I know some of those jobs at O’Hare run  seems like forever and they never go away.] Yeah, but... [Was that a short term...?] Yeah, four months I think. It was the middle of winter. We started I believe January 4th. Oh that’s fun. [And then after that, from O’Hare, where did you... Can you think of some places?] I worked at 340 Randolph. I worked at Block 57. I did a lot of work at the n avy yard, different other small jobs. I did a couple days doing some re-enforcement steel on the Sears Tower. I worked one day at the Hancock Center. There’s a lot of small buildings. I worked at the Board of Trade for a long time. We did all the emergency stairs at the Board of Trade. Worked at the Cook County Jail. One of the... Couple of the things that I never done was I never did rolling-shutter door and I never worked at a nuclear power plant. I did work in Zion. For a while we did some heavy lifts stuff there that was a million pounds lift we did once. I worked everywhere. R: Prudential too...Prudential...Navy Pier S: I worked a little at the Prudential Building, yeah, not a lot. [And on Navy Pier too when they were doing the re-....?] Yeah, did the Navy Pier. [Did you do the skeleton? The white skeleton?] No, I did curtain wall at Navy Pier. I didn’t work in that. 5:36 [Why don’t you explain a curtain wall a little bit because whoever hears this is going to want to know exactly what you mean. Tell me, they are big sheets of curtain, right? Of glass and window, is that right?] Well, the steel hangs on the outside of the building, on a clip system. That’s why it’s called a girder. The steel hangs down and the glass and the sash fits inside. There’s very little raw glass that we put in. It’s already sashed when it comes out. You put the structure up first. Steel that hangs from the clips. It all hangs from some kind of a clip. You put the steel up, then the sash goes in. [And you have to be hanging on the exterior wall...well, for the curtain you have to be on the outside...] Most of that is on the inside, once you put the sash in. I did work on the navy yard that we put stuff in on the outside, off a lift. That was worked on... The raw glass is usually glazier stuff on windows. [Meaning it is the work of the glazier union’s members.] If they’re using it on a staircase, it’s a baluster sort of thing. That is claimed as ironwork. [Did you work on the Apple Building?] No. [I know there was some that worked there. No, ok. Did you ever do any of that...those fancy stairways? Have you worked on some buildings down town here?] We did a large free-standing circular stair in a exercise club. I want to say it was a Bali’s Fitness. And it was somewhere near Shomberg. And that was all raw steel that just had a clear glazing over it so it was all... It was unpainted. So they just glazed the raw steel. They put that one it. I did another architectural stair at the library in Lake Zurich. That was another sort of a circular stair. All fancy stuff. Most of the stairs I worked on were just the steel stairs in emergency exits that you see. That’s all of our stuff. [Did you do any welding too? Some of the 63 people...] Oh, lots of welding. At the Cook County Jail. The bunks and all the stuff inside the bunk areas. All that welding, we did all that. The steel chase thing. The electricians messed up and when they came in and poured the concrete, they pumped the concrete through all the electrical chases... [Ohh...] And they wouldn’t pass the code unless you could put the wires inside. So concrete filled all that. The wires were stuck. So they had to put wire chase up outside between all the cells. So they had to weld a piece of channel out for the wire to go through and we did all that. Hung on all the doors there. That was a long-term job there. I worked on Division 10, Division 9...some of the rehab on Division 11.  8:20 [Out of all the kind of work that you’ve done as an ironworker, which was your favorite? What was... Is there some area...?] The jail job was my favorite job because it was kind of... This job here at caulkin [Referring to her work on Block 37 building in the Loop] wasn’t bad either because they kind of said, “Ok, this is what you have to do.” And they left us alone. You know? We could go and do what we had to do and that was that. R: She’s fearless when it comes to swing-stage work too. A lot of guys are afraid of it. She’s fearless when it comes to any kind of wire, all day, outside... S: I’d rather go out there swing-stage on the outside of a building than go in a man cage on the inside. [And why is that?] S: Because I’m claustrophobic. LAUGHTER And there are guys that don’t step on a swing... I was hired for a job when I worked for [?] on a building. Just for swing stage work. And the job I was in at Northwestern Hospital and the job that we did off the stage took us a couple of hours and the rigging took days because the building was already there. You had to come in and take it down, move it, walk it here and get up the stairs. Take it out. It was days we were rigging. And then we’d sit on the swing stage a couple of hours, did our thing and it was done. LAUGHTER That was fun too. 9:38 [Yeah. So, when did you start in the program?] In 85. [85. And at that point, hmm, were there many women in the apprenticeship program or starting in the market?] No. I was the only one in 85. There was, that I know of, one or two before me but they were no longer working. Hmm... I think her name was Cindy. She was an Indian lady. [Oh yeah, I heard about her.] There was a Black lady, Frances. They were before me, but they stopped working. [Were they in local 63?] Yes. [Yeah, I’ve seen pictures of them. Yes.] R: I’ve worked with both of them too. Cindy was ok. She could hold her own. But Frances would drive a guy nuts. S: That’s why I wondered when they said I was the first one that would get 25 years because I knew there were at least two women before me. And they said they don’t work any more so. They either withdrew so they didn’t get 25 years, I don’t know. And there were a few that came after me...way more after me than before, obviously. And there were several that I saw that started and stopped and dropped out. A couple, a young Black girl that paid a lot of money. I forget what her name was. She paid a lot of money at a private school to learn how to weld. And they sent her on a welding job and she was one of the first that went out as a welder. And she didn’t get a very good reception. And she ended up quittin’ and following some man somewhere. It was stupid. 11:05 [Yeah. And what kind of reception did you get when you started?] I don’t want to say that it was real warm either. It depends. And it was a large mix of people who didn’t like it. There were young guys and there were old guys. [So it didn’t matter. Just certain people.] Right. You never knew until you actually started working there. Some of it was real obvious that they didn’t appreciate you being there. Some of it was very subtle and some didn’t care. [Did some people, like, say things...] Oh yes. [...straight out?] Oh there was several comments made, you know. I was taking a job away from man with a family and I was thinking... My son’s father died when he was very young and my thought is... Why is my family worth less  than yours because I’m a woman and a mother. You know? Because you’re a man and a father, your family means more? I don’t think so. And this is what I did for a living, this is obviously not who I am. This is who he is. He is an ironworker. I don’t claim to be an ironworker. I did it as a living. This is what I am. 12:10 [Have you talked to other women ever about it in the profession?] Well, I was friends with a girl that moved out to Arizona. Her name was Loreen Wilson and she married a pipe fitter I believe, and followed him to Colorado or whatever. I don’t remember. But she married a pipefitter and she was not... She was an ironworker. She was an artist first before she came into the trade. I don’t know how she came. But she was very much an ironworker. We were working on a job together one time and I paint my nails and stuff like that. She had burned herself and was afraid to say anything...that... somebody would make fun of her. She ran a torch across her leg and she had her hand right there and she burned the whole top of her hand. It was bad. I said, “Loreen, you’ve got to go to the hospital!” And she said, “Oh no, because they might say something.” So what? And she had hands that were not real feminine. Someone came over to us at lunchtime and took a look at us and said, “Well, I guess we know who does all the work.” Excuse me, why does that mean anything? I don’t get it. Because I paint my nails, I don’t work? Made no sense to me but... [Did you find that it got easier over time and for other women? Obviously you were kind of a pioneer, a path breaker.] I don’t know whether it got easier. Some ignored it. And some women I consider more sheltered because they had a father in the business. So it’s just my opinion, mind you, that the men respected that more because they knew their father. I had nobody. There was nobody was looking out for me. GIGGLE [So right up to the present, there’s still a hostility towards these...?] Oh sure. [Really.] Well, there’s hostility more than just because I’m a female. There’s hostility because I make them tow the mark to what the books are. Did I ever break those rules? You betcha. And if I got caught, I got caught. Ok? When they got caught, there was all kinds of excuses as to why they should get away with that. It’s like, no. Wrong is wrong. And that’s just it. And they knew that if they were going to break those rules and I caught ‘em, I’m sorry but I’m going to say something because that’s just the way I’m made. And if they didn’t like it, because a lot of these jobs are run by men and they have their little clique. And they want to do what they want to do. And they think they should be able to do that. To this day that goes on. And there’s not a lot that the local can do about a lot of it. 14:33 [Yeah. So it’s both the contractors and some of the union people are not...?] Yup. [Supervisors?] Contractors think that one of the companies he work for, I own this business, I can do whatever I want. And it’s like, excuse me. You signed your name on that contract as well as I did. You need to hold up your end if you’re going to make me hold up mine. They don’t think they should have to. [So when you’re talking about rules, you’re talking about work rules...] Yes. [...and stuff on the job.] Yes. [So...] Before we had a 7 o’clock start and before even when we had the 7 o’clock start. It gets progressively earlier and earlier because when everybody starts at 7, the traffic is the same pattern as when everyone was starting at 8. So now  everyone wants to start at 6. Well, you know, our contract says that this is when the start time is. And if you start before that, you have to pay overtime. And many guys look the other way because they wanted to start early so they could get home early. So they just, you know, ignore that because they wanted to do what they wanted to do. I remember distinctly one job I showed up on, he was the superintendent. He said, “Just go out there and start at 7 o’clock. I don’t care.” You can’t do that either. And I got out of my car and said, “What’s this that we’re starting early, without getting paid for it?” And the steward came up to me and said, “If you don’t want to start at this time, then go get a different job.” Excuse me, what does it say? That’s just wrong. And they didn’t want a little girl telling them that they were wrong. That’s why they don’t like me. LAUGHTER. 16:03 [So that must be one of the worst parts of the job. What’s the best part for you?] The best part... [Yeah, what do you like about being an ironworker as an occupation?] I came from an office and restaurant background. The nice part is you get paid for what you work. When it’s lunch time, it’s lunch time. When it’s coffee break, it’s coffee break. And I came from an environment that that didn’t necessarily hold true. Sometimes you worked a lot that you didn’t get paid for it. Sometimes you didn’t get what you did. They took the money out for it but you would get in time. When you work in restaurants, you know, when there’s business, you can’t go have lunch because you have to do your stuff. So that was the best part. You were looking for something fun, right? LAUGHTER [No, I think that’s actually good. I mean, I would probably be the same way.] R: I think you appreciated the income it provided as well. I mean, you bought your own house. S: Well yeah, that’s why I said... R: You couldn’t have done that as a waitress. S: I worked as an ironworker. But that’s not who I am. R: Yeah. S: And you know, there’s a lot. And I had everything that those men have that probably lost it all. I paid for my own house. Some man didn’t divorce me, give me the house. I bought my own house. There was nothing that was ever given to me. I had two cars. I had a motorcycle. I had a house. I had a child and I had to pay for it all by myself. And there’s guys out there that have to work. I know a guy, he knows the same guy, who claimed at one time he had to work at least 8 hours overtime a week to make his...at the end of the month. I do not want to life like that. Where are those people now that the economy that... Some guys... I met the guy that was the foreman for Block 37 for the window crew over there, who worked for Arcadia. And I talked to a mutual friend that knew him. And he said for the last couple of years, that guy has only been working 2- 3 days a week. So what, they lose their car, their house and their motorcycle because they can’t make ends meet? R: You also have fun swearing like a truck driver. LAUGHTER S: Oh shut up. R: You can’t do that in a restaurant. You have offended a few pussy guys. She has over the years 18:17 Tell him about Joe. Joe. S: There was a guy at the . . . When we were working t the Navy yard, we were putting up this big gymnasium... [And which Naval yard was this?] Great Lakes. R: Right. S: And we’re putting up this big gymnasium and he had a guy... He was a  superintendent, once again, and he had a guy that came out from the shop. The shop was pretty much glazier orientated. So when they signed up with ironworkers local they got free ironworker cards for several people. One of these guys came in and he was a glazier. And because he worked for this company, he got an ironworker’s card and he was immediately the foreman. They set him up for the job. Once again he says, “Would you take him up with a lift and show him what to do?” And I said, “No. Stuff you buddy. You want the foreman to go up there and learn how to do something? You take his ass up there, because I’m not the foreman. I’m not going to tell him what to do.” So he didn’t like that. So during the course of that job, this guy comes to him at one point and said that he couldn’t work with me because when I went into a bar, sailors came running out of it. LAUGHTER. This was a guy who was alled... R: She also brought up...a level of femininity wherever she went because she liked to wear pink overalls. S: Pink overalls. R: She had pink gloves. And she liked a pink tool bucket so... S: Pink bucket... R: There was a little bit of femininity that she added... S: That wasn’t what it was for now. 19:42 R: One of the old guys... S: Terrorism, pure and simple. Sorry, that’s what it was... R: I think it was the painted names but...they gave it a nickname of Flowerbell down at the University of Chicago. I’ll carry your bucket, Flowerbell. S: It was Owen Maloney. I worked with Owen Maloney. R: You probably met him at the hall. He was an old timer. S: Do you know Owen Maloney? R: He had white hair and white eye brows. Oh, he could tell stories. S: He was my partner there for almost...well, I worked with Jim Amundson for a while. I remember I worked for Jim Armeson. R: The Cat. S: The problem with a lot of ways that men function that I don’t... Sorry, they’re slobs. They’ll throw their crap everywhere. Then at the end of the day, you’ve got to follow them around and pick all their shit up because that’s the way they work. I don’t work like that. So when I worked with this guy named Jim Amundson, we had a cart. And this building was odd because it had 400 different clips. Typically you don’t need that many. But the guy that designed it, he had a different clip for everything, man. Man he was pulling his hair out. So I got a box and I put this size bolt and then I got one for a different.... So everything was organized on this cart. It probably took me two hours to do that. And the guy I was working with, he comes up and says, “You know, I don’t believe they’re going to want to pay you for two hours for doing that crap.” I’m like, “Well, that depends.” By the end of the day, I saved them two hours by doing that. [Yeah.] And they don’t get it. Well, that was the same job I was working... Ol’ Maloney... and we were putting trim on this stairwell. Whenever there’s an edge or an opening where you can fall in, you had to tie off as a safety precaution. There was a gap, maybe 6-8 inches between the edge of the building and the curtain wall. We were putting trim on and we didn’t tie off. It was a little hole. It’s only this big. So the safety guy for the building came by. He says, “You have to tie off. You could fall in there.” I’m like, dude. My chest will catch me if I fall in that hole, no worries. LAUGHTER That was kinda funny...‘cause he went back and told him. And he said, “You have to put your harness on.” Ok...  21:41 [Did you see a lot of changes in safety while you were working? I mean, or did most of that come in before you got in.] No, it changed. It used to be a belt when I started. You only had a safety belt. And then it progressed into... You had to have a full body harness. People used to routinely tie off to a parameter cable and that was considered ok. And that progressed to where companies didn’t want that liability so they said, “No, you can’t tie off to that.” Because if you fall, and that parameter cable doesn’t hold you, they’re libel for that. So they tell you to tie off of the structure inside. They... When I first started union, you’d tie off on a ladder. You didn’t have to tie off on the boom lift. Now we have to and I think some of that is just really stupid because if you’re in a boom basket and the basket goes over and you’re tied off, you got no chance. Just, you know, no chance. And I don’t understand except for there’s a couple goofy people that don’t work properly in the first place. They’ll put a board up on a safety rail and stand there so now they’re way above safety railings. The rails are like a maze. And if they fall, you’re off the edge . [Yeah.] If you work inside the basket, I believe it’s unnecessary to have a harness and tie off. It’s actually a safety hazard to do that, unless you’re tying off to the structure, not the basket. But that’s not what they say. They actually have modified all the baskets now that they all have a tie off hook. And they say this is where you tie off to. [Yeah, so if the basket screws up or whatever...] Right. Or if you’re driving while you’re extended, which you are also not supposed to do and you hit a hole, you’re extended 20 feet in the air. The basket’s going to go over. [Right.] And you got no chance. [So you’re better off being tied to the building or...not tied at all.] Either tie it to the building or not tie it at off at all. We used to have a chance if something happens to your basket if you’re not tied off. [Yeah.] If you’re tied off to the basket, you’re connected. Where that basket goes, you go. And that usually means on top of you. 23:39 [Were you ever hurt on the job at all? A lot of these older guys, of course, worked in the pre-tie off era so almost all of them have stories about somebody they know who have died or seriously injured. Did you ever have any really bad injuries when you were working?] Nothing really bad. I still have all my toes and I still have all my fingers. R: You’d cry about a broken nail. S: I’ve never broke a nail. LAUGHTER They’d have to call an ambulance if I broke a nail. I do have a hip syndrome, which is congenital and it’s usually on women because it’s from having children. And I have a hip that doesn’t stay in its socket. And that came out a couple of times and it came out on the job somewhere, a couple times actually. One doctor that tried to fix it. You can’t fix it, dude. It is what it is, you know? And sometimes I can’t walk when it does that until it goes back where it belongs. Sometimes that takes 20 minutes or so. That’s happened a couple of times. But I’ve never really... R: Boy, do we get on the radio when you get hurt now. S: Oh my God. I would tell them...and this happened a couple of times at work. And I’m like, don’t tell anybody. And it was too late. They already said that I got hurt. And all these old guys come running up seven flights of stairs. I’m like, oh, I’m so embarrassed. It was bad because I knew it was nothing. [Yeah.] It’s happened before. I got something in my eye once or twice. Sent me some veterinary college. And it’s like no, you’re not sticking that in my eye, dude. GIGGLES The safety guy at Grainger did that when I had something in my eye. I wear  contact lenses. So when you get something in your eye, it’s irritating. But when you take the lens out, it’s 400 times worse. And I took my lens out and it takes a couple of minutes and then tears were running down my face. So I knew something was in there. And I went to the safety guy. Now he comes after me with this little metal something or other. He wants to stick this in my eye. I’m like, get the hell away from me. You’re not touching me with that. And he sent me some other place. The guy examined me and he wanted to send me back to the job. You know what happens when you only have vision in one eye. You lose your depth perception. And the guy knew that. And he says, “I’ve got to send you back to work.” And I’m like, “Dude, do you understand? I cannot see out of that eye.” And he says, “Due to insurance regulations, I have to send you back to work.” The poison pen came out on that one, I tell you. [Yeah.] They sent me back like that, in this impaired condition. I almost... And when I came back and I gave them my paperwork for Grainger. R: Was that the mongeese [?]... S: That was the mongeese letter. Yes it was. R: Because they saved that letter in corporate Grainger. S: I think... When I came back, Rick Oscarson was the foreman there and I gave him my paperwork. And I says, “The guy told me I have to come back to work. However, you have to understand, I only have vision in one eye. I’m a hazard to be on this job.” And I said, “But the guy told me I could not go home.” And I said, “Look, I’ll just go home and come back tomorrow and I’ll wear glasses for a couple of days and I’ll be fine.” And they wouldn’t let me go home. He said, “Here’s a garbage bag and a broom. Go pick up trash.” It’s on you dude. You want to re-injure me, that’s fine. Well, you know... I’m for it, whatever. So I go back, and it was lunch time at that time. Just before I got over to where we were going to have lunch, there was a guy hat had his tool bucket there and he had a sleaver bar sticking out the top of it. And I almost impaled myself on that bar. And I said, “That’s it.” I called a friend of mine and said that you need to come and get me. These people want me to work like this and this is not possible. So he was on his way to come and get me. And during the whole entire lunch time, my eye is just streaming because the doctor had not gotten whatever was in there out of it. I had to go to my own doctor after work and take care of it. But later on the company wrote me a letter and said thank you because they drug test you. Thank you for keeping a clean and safe work place by not being on drugs. They never once mentioned how was your injury? Did you heal ok? How are you? Not once. So I sent them a horrible letter and called them corporate weasels and mind geese. And the fact that they...I don’t remember exactly how it went but it was... They cared more about the almighty dollar and sending an injured worker back to work to possibly re-injure themself than to have just little common sense. 28:02 R: The corporate mongeese comment went all the way to the corporate headquarters at Grainger. It went all the way up to the Armond [?] hierarchy, the company we worked for in Minneapolis and it floated around here. It was quite a, actually a funny story that she nailed everyone, called all the corporate people mongeese . They deserved it. S: I sent a carbon copy... R: She also has a very sly way of surprising crews. On many occasions, people would  show up for work in the morning and there would be 20 gifts on the table for everybody on the job. Where did this come from? Nobody knew. Nobody could figure it out what it was. Nobody could point to who it was. S: That was Grainger too. They had a safety program there where if you’re company had no injuries for the entire month, you got some goofy gadget. A tape measure or something. And it was just that everybody wanted to win something. R: But we had so many people we were getting hurt. S: It didn’t matter, if it was just a hang nail. If you had an injury, you didn’t, you couldn’t win. And I said, well, that’s enough of this crap. So I got these little plastic flashlights and I printed up a label that said...that you possibly are able to win a safety award or some goofy crap like that. I put that on every flashlight and that basket of flashlights just showed up one day at the safety meeting. Nobody knew where they came from. I gave them... I was always giving stuff to the steward and said, you take care of this. And you know, it’s funny shit, what can I say. Valentine’s Day, I went around to every guy on the job and I said, “Do you want pink, yellow or red?” And they’re like, “What?” And they’re thinking that I’m going to hang some ladies panties in their car or something because that went around too. LAUGHTER. And I wouldn’t tell them what it was for. And some guys would not choose. They were terrified of what I was going to do. And all those guys... they were into it. Ok, I’ll take this color. And all it was... My son and I spent the night before Valentine’s Day, went to the florist and I got long stem roses, pink, yellow and red. Everybody chose, whoever chose their color, got their color and they got a little baggy of Hershey’s hugs and kisses, those candies, tied up to a flower the next day, there they were. At the end of the day, there was one guy that got half way home, turned around and came back because he forgot his rose. LAUGHTER That’s important to me. It meant that goofy stuff that I did was in fact appreciated. You never did shit like that. R: No. S: Sent the Easter bunny to a job a couple of times. LAUGHTER It was always his jobs. 30:30 R: Yeah, I was working out of town... LAUGHTER She chased me for ten years before I finally asked her to marry me but... I was working out of town, I was flying, and I had a toolbox with me. I’d lock my toolbox before I got to the airport. I get to the job and I get to the airport, on the other side. Got my toolbox. Showed up on time for the job. So you arrive in the toolbox. And there’s a pair of frilly panties in my toolbox. I had no idea how she got in there. LAUGHTER Because I had locked it. S: It helps to be friendly to the TSA people. R: To this day I still don’t know how she did it because I locked it. They weren’t in there when I brought it in to check in at the airline. I don’t know how she got them in there to this day. S: And what did you do with those panties? R: I used to put them on my windshield. S: What else did you do with those panties? R: I used to keep them in my coat pocket, wipe the sweat off my head. LAUGHTER R: I used to bring them out when the other guys were hanging around. What do you have... and I’d say, “It’s panties, somebody’s panties.” She had a lot of fun, trust me, she had a lot of fun. Someone would yell out something... Sharon, just stick it in. LAUGHTER S: That’s a guy thing. R: There would be a moment of silence. Her voice carries. “Stick it in. That’s not my job, that’s a guy’s job.” S: That’s a guy thing. GIGGLES R: You guys stick it  in. S: I don’t do that. R: Yeah, she does that a lot to the guys. S: Well, I’m doing this as a courtesy. It’s a guy’s thing. That’s right. R: Just stick it in. 32:03 [So how did you two hook up then? Did you work on the same job site or something?] S: A lot of jobs we worked together. But I met him long before that. He was married to someone else. [Oh my.] I don’t do wives. I don’t do girlfriends either. R: You know, she’d come to some of my jobs. I worked for a big company. We had big crews. She was one of these ironworkers that was always going back to the hall and get sent out for another job. Because she didn’t really last anywhere too long. Well, she had a few jobs that lasted but... A lot of people just go to the hall and come out again a lot. They just bounced around jobs... She had a lot of W2 forms every year. I was lucky if I only had two in a year. Usually I had just one W2 form for many years. S: But it was not job performance. It was always because... they’d... I’d...actually I considered they were afraid to have me on jobs because at least they knew what they were getting. Ok? And they knew that if they stepped over the line, I wasn’t going to like it. I actually had a foreman come to me one time and say, “You know, we’re going to work Saturday.” I was the steward on this job. He says, “We’re going to work Saturday but I don’t want those two apprentices to work. We’re bringing guys in from this other job.” And this company liked all of their foremen to work on Saturday so everyone else stayed home so their foremean could get all the overtime and they’d go from job to job doing that. So I said, “Well, you know, you do what you have to do, but you know I’m going to do what I have to do.” So they knew at that point that I’d call the hall. And I did. So they didn’t do it. Because if you get caught, it’s bad. They fine you and all kinds of terrible things. 33:41 The guy I mentioned earlier, he worked at the baseball park for a second company while he worked for this company. And that’s a no-no. You don’t do that. Especially when there’s guys sitting on the bench out of work. So now you’re actually taking money out of somebody’s mouth doing that. Because there’s a job obviously there. If you can work on Saturday and they need extra men, then there’s a job there. If you have to be that greedy, I feel sorry for you. And I called the hall. I was not quiet about it. I don’t care. It’s wrong. I’m not going to stand in the corner and whisper. “Those guys worked on Saturday.” I’ll tell you out loud. You know? And they’d like that...and my days were numbered after that in that company. They didn’t like that. But I wasn’t the only one either. There was Local 1 guys that called. They don’t like that crap either. If that guy had been as smart as me, he could have gotten away with it. I started to take a liking to her. She could do work that most any guy could do. And she could do more work than a lot of guys wanted to do. So she was always a good employee to have on a crew. And there was times when having a woman on your payroll was required. S: I got a lot of those jobs. R: ...with minority contract obligations with the federal government. S: But I came to work every day. R: It’s nice to have a female. That really counted, you know. You’re a good company. You’re hiring minorities. S: And they didn’t have to force you. You already had one. 35:18 [Did you ever think about becoming your own contractor? It seems like you could have opened some doors with your ironworker background.] It always scared me. R: The liability.  [I wouldn’t want to do it either.] R: It would take one job to go bad and... S: I have people that actually ask me, “Look, why don’t you...” You know, there’s... Before it was... they relaxed a lot of those rules. But it used to be that women couldn’t own a company because a lot of it was just their name. So if it was just their name so that they can get work, our hall said you can’t do that. The person that owns that company has to be an ironworker or actually work in the business. You can’t just put your wife’s name on the company and just do it. [Yeah.] Well, they relaxed all that so... It’s become to where you could do that. I’ve had guys that actually came up to me and said, “Would you start a business and have it run under your name and we’ll do it for you?” [I can imagine. I can see that.] And I’m like, “No...I don’t want to do that.” Because I’d be carrying the liability doing that. It always scared me, so I never did that. 36:18 [How do you feel about Local 63? Did it work for you? Were you happy with the local over the years? I mean, the ironworkers union in general? Do you think it’s a good union?] In general, yeah. I can’t say they’re all bad and they’re all nasty and they hate women. That’s not true. But there’s prejudice everywhere for everything. It’s not just women. And there are certain things, like I said, that I just didn’t like and... Those were my battles. That’s where I ran into trouble. I can deal with I don’t like you just because you’re a girl. It’s your problem dude, it ain’t my problem. And I didn’t like that I wasn’t always judged by what I could do. It’s who I was that judged me. Now we don’t want to... When it came time to lay people off, we want to lay her off because then we can do what we want when no one’s looking. That happened a lot. But as long as they needed my female hours, they kept me. They knew what they were going to get. I came to work every day. For the most part, I did what I was told. Did my little job, whatever it was that they gave me to do. And they knew if they were going to do something that wasn’t right and I knew about it, I was going to tell. You know? That’s how it is. A lot of guys they would hire, you never know what you’re going to get. So a lot of guys that have substance problems so you never know if they’re going to be there every day. And if they show up, are they even going to do anything. 37:49 I had a guy, the second job I worked on was a high rise at Ohio, right on the lake. It was right on a lake. It was section 8 housing. Across the street from that big white building with the cross x’s on it. Ohio and Grand, I think it was. But there was a guy that was booming into our local. He lived in Indiana. Belong to an Indiana local and they had no work so he came here to work on permit. And I was married to my other husband at that time who was an ironworker. So he came with me on this job to see if he could get on too and we could work for the same place. It made it convenient. Well, they didn’t need him. They didn’t really need me either, but since they put the order in, they had to take me. And this guy came in the door and they happened to know each other. The men... He came out with all these dirty words when he saw that I was going to work there. You know? And this is it. I don’t take this. And I went and called the apprentice coordinator. I said, “This is bullshit. I should not have to be subject to this. This is crap and somebody needs to deal with it.” Because my husband I was married to at the time, the steward, the general foreman and the foreman were all standing there when this guy did it. And  not one person said a thing. That was horrible. Nobody said anything. And the guy was drunk on top of it. But...praise the Lord. Lenny was a great guy. Leonard Japsik was the apprentice coordinator then and he went to the hall and he had the BA come out and he came out. They both talked to that guy. Told him that if they ever had a problem with him again, and if he doesn’t shut his mouth, he won’t ever work for 63 again. 39:22 So it wasn’t all bad. I had a problem with one of the business agent’s sons on a job. He had some things to say. I did the same thing. I called the apprentice coordinator, I was still an apprentice then. And I said, “This is crap. These guys cannot be allowed to do this.” Not that I wasn’t going to go to work and I was going to go in the corner and cry. That wasn’t the point. There’s other people they’re going to abuse by doing this. He said, “No, it can’t happen.” That guy served another year at the apprenticeship school for that. And I’m proud of those things because you know, you can’t... I don’t think I should be allowed to walk up to somebody and call them all these horrible names just because he was just some man being a nurse. It’s just wrong. It wasn’t all bad, but most of the protection I got was created by myself. If I didn’t look out for me, nobody else was going to. [Yeah.] But that was nice that they acknowledged that that was a problem. The guy from Indiana straightened out and never drank again on the job after that. He was never drunk again. He would lose his livelihood. They would have not let him work in 63 again. 40:31 R: She had an instance, too, one time at the Navy facility. Somebody wrote on one of the john walls “I’ve got the hots for the gal in the pink coveralls.” S: Some ironworker in the pink coveralls. R: Yeah. I brought it up to the contractor’s attention. He was aghast that that was going on so he immediately had it removed, wiped off. I mentioned to all the contractors to tell your men to quit writing on the walls about this female ironworker. It was not acceptable. But stuff like that will happen too, I mean...with any woman on the job, no matter what trade. The morons start writing stupid stuff. S: And I have to say... R: It’s usually the insecure ones with the small penises. I don’t know how to describe it. The small minds, small penises. They have to come up with that stuff to write on walls. 41:20 S: Like I said before. I like pink tools. My pink bucket. My pink bibs wasn’t just because I’m a girl. I did it on purpose. I’m sorry, it was terrorism. I can’t go up and say things to them. I can’t do the same things they can do. But I can do that, knowing that it’s going to bother them. But it didn’t affect my work and there was one job I worked on that I actually could not wear my pink bibs because I just got too much shit. I made a comment that it’s pretty bad that I have to adjust my clothing because you can’t handle it. And I worked with a guy on the CTA El tracks and I had... They were blue and they were blue in the front and they had flowers in the back. And this guy came up and said, “I can’t work with you.” And I’m like, “Excuse me?” “I can’t work with nobody with flowers on their pants.” What’s your problem, dude? It’s not mine. Some guy at O’Hare once made a comment that I worked with at O’Hare. And he said, “You know, really, this is opposite of that. He said, “You know, those bibs really don’t do anything for you.” And I was like, Jesus I didn’t know this was a fashion show here.  LAUGHTER I thought we were working here. R: Most guys wear bibs that have never seen a washing machine. S: It’s half a day Hathaway. LAUGHTER He’s a nice guy but... I’m not here to model for you dude. You know? Interesting. 42:40 [So what do you think about the labor movement right now in the United States?] S: What do you mean? [Well, I mean... Obviously it’s not in great shape these days.] S: No. [Where do you see the future of labor going?] It’s not in great shape and it’a all labor’s own fault. Sorry. Because as I said before, apathy wins the day. They had that big illegal alien thing in Grand Park where... Oh, we all don’t have jobs, ya da ya da. Doesn’t illegal still mean illegal? No it doesn’t. It means I’m documented now. I was born in this country and I can’t half of what those people get and they’re still bitching. It’s just wrong. And all of us are too busy to go to work to go demonstrate or, you know, do anything that’s going to be overt to people, you know? We’re too busy working. You now see that you have such a high unemployment. Now there’s people out there. But I think now that it might just be a little bit too late. But the pendulum will eventually have to swing the other way. It’ll be a long time before labor recovers from this. And, like I said, I think a lot of it is labor’s fault. I have to commend our hall. They do try to join some of the big marches. They have buses that go to DC and, you know, I had people sign up to go down there and march and show support for certain things. They do encourage voting on certain bills and they’ll explain stuff to you. They’re pretty good about that. But you have to get each individual person to come out and do that. Whereas... R: That’s part of being in the trades in this state too is our local will tell you who to vote for... Like Rod Blageovich. S: They don’t tell you to vote for him because they can’t. R: Well, who would you vote for, a case like that. Where’ s the least evil? I mean, there is none. I mean, we picked a bad guy. Whose fault is that? We’re our own worst enemies when it comes to politicians in office. They take our money and . . . S: Can I take that chance and say that’s right? [Yeah, go ahead.] 44:36 S: Like Richard Nixon, the only thing Rod Blageovich did wrong was that he got caught... [Yeah.] because they all do it. What was so horrible about what he did? The only thing that was so horrible was he got caught. He didn’t do anything different than anybody else did. Now everybody says how horrible that he was. What did he do that was so bad? He got caught with his hand in the cookie jar. That’s it. I don’t consider that he was really bad for labor, etc. [Yeah.] I don’t think he was. But he did get caught doing some shit he shouldn’t do. That’s the chance you take when you do that shit. Richard Nixon was the exact same way. He got caught. That was it. It’s the only thing. [Do you think that separate from politics or lobbying against illegal immigration...?] Come on, that’s my thing. 45:25 [But...well, obviously there’s big problems with organized labor that aren’t just illegal aliens. What do you think labor should do about... Do you think labor needs to be more active now, just in general, I mean... Shouldn’t we try to, I mean, it’s getting to be a smaller and  smaller percentage of the workforce. Do you think they should be out there trying to organize?] Labor should be doing the same thing that government should do and they should get rid of the 15,000 people above me that get paid six-figure incomes and take that money and maybe do something progressive with it. We have this goofy thing called I-Pac [Oh yeah, INAUDIBLE] When I was an apprentice, I had to sign the sheet because the apprentice coordinator made me sign it. After that, when it was up to me, I never signed it. I’m one of probably a dozen people in our hall who refuses to sign it. I said, “I’m sorry, but you can’t substantiate to me what you do with my money so I’m not signing.” The business manager did one time, send me something to try to substantiate where the money went. I can’t recall where he said that this happened but he said that they donated a certain amount to some labor movement this or that. And I said, “How much?” He said, “It’s only a few pennies.” And I looked it up and how much was it? It was over a million dollars. I said, “That’s not a few pennies and that’s why I’m not signing.” [Yeah.] You know? Everyone who signs one of those to have... It’s contractual anyway. I can’t stop them from taking the money. It’s in our contract that we will do that. But in order to satisfy the government, you have to sign a form that says it’s okay that they do that. I won’t because I don’t think it’s ok. [Yeah.] It’s wrong. But there’s way too much porkfat in government and in our own local government, in the local. You have people who make six figure incomes. What do they do for six figures? I don’t see it. Put a spud wrench in their hands. Put them out to work, you know? You don’t need that many vice presidents, etc. etc. You don’t. [Yeah.] R: We do have a big... Look at the big international magazine, there’s a list of about eight or nine vice presidents that are making big bucks. S: And nobody knows what they do. R: We know Eric Dean is headed up that ladder. He’s our pride and joy. He’ll be the next president someday. [Yeah, I’ve met him a few times.] R: He’ll be at the top of the food chain pretty soon, I think, but... Again, is that going to bring anything back to us? S: He has brought back stuff to us. He does do... He’s heavy into education...etc., in Washington. R: One of the last things, though, that we got cut was because he had his hand in the cookie jar in Washington. Ray Robertson. His daughter. There’s some bad news there. And there’s some guys who would just as soon ring his neck next time they see him, too, after what he did to our money in our international. S: It’s all the way down to the local level though. I mean, in our local, we have business agents and they all have a big gas-guzzling car, is that required? Ok, they need a car. Do they need to have an Escalade? I don’t think so. And that’s money that comes out of my pocket that pays for that. And I keep paying because you gotta put gas in it now. And yes I know that they sit in that car a lot but that doesn’t mean that they need a car that costs that much money or eats that much gas. And the whole gas thing goes two ways. You got the whole wasting oil thing plus it costs a lot of money to pay for a lot of gas-guzzling vehicles. And it’s not needed. [Yeah.] You know? Who was it that told me that they personally wanted me to know that they didn’t vote for that. I just talked with a guy recently. I don’t remember who it was but he said, “You know, I want you to know I voted...” Oh, it was when Roy Williams left to go to Washington, our local bought him a car. And somebody told me that they voted to not do that. They knew that I would appreciate that.  49:19 [Did you ever have to work like in the same little small work area on the job site?] Oh yes. R: Oh yes. She’s thrown stuff at me. She throws to hurt too when she gets mad at me. I drilled a hole in her leg one time, on accident, on purpose according to her. S: You didn’t belong on that lift. [You’re lucky he doesn’t have hot rivets any more. She’d throw one of those at you.] S: Well... R: Oh no, I dare not throw at her. I just duck. LAUGHTER S: I consider... He tries to protect his maleness. Ok? This is just, once again, my view. But on the job, he was the superintendent? The guy that...hmm...was above him came to the job and said, “I want an anchor here, here and here, and every so many inches.” And when that guy left the job, the foreman was running the job said, “We’re going to put it in every 15 inches or whatever...” And I’m like, “But he just said...” “That’s what we’re doing.” Ok, I just work here. So that’s what I did. When he came back later for follow up, he saw that that’s not the proper thing that the big boss wanted, wasn’t done. So he gets on my lift. He’s going to go up there and do it himself. It’s like... No, you go over there and yell at the foreman who clearly counter-manded the order...but he wouldn’t do that. Not go over there and say something to the guy. So he drives the lift over the cord on the drill motor. Flips out and it embeds itself in my thigh. R: I’m sorry. R: Yeah, we’ve been together on a few jobs. S: We worked at Grainger and I was his partner in Grainger. He was going to do the welding because the guy that was running that job, you had to be certified in order to get on that job, whether you were going to weld or not. So I’m like, okay, I went to the hall and re-upped my papers because I knew that they were going to send me to this job. And this guy didn’t want me on the job. I showed up and he was pissed off because I had welding papers. Matter of fact, he was one of the instructors at the time who tried to flunk my plate so I swapped mine with someone else. He didn’t like it. He peed and said, “Oh no, that’s no good.” So I went to another guy who I knew they were going to pass this and swapped plates with me. So he did. He took his plate and he passed him, just like that. So it wasn’t that it was bad. It was that it was mine. So I passed and I showed up on his job and he goes, “Well, you’re not welding here.” I was wondering if he was going to do the welding. He had to go do something. He had a radio in the bucket. Someone called him for some shit and I said, “What do you want me to say if somebody calls you?” “Just tell them I’m not here.” So some guy calls him. I got on the radio and said “He’s busy right now. Can I take a message?” Oh my God. Every guy that heard that said, “I wish I had a secretary too.” And that’s only because it was a girl that answered the radio. Because other guys did that for each other all the time and nobody said shit. R: We did not broadcast that we were a thing either. Although...the calendar. Someone made a calendar of me. S: I took lots of candid pictures, okay? LAUGHTER S: It was 4 o’clock. R: It was somewhat risqué. S: It was an art project for someone else because I did a lot of photography at the time and I got cameras and film from frickin’...a lot of film from Kodak to test. And I did test shots and pasted up boards and sent them into them and told them what I thought of it. And one of the representatives said, “You should get in on this project. You got two weeks. Just do something.” What am I going to do? She says, “Take some pictures and make a calendar,” she says. That’ll be good enough. And so I did. I took pictures of him and I made this calendar and I submitted it. And I showed it to him.  He thought it was kinda funny. And I asked him...and he said, “You can show any woman you want this calendar.” I was friends with one of the girls in the office where he worked. So I sent it to her and I told her clearly that it wasn’t for everybody to look at. And I said, “When you’re done with it, put it in interoffice envelop and send it to him on the job because I thought it would be funny for him to see it at work. And she did that and it came out to the job. He looks at it and stuffs it back into the envelope, runs out and puts it in his car. One of his buddies broke in his car to see what it was. I didn’t show it to anybody. But his buddy did. R: There was these stuffed vagina... S: My vagina puppet? LAUGHTER R: Was that down on Block 20? S: Navy Pier and you were working somewhere on Michigan Avenue when I made him a... R: Football shirt. S: Oh, I bought that but I made him a... He was working on Michigan Avenue and he always would talk about the expensive panty hose on Michigan Avenue. I made him a Michigan Avenue survival kit. I don’t even remember what was in it, but it was hilarious. All kinds of these... R: She was always doing that... S: You’ve got flowers at work all the time and all the girls thought that it was for them and they’d look at it and they wondered if it was for him. It was always funny. [Yeah.] And I’m sure that every guy on the job was jealous. But that’s how we came out. Nobody knew where any of it was from at the time because there was nobody who connected both of us together. It was years before anyone knew that. R: She’s very coy. Very... S: I won’t take no shit from anybody for that, ya know? I work... R: She enjoyed the feedback she got later on from one of my embarrassing moments in front of others. S: Easter Bunny came and visited him at work. [On the job site?] Yeah. R: On the job. And it was a guy too, dressed up as Easter Bunny because the girls were all busy I guess. S: Brought his little grandson or something. Oh yeah. [No singing telegrams ever?] S: I know where to get a singing telegram but I used the messenger service down town to deliver stuff. And I used to set my computer to send a fax to the office every now and then that said, “This is a reminder for Richard Sisson for his massage appointment at 5:15 today.” LAUGHTER. And they had to call him at work and tell him. R: She used to send poetry to me through the receptionist at the hotel I was staying at. She’d make them read them... S: I didn’t do it. You did it. R: Well, they read them to me. S: He forced these people to read these poems. Now everybody except one girl...who was...I don’t know...some anti-Christ or something. Everybody thought it was hilarious. They used to fight over who was going to take my phone call to write the poem down. They did. And this one person complained because it was rather risqué poetry. And she complained that, you know, this was horrible and they shouldn’t be subjected to that. And she wasn’t. If she didn’t want to listen to it, she could have gave the phone to someone else to take the message. Whatever. But when he’d get the message, he’d make them read it. That wasn’t too nice but... And when it was all over, he came back home, and I sent them a box of candy, telling them thanks, you know, for participating. It was fun. 56:14 [Did you two ever go on the road together to another job site? Sounds like you travelled.] S: He travelled, I didn’t. [Because you had kids at home?] S: No, I just never had that opportunity. And I went as far as Indiana and the mills... Oh, the guy there. Shall I... We were working with a buddy that I rented from at the time and he lived next door. Work was  really slow here. And so he said, “Let’s go out to Indiana and see if we could get a job at the mills. So, he’d go out there and you go to a related... They sent out jobs differently there. The steward comes in from the job and brings a job order in...as opposed to here, the business agent hands out work. So we said, “Ok. We’ll give it a shot.” So we go out there. You’ve got several hundred people milling around this big auditorium. And the stewards would come in to collect workers. And a guy came in and he said he needed five guys. He said it’s on a scaffold and it’s a little welding, not a big deal. There is no overtime. Chuck looked at me and I was like, I just want a job, man. I don’t need overtime. So we raised our hands. Well, when you’re in a hall like that, you know what you’re getting. So they’re like, ok, you guys... So we go out in the hallway. And this man was the treasurer’s brother. He looked at me and he looked at my buddy and looked at me again. He says, “I can’t hire you. I can’t hire no women.” My hair was on fire. I mean, you actually said that? That actually came out of your mouth, dude? “I can’t hire you because you’re a woman.” That’s it, this is over. And my buddy’s like, “Oh, no...come on. Don’t do nothing.” But this is wrong! And I went in there and I complained to the business agent and I called my hall. I told them this is bullshit that they treat us like that. We treat their workers fine and then we come here and they should do that? Well, there was a little guy who heard all this was going on. While I was talking to the BA, he came up to me and said, “Do you all want to work?” We just want a job, dude. “Come on, no overtime. We’ll get you on for 8 hours.” Okay. First day we worked 14 hours. Then we worked at least 12 hours every day after that. Taking a big turbine out of a building so they could re-fit it. And they estimated that this job would take ten days. My buddy and I, and a couple of their guys, worked on this and the turbine was out on the flatbed in a day. They’re like, “We’ve never had anybody from 63 that could really work.” We did a bunch of welding steel plates off to big . . They’d wear out, big tumblers like... So there were wear holes and rust and stuff so we had to weld plates over it to refinish it and I worked with the little guy in there. He’d work on one side and I’d work on the other and we just passed the welding stinger back and forth. And at the end of the job, the guy says, “I never knew a woman that could weld.” Okay fine. But they were all pretty swell. 59:00 There was one guy there named Mario and he was married and he had kids. And the guy obviously had the hots for me. He was asking me to go out with him throughout most of the beginning of the job. And I was just hot, I’m like...this guy. I don’t, you know... Because he had a wife and I knew it and now he’s propositioning? I didn’t like that. And he used to drip water on me from up above, little drops of water. This is a man with little children. And I said that’s it. I’m going to put a frickin’ snake in his lunch box. Once again, my buddy said, “Oh, God... Come on. We’re not home! You can’t do this shit!” Mike, this guy, he needs to be taught a lesson. I walked into the shanty one night and I got a big glass of water out of the water cooler and threw it on him. And I said, “Now leave me the hell alone.” And he wouldn’t left me alone. So I went to the pet store that night and they didn’t have a snake cheap enough. But they did have a spider. A ginormous tarantula like this. And they wanted $25 for it. And I told the lady, “I’ll give you $15 cash and I’ll bring it back tomorrow and you give me $10 back.” And she said, “Ok. Do you want to rent my spider?” Yeah, I only need it for a day. So ok, here.  So I take the spider. Everybody leaves the shanty, I dump it in the guy’s lunch box. It was kind of cool so they don’t move really fast. And we came in at coffee time and everybody’s sitting around, playing cards and shit. Those guys over in the corner, everybody knew except his, everybody knew. So they’re all kind of watching out the corner of their eye. And he flips up the top of his lunch box and he reaches in without looking. And everyone’s going “AAA” (DEEP BREATH). You could feel the sides of the trailer just suck in from everybody going “AAA”, afraid he’s going to bring this spider out, right? He brings out his sandwich and eats his sandwich. And after a while he gets his chips. Then he drags the lunch box over. He has to look in it for something. There’s the spider in there. I swear to God the guy wet his pants. He jumped up, kicked the lunch box across the floor. It stops at my feet and I’m like, “What the hell’s wrong with you?” And I looked in there and...”There’s...there’s...there’s a spider in there!” I reach in and picked out the tarantula. “It’s just a little ol’ hairy spider.” I swear to God he peed his pants. He never messed with me again. [Yeah.] I put it in a baggy, put some holes in it and I took it back to the pet shop. [Great story.] Nobody else did stupid shit like that. Come on... [It sounds like you kept the work place lively.] R: She did. It was a good reason to have her around because... Something would happen always somewhere to make it interesting. 1:01:30 R: Another time at another job, some guy grabbed her ass in the elevator in front of people. And that was uncalled for. And she told me and I remember telling the operator. And the operator kept his eye out for her too. To make sure... S: He wanted to go to the superintendent and have the guy thrown off the job and I would not tell him who it was. I said I don’t need you to fight my battles for me. I will get him on my own. And we were in the elevator one time and it was the operator, myself and this guy. I don’t even remember what I told him... But the operator knew and this guy was like about this big. And I said, “If you ever tough me again, you’re not going to live to talk about it.’ [Yeah.] The operator asked me, “Why don’t you just tell your husband? He would have had him kicked off the job.” I says, “This is way better.” LAUGHTER Make him work here and have to look at me every day. I’m just evil, what can I say? [It sounds like you just did the right thing to me.] Don’t mess. Don’t ask the question if you don’t want the answer. If you really don’t want to know, don’t ask because I’m not going to not tell. A lot of people aren’t smart enough to understand that if they really don’t want to know they shouldn’t be asking...because I’m not going to put sugar on it first. There’s no pudding before I give you the right answer. You’re just going to get it. Many don’t do that. Some aren’t appreciative of equality. [Well, you’re just a straight shooter and I’m sure that’s hard, especially coming from a woman for some people.] Correct. There’s no other way to be in our environment, okay? There’s other where you could beat around the bush and its okay and exactly...sometimes you have to do that. But not here. 1:03:15 R: The US Army pissed her off recently. Her son was over in Colorado. What was that all about? S: Well, that was before he went off to Iraq. They did hand to hand combat training, live hand to hand combat training in the desert in California. Some guy was jacking around with my son and got stabbed over it. They trained them until its reflexive to do what they  need to do. And the guy got stabbed. They were going to have him thrown in Leavenworth for attempted murder and shit but I said, “Go to JAG. You didn’t do it. You didn’t attempt to kill a guy. He got in the way. He was jacking around, doing shit he shouldn’t have been doing. Go to jail.” So they got three witnesses that said it was the other guy’s fault. But until that part happened, the guy that was the commander said, “Well, you know, I’m going to call your mother.” And he clearly said, “Do not call my mother. Do not call her.” And they did anyway. [Uh oh.] And I’m like, “Excuse me. What the hell do you want me to do? I’m in Chicago. He’s there. Do you want me to send him a spanking in the mail?” Come on. Get real. The guy was stupid. He asks my son, “Why was your mother’s name different than yours?” That’s just dumb, isn’t it? [Yeah, I would say in this day and age, that’s really stupid.] Yeah, well... [There must be a lot of people going through the army and stuff with different names.] R: They don’t look for the Mensa, Mensa people. S: If you went to college, you’re an officer. It doesn’t mean, yeah, you’re an officer. It doesn’t mean you’re really an officer. You just get that commission walking in the door because you went to college and it doesn’t mean you have to be smart because you don’t really have to be smart to get through college. Sorry if you went to college. [Yeah, well...] A guy once told me... [Well, you are right. I mean, I always say my grandfather went through 8th grade and he’s smarter. I taught college and I always said my grandfather was smarter than most of the students when they graduated.] S: My mother graduated in 8th grade in 6th grade and that’s as far as she went. I would never had said that she was stupid. [Yeah, that’s how I feel about my grandparents. They’re smarter than most college students I taught.] S: It’s just, you know... We have an incident going on now. They’re not getting mail. It’s been six weeks now since he’s gotten mail. In fact, it might even be more than that. And I tried calling the base. I talked with someone. I got no satisfaction. I said, “Dude. I am not above getting on an airplane and coming out to see the base commander. Do you understand me? I will do that if I have to.” My brother said, “Go see your congressman first, before you do that.” So we’re going that way this time. And we’ll see what we get out of that. But no, I truly am not adverse to doing that. It puts him in a strange position though. When I complain to the congressman, she wanted to know his name, the aide. And I said, “I’m not telling you...” She’s like, “What?” I said, “He doesn’t need any more shit than he’s already got. Don’t you get it?” You know, they’ll know who it is and he will have more shit than he has now. It’s already a shit hole that he has to work in. It’s terrible out there, absolutely terrible. The picture of him, my favorite picture to come out because I’m his mother, it’s cute to me. He’s sitting on the side of a mountain, sitting on top of a 55 gallon drum with a toilet seat on it. That’s their bathroom. And that’s cute for me because I’m his mother but...it was meant to portray exactly what they have, to get the conditions, correct. And you know, people see that and say, “Oh my God.” Well, they don’t have any showers, no bathrooms, nothing like that. Now they get no food and no mail? He would go sometimes 2-3 days without eating. He’s in a very small cop [?] and they have hot food every other day and if they’re out on a mission when they serve the food, they don’t get no food. So of course, I send him food. Most of what I send is stuff to eat. Now he doesn’t get that. He’s got to have 15 boxes sitting in Kandahar or  somewhere that they’re not delivering. He’ll need a whole [?], just for himself. R: She’s retired now so she’s got time to put the boxes together. She’s got a basket at Jewel to collect food for anybody who wants to donate food for his battalion. She’s got time to sew him quilts. She’s making quilts for each of the guys in his little battalion. She has three of them made so far. S: His squad, I would supply always... When he was in Iraq, I would supply his squad. And I supplied his... When he started out, there was only four. And they sent him to Iraq or to Afghanistan, I made a quilt for him that was supposed to be for his sleeping bag. It was not very big, probably the size of this table. It had dragons on it. It was kind of cool. And his girlfriend gave him a little special little pillow and he took that on the airplane with him. Now he’s on an airplane... And I said, “Son you were on the airplane with all the army guys with your blankie and your pillow?” And he said, “Yeah. Why?” I said, “Didn’t they kid you?” And he says, “They wouldn’t dare. Besides that, they all want one.” So he had four guys to start with and I said, “Ok. I’ll make your guys each one. So one guy already got one. I had sent it because it took so long. It’s not that it costs a lot but there’s a lot that you put into it. And I’d hate for it to get lost in the mail or stolen. So I told him I’m not sending any more. I’ll make them and when you come home on tour leave, I’ll give them to you and you can take them back and he’s ok with that. But he’s up to six guys now. Mama sews until 3 o’clock in the morning. [So tell me about these pictures.] Those are my son. [These are your son?] Yes. [Are both of them from overseas?] Yes. He’s in Afghanistan in both of these pictures. [How long has he been over there?] He left June 1st. [And how long is he going to have to stay or doesn’t he know?] A year. He’s due home for Thanksgiving for his mid-tour leave. And he’s slated to come back on the 5th or 6th of June of 2012, but he’s talking that they might come home a little earlier. They don’t’ know. [As they draw down troops or...?] Allegedly. Well, they tell you they’re drawing down troops, but being a mother of someone that’s there, I kind of know that the guys that are coming back were already slated to come back. So they’re not really sending extra people back. It’s those that were already slated but they’re not telling you that. They also don’t tell you the rules of engagement which are pretty horrible too. If some Afghanistan fighter shoots at them and then throws... He’s had buddies standing next to him that have died right there next to him. The last one was a guy that took a couple in the throat and bled out right there. And as soon as the guy got hit by bullets, the Afghani drops the gun and puts his hands up and at that point, they can’t touch him. It’s just wrong. You know? They call the Afghani police. And the police arrest the guy and they take him in. Then the army confiscates the weapon and they turn that over to the Afghani police and three weeks later, they face that same guy with that same gun. Because somebody from that village comes in and vouches for that guy and they let him go. Why are we there? If that’s what’s going on? You know. I have found... Now you sound like you already knew that, but I found that the average person on the street doesn’t know that that’s what happens. And that’s pretty bad. And there’s nothing that these boots on the ground troops can do about it. They have to sit there and let them shoot at them basically. And they can’t shoot anybody else either. They have to be shot at first. He was on the phone with me one time. It was kind of funny. He was talking to me on the phone while he was in the guard station.  And they took fire and he’s like, “I gotta go!” LAUGHTER. That’s kind of funny. R: It’s something, though, to listen to his voice change, the way he’s aged. Because when he started out in the army, just a punk. And now...he’s a man with kills under his belt and received... S: He’s not happy about that. R: He’s fought a war and he’s been in the battles now. He’s been blown up. And he’s stepped on IUDs that should have gone out that didn’t’ go off. So he’s a cat with 9 lives and he’s used up about 7 of them. S: He’s got a hole in his head from Iraq. He got a Purple Heart from... R: He’s grown up so much. I hope he can leave all that stuff there when he comes home, and not suffer the syndrome. [Yeah.] S: He definitely isn’t proud of the fact that he’s had to kill people. But he does his job. [How long has he been in the service?] Since he was 17. [And he’s how old now?] 24. [That’s a long stint.] S: And I hope he stays in because there’s no work here for him. He’ll go through phases of... At first he’ll say I had, you know, because it’s no different there than it is out here. There’s bullshit that slides downhill. Nobody likes their boss and it’s the same there. He gets shit all the time and he doesn’t like it. He does have a little of his mama in him. You know... He doesn’t know how to deal with that yet. So he’ll say, “I’m getting out. This is it.” When it’s time next year, it gets June of 2012, when he’s due to get out...he’ll say, “I’m leaving and that’s it.” And then he’ll calm down and later on he’ll say he’ll just re-class, which means he’ll go from the job he’s doing now to a different job or he’ll join the Coast Guard or... He wants to join the park service. It doesn’t pay a lot, but he likes it. [The National Park Service?] Yes, because his federal pension will continue then. [Oh sure...] So at least he’s thinking. You know? 1:12:44 R: And it was kinda cute here last week. He mentioned that he put some of the ironworkers skills he learned from his mother to use. They were putting another barracks up for winter use. He was actually doing some welding that he picked up, learned from her. S: I took him to a few jobs when I was a boss on some of the jobs, doing some curtain wall. I took him to work with me and he brought his skate board. The big buildings that were empty. We were doing rehab so he would skate board around. He met a lot of guys. He was very small and sheltered when I took him to his first union meeting, I wanna say he was two. And he had never seen a Black person before because we lived in Indiana. Ain’t lot of Black people there. And I brought him to the union hall. And one of the guys I went to school with, apprenticeship school with was Black. His name was Jefferson Beatty. We’re buddies. And I came up to say hello to Jeff and I introduced him to my son. His eyes got really big and he reached down to touched Jeff. He says, “Is he chocolate?” LAUGHTER. It was really cute, you had to be there. He’d never seen a Black guy before. Jeff’s really Black too. It’s funny. And he carries enough C4 and bullets for his whole entire squad because he’s terrified he’ll run out of bullets. Scared to death. [I don’t blame him.] Typically, they don’t carry that much crap, but he does. But he’s in explosives so he...is supposed to... He’s in route clearance so he’s supposed to find the IUDs before we run over them. And now they pulled him off of road clearance and they don’t do that anymore. He’s stepped on two IUDs so far that did not go off because they weren’t properly armed. He was blown up in Iraq. His Humvee got blown up and he laid there for I think he said 4-5 hours. Because they said, “Well, when that happens and they blow your Humvee up, they  come right out to get you.” And he said, “No...” What?” He said, “No. That’s why they blow you up. It’s just a big diversion to get more troops to come so they can pick them off.” So they have to wait until they clear the area. He had a big hole in his head. They took him to Mosa . . . [?] and fixed him up. He had problems from that for a long time. He probably still will have... I found it amazing. No one called and told his mommy. Now that’s when Captain Gleason should have called – but they didn’t. 1:15:05 [Well, hey. This has been a great interview. Do either of you want to add any final comments? And then I need to take a couple of shots of you guys.] S: Yeah, we could have a couple of shots. LAUGHTER Wouldn’t you go for that? I think Billy Goat’s is down the street. No, I don’t. A guy asked me that one time because I don’t smoke and I really don’t drink. And he says, “You don’t smoke, you don’t drink. I don’t hear you swear much. How did you get in this local?” Just lucky, I guess. Because I don’t have a father... [You’re the first one I’ve had that doesn’t drink, of all the interviews. But they all talk about how the drinking was a lot heavier in the old days.] S: Yeah, they used to do it right on the job. R: It’s no fun anymore. Oh my God. My kids are... S: That was before the days of drug and alcohol testing. [Yeah.] R: My union sleeps with the contractors so much. That’s one thing that I don.t like. That’s why the safety is so rampant now. The safety... You’re supposed to sign that you read this book when you sign your W2 forms. S: That was that one job. R: You get the safety book and they put you to work an hour later. But it would take 3 days to read the safety book but you got to sign off on it. I was like, how does this work? S: Who wouldn’t do that? R: You wouldn’t do it, I wouldn’t do it. S: That’s shit. It’s horseshit. R: They force you to sign the acknowledgement of taking a safety book and reading it and yet... They did not give you... Take it home and read it. S: Who got burned with that safety book? R: Why is this happening? There’s no backing from our own people on that. Well, you gotta read it I guess. S: That was the only thing that changed on safety. Most every job, that was 100% safety glasses all the time. Doesn’t matter if you’re in a hazardous area or not. And just as that was transitioning, I worked for the guy at Grainger that didn’t want me on his job. And I was working, I had my glasses hanging around my neck, but I didn’t have them on because I didn’t deem it to be in an unsafe place that I needed them. And he came up and started ripping me, saying that he was going to write me up because I needed my glasses on. I said, “I don’t need them on.” And he said, “It’s in this handbook. You have to have them on.” It is not in the handbook. “Yes it is!” Do you want to bet your paycheck on that? “It’s in the handbook.” The superintendent happened to be in the shanty and he started laughing because he knew it was not in the handbook that I signed. It was in the ones after that but it wasn’t in mine. Sorry dude, I can’t be held accountable for something you didn’t tell me. 1:17:29 R: There was a job where a contractor had this big display board. And all the contractors’ men could be entered into a drawing once a month. S: That was Grainger, for the flashlights. R: For a flashlight, tape measure, pliers, a wrench. S: Right. Some goofy little thing. R: Because we had so many men... Someone is always getting hurt so we never got our  names to the pool. One day we were sitting there and having coffee, about ten of us, were sitting on scaffolds. Here’s this big display case with plexiglass and tools inside of it. And there’s this one kid... We’re all talking about, lamenting, how we’ll never win anything. And he’s looking at that board... All of a sudden he jumps up and runs over the board, smashes the plexiglass, grabs all the tools out of there and says, “Look – we won! We won!” After that, the contractor only put pictures of the tools up that people could win. He never put the pictures of tools up... S: That was Chainsaw. That was the job that they all got the little flashlights. It was the one. You’re never going to win. R: We never won a prize. S: It’s just not right. R: Look, we won now. S: That was the glazing outfit that tried to use the 10 hour OSCHA class book that you get as their safety handbook. And there’s a page in the back that says that you read it and sign it. So he gives me the book and says, “Ok, here, sign this page.” I said, “I’ll read it first.” Well, just sign it. I’m like, “Nope, sorry. I’m not getting up off this chair and go to work at your job until I’ve read what I have to sign my name to. R: Now the contractors make you sign out every day that, “No I did not get hurt today.” I did not... S: I don’t have a real problem with that. I don’t have an issue with that. R: I don’t know if that’ll work like, for instance, I worked for nuclear power plants in my early career. I’d wear a dosimeter up here. [Yeah.] And you’d take a radiation reading up here but I later found out later on that where we were working the radiation would be hitting my ankles. If I were wearing the dosimeter in my boot...it would have tripled my reading, ok? S: And when you sign the paper, you write “to the best of my knowledge I was not injured today.” See? R: I’m sure they’d get back to you on that, you know. 1:19:33 S: They’re just not that smart. LAUGHTER They’re like sheep. R: We’re not worthy, we’re ironworkers. S: You see, I am not one of them. I just did that for a living. R: I was taking such a high daily dosage that the Commonwealth Edison radiation protection people wanted to do a life-time study on me but I was like 26, 27 years old and I was young and healthy. I was making gobs of money every week and I just not thought... S: Safety first – unless it costs money. R: Asbestos and radiation, we’re only covered for 25 years from the original employment on workman’s comp rules. I don’t know if that’s changed or not. They might be the same, I don’t know. But it wouldn’t have matter because that’s what I tell people that’s why I got this lump up here. I got that when I was working at the nuclear plant. That’s my brain from radiation or my brain on drugs or whatever. [Yeah.] Working at nuclear power plants. S: I didn’t have a radiation, I had a lead issue. R: You’re talking about drinking at the nuclear power plant . . . back then...this is back when security was real security. We used to drive to Chicago, John Stath, his son and I. We’d drive up to the gate and we’d always have a six pack of Old Style. The old man liked his Old Style. We were working at the night time shift. We’d drive up to the gate and they would allow one car inside the campus on the Zion Nuclear Power Plant site. So we would hand that six pack out the window of the car. The guards would confiscate it, put it in the refrigerator in the guard shack. We’d come out ten hours later and they gave us back our beer. It was ice cold. We’d have two beers going home, down 55, each [I-55]. And it was just enough to get back at... S: Your hair was black before you started dealing with ironworkers, right? LAUGHTER R: But our beer was confiscated but it would come back cold  at the end of our shift. It was great after work. [I don’t think you could do that now. I’m sure you’re right.] S: There was a copy in Lake Zurich that used to stop me every weekend when I commuted to the city and he was down here in Wauconda. And on Friday night I would come up and he stopped me every Friday for like four weekends in a row because I had an ironworker sticker in the back of my truck. [And he figured that you were drinking.] He figured I was drinking. [He knew something about ironworkers then, didn’t he?] S: Probably stopped a few. 1:21:32 R: A true story, a true story. A bunch of ironworkers were working out on the LaSalle Power Plant. There’s three guys in the front seat and three guys in the back seat. S: Oh geez. R: They’re drinking beer, coming home, down 55 [I-55]. And a state trooper is going to pull them over. So their driver who thinks...and he’s got a spud wrench under the seat. He pulls it and he whacks the guy sitting in between the front seat. Bumps him on the head and blood is coming out, pouring out all over his face. The cop pulls us over and pulls his weapon out. “Are you guys doing... What happened?” “This guy got hurt at work, an ironworker, and I need to take him to the hospital. The cop looks and says...”Come on, maybe that’s corn silk. Rolled the windows up and kept drinking. The cop gave us an escort all the way to the hospital.” So they rolled the windows up and kept drinking. The cop gave them an escort all the way to the hospital. S: One of the few times they were thinking. R: I heard the story, I thought it was a great story but I just thought it was a story. Twenty years later, I’m working on a job down in Joliet Local. I mentioned that story and this guy says, “That’s true. I was in that car. It’s a true story.” O kidding. S: It’s one of the few times they actually thought. R: It’s a true story. BAM. We’d do that to save ourselves from going to jail. S: Never thought about just not drinking. You know? It would never occur to you. I always said that I would never in my lifetime get a DUI. It will not happen. R: That was the old ironworkers school of thought. What do you do when you see a double yellow line drivin’? Cover up one eye. S: These are scary things here. No way. R: It was a different day and age back then. [It was.] R: It was a different time... Working down at the lakefront here. We were doing a little store front replacement on one of the oldest curtain wall jobs in 860 North Lake Shore Drive. And they had a concrete truck on the frontage road along there, on Lakeshore Drive. It was like 7:30 in the morning. The laws, I think, say that you couldn’t handle a cement truck down in that area before 8 am. S: Before 8 o’clock. It was a noise ordinance. R: Some guy gets out of a car, waving a gun. “Who in hell is in charge of this job?” He was some political hack who lived around here. “Who’s running this job God damnit. You’re not supposed to have this cement truck down here.” He said, “In the trailer over there. Go see the guy in the trailer over there. There’s the guy running this job.” 1:23:59 S: Is the recording from the interview, in its entirety, put in the Library of Congress or are you do you transcribe things from it? [It has to be transcribed and I’ll probably edit some stuff on it.] R: My likeness is on those two...ah... S: The fountains. R: The fountains... S: He worked on that... R: Millennium Park there, that spits water? [Yeah.] My picture’s there. I worked on that. [Really?] Yeah. All the workers that worked on that project got to go  to the Art Institute. They had a studio across the street. And they had a picture taken doing the motions of that the...character pictures... closing your eyes... [Ok, sure.] ...and making you smile, pursing your lips like this so you spit the water out? There were 1000 faces that supposedly come up random on that those TV screens inside those towers and my picture is one of the 1000 faces. It’s all supposed to be local Chicagoans and its people from the local area that are part of that piece of art work. [Did you work on the interior or did you work on the...beam, because...] R: I worked for a company that put on all the glass flux up on the outside. Somebody else put the steel... Actually, they just put the... The glass flux [?] came from California. There was a Frenchman that was running the job. And he was always... He would always bring beer out for the night crew because the day crew always had... S: You worked midnights on that job. R: I was third shift on that one too. It’s like, as soon as the sun goes down, you can’t see what the hell you’re doing. We just kind a...did motions. It looked like you were working because you couldn’t see what the hell to do. [Yeah.] When you’re doing stuff that you gotta see what you’re doing... S: That’s the hardest work of all. R: That’s why God invented sunshine. [You didn’t work on the Bean did you? Because I think...some locals...] R: INAUDIBLE S: We had a lot of guys from 63 on the Bean. R: ...on that job and they were making...40 hours overtime a week. Welding and polishing and welding and polishing... [Yeah.] S: Navy Pier was like that too. They had tons of overtime. [Guys that I interviewed talked about that job. They worked down there for a long, long time.] R: That’s where they beat up that guy with the hatchet. He came to work all scarred up. 1:26:03 S: Paul Thompson stood up for me. R: No. When you got...accosted...? S: Oh, that’s when I was mugged at the shopping mall, yeah. R: When she got mugged. She was arrested for battering some guy who tried to steal her purse. The police had to pull her off and she was beating him up with her 5 cell flashlight. S: He wanted my purse and he called me a bitch. [Yeah.] R: Yeah, don’t call her a bitch. S: That’s bad. And I was kind of thinking about it. He said, “Give me your purse, bitch.” And I’m thinking, this isn’t really happening. BOOM he hit me in the face. This really is happening! So I reached inside my car and I guess he thought I was reaching for my purse. I always carry a mag light in the back pocket of my truck. I reach in there and I grab the head of the flashlight out of the pocket. And I came out swinging. I didn’t stop until the police came and took it out of my hand. “You don’t have to hit him any more lady.” “That’s a matter of opinion. I’m bleeding here and he called me a bitch.” LAUGHTER And he was Black. So when they arrested him, he screamed that they only arrested him because he was Black and I had accosted him. So they called me up and said, “You need to come in and surrender yourself.” I said, “Excuse me? This guy attacks me and I...” “I’m sorry, but the guy is claiming that you attacked him.” And at that time, this was a long time ago, that time, they didn’t have the 911 tapes immediately available. It took 72 hours before they could get access to that. And it was someone in a parking space a couple of rows away that called and clearly said that there was a Black guy attacking a white woman. That was the only reason I got off. But we go to court, the guy was out on... He never got out of jail. They threw him right in jail because he was out on bond for some other violent crimes. And you go to court  and the judge is there. You get this criminal attorney and he says, “Now be a girl when you come to court” because he knew what I did for a living. He thought I’d come in looking like him or something. Okay. So I put on my red and white checked dress and my mary jane shoes, and pig tails. Not really but you get the picture. And we go... I messed up my lip and my face and stuff. We go to court and they bring this guy in from jail and he’s in a wheelchair, stuffed like a chicken. His shoulder was separated. He was missing teeth. He had stitches on his cheek and shit. You go in front of a judge and they read the complaint that I attacked this guy, right? Here I weigh 110 pounds soaking wet. And this guy was like 6’5”. He’s a big guy! And the judge looks at him and looks at me. Looks down at the lawyers and he’s shaking his head. And I’m just standing there. He calls the lawyers up and they talk a few minutes. I have no idea what they said. And finally he smashed the gavel and says, “Case dismissed.” It’s like, whoa, what happened. He says, “Shut up. Keep walking out.” I want my flashlight...because they confiscated it. And the guy says, “Shut up and keep on...” But I want... He pushes me out the courtroom door and says, “Shut up. The 911 tape is the only thing that got you off here.” I said, “Oh come on. That guy couldn’t possibly win in front of a jury.” And he said, “That flashlight is evidence.” That’s a 50 buck flashlight, dude! Never did get my flashlight back. But that guy went to jail, but it cost me two days off of work and $300 to a criminal attorney and I did nothing wrong. But to go to work with that, yucky looking. Come on, I still don’t have feeling in my bottom lip. When I drink coffee when it first happened, I had no feeling so it would, like, run all over me. 1:29:29 R: I have a story... I was in Cleveland and one of the guys, one of our superintendents, stayed in a hotel in downtown Cleveland with his wife. And he used to walk two blocks from the hotel to our office. It was two blocks from our office to the new, it was the new Cavaliers basketball arena. We were putting all the windows on and all the metal around the top. It was a big job. And he come out of his hotel. He smoked Pall Malls. He takes one out of his pocket, taps it on the brick wall, and he’s lighting up. He’s walking down the sidewalk to work. Here comes this guy. He asks him for a cigarette. John...he’s about 6’8”, 300 pounds, ex- Marine, Vietnam vet. Big guy, big guy. He raises horses. He says, yeah, okay fine. And he shakes out a Pall Mall for this guy. And the guy comes up with a knife. “Now give me all your money.” And John says, looks at this guy, thought a second, and he gives this guy... “Haymaker right to the nose. Knocked him out. He just kept on walking. He came to work that morning and was shaking his hand, his wrist all swollen up like he broke something. “What happened” “Awe... This guy tried to hold me up this morning and I whacked ‘em.” He did file a police report and the police said, “What did this guy look like?” He says, “I don’t remember what he looked like but his nose is this wide right now.” Sure as shit, they did find this guy in an emergency room somewhere with a big broken nose and no cigarette. S: I thought you were talking about the guy at Navy Pier... R: It was John Lanier. S: The roofers. R: I remember that job. That’s a job where... I was working for this same company. I went to Singapore and came back from Singapore. They let me just hang for a month, just to get my feet back home again. And then they said, “Ok, we’re going to send you out to Cleveland Cavalier Arena. Run  that job. And I remember standing at the zero point in the center of the arena. This was when the trusses weren’t even up yet, we were just starting to pre-cast risers for the seating and the structure for the tresses to go up. I felt so small. I’m standing and looking around this huge stadium going to myself... What the fuck did I get myself into on this one because it was a big job and I lasted on it...and I finished it. We overcame all the problems and it’s a wonderful place on earth now. S: I thought he was talking about the roofers at Navy Pier. R: No, it was in Cleveland. S: No, when you said that the guy that attacked me. There were some roofers and they didn’t have union cards and I went up and carded them. And they got kicked off the job and they threatened me. They said “We know what you drive.” I said, “Good, I’m glad. You know where I live? Follow my ass home because you will deserve what you got coming to you.” Paul Thompson went out and had words with them so...they left me alone. [Well, hey thanks a lot to both of you. Really a pleasure.] R: Are you going to take some pictures? [Yeah] END: 1:32:23
Ironworkers;Ledwith, Robert;1941;2011;Audio Interview Contents Counter No./Time Topic 00:01 My name is Robert A. Ledwith and I’m known as Bob Ledwith, Local 46, New York, New York. [It’s a German name?] No, it’s Irish. Now, that’s what happened. I grew with the kids in the streets of Washington Heights in Manhattan, hearing that I was a German, I was a German. And my parents always said, well you’re really from Irish Heritage. A few years back, my wife said, “We’re going to Ireland.” So we went to Ireland. We found a... We found the political district known as Ledwith Town. [How do you spell it?] Ledwith. So over the years, it was Bobby Ludwig. Bobby Ludwick. Bobby Ledwitch. And really the name is a simple           name. It’s Ledwith, like the marchers led with their left feet, but growing up is a very interesting experience in the streets of New York City, where it was very much Irish neighborhood with the first generation, basically, of kid and the brogues were all over the place and for some reason, they wanted to single me out as a Dutchman, as a German, but I really was an Irish American. [So you born in New York?] Born in New York in November 30th, 1941 in Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in a neighborhood known as Washington Heights. Mary and I lived in the suburbs for 25 years and we moved back. What we did... I thought about this that I wanted to move back to the same neighborhood I grew up in, with the same zip code, with the same telephone exchange. And, they say you can never go back, well...we went back. [Good for you!] It was quite an experience. I went back to my church where... I am a product of a Catholic education. There I attribute everything that I have to the School of Incarnation. We were growing up basically in a very poor neighborhood that would be known basically as a slum now. It was street. Gang wars and a lot of different things that went on. It was difficult growing up. A lot of alcohol, a lot of other social problems that people identify today, but weren’t quite as sophisticated back then. But the Catholic School was the scene, the discipline was so strict that... You have 53 kids in a classroom and nothing would be tolerated other than strict attention. So that broke some of the wildness in your spirit, but also educated you if you wanted to be further in life so... From there I went to Catholic high school. The first time I ever went to school with a girl was when I went to CCNY [City College New York] at night to get my college degree. That was the first time. We were all, back then, separated the boys and girls. [Did you have separate entrances in the school?] Absolutely. LAUGHTER The east end of the school steps, on one end of the building, was for the girls. It said GIRLS right on top. And on our west side of the building was BOYS and you went up those stairs. 2:42 [Well, how did you get from high school then to being an ironworker?] Well, in 1959, my Dad... I had got... I was accepted into both City College at the time and Manhattan College. Manhattan College was a Liberal Arts Engineering School. Again, Christian brothers were my educators. And I decided to go to Manhattan, even though they had told me in high school that because of the situation with money and everything, I should really go to CCNY because the tuition was going to hurt you. So my Dad put me out on what was known as a permit. For the first time I tied rebar for a salary was in June of 1959 on Governor’s Island building barracks for the officers of the U.S. Army because the army was based there. And that Island was right at the tip of Manhattan and the view was absolutely magnificent. So that was our first job, my first chance to work with all the men, to share the experience of working outside in the hot sun. What we call pumping rebar, working hard and I loved it. It was just something I liked, but I went to college then, for a year. Got credits. Ran out of money. I was evicted, I just couldn’t pay the tuition. Then I went back on permit, then in 1962, I was called into my apprenticeship into Local 46, metallic lathers’ union. And from ‘62 to ‘65, I started my apprenticeship. So it was ‘59 to...that I started. June of ‘59 and by May of 1965 I was a full-pledged journeyman in my union. [In Chicago, a lot of the ironworkers went through indentured apprenticeship. Did you do that?] Yeah, I did. There’s different terminologies where, in different parts of the country, yeah, it was  called indenture. Indenture went back to the old school, where the indentured workers in the colonial times when you became indentured 5 or 10 years with a craftsman and then they went out on their own but they didn’t have citizenship and everything. That was their passage to America. You have the slave issue in the South and then you have the indentured servants and workers in the north. And it just kept that term. So yes we took an oath. So you take an oath as a member and to your brotherhood, your brother members. [What local was that?] Local #46. And it’s been local 46 historically...and I was just telling Rich [Rich Rowe] about this. 5:06 Our local was originally charted in 1897. That’s why I was referring to the fact that we’re old and most of them are corporations. And traditionally, as an institution, we have existed, for all of these years, three centuries. So our logo has a bridge with the original logo of wood, wire and metallic lather international union which in 1979, collapses. The bridge...bridging...the generations...bridging the centuries to the ironworker logo and it just...identifies itself as the metallic lathers union Local 46 of New York and vicinity. So this thought process, right from 1897 is that we would...in the beginning be very independent because at that time, the building trade unions were all forming. There was problems with jurisdiction. Who did this and who did that. And New York, it come to a crisis with a big lock out in 1902-1903. That created an instrument called the New York Plan, which still exists today, to settle jurisdictional disputes. That lock out, every union craftsmen was fired. And if you were a member of a union, you wouldn’t be re-hired. [Was that in the construction trades in general?] Yeah, the whole war was declared on the construction unions at that time, which they believe got too powerful. The money interest has always been there as our enemy driving to stop us. 6:30 So at that point in time, about 1905, our founder, a man named John “Bull” Tagget, because we all had nicknames and he was the “Bull”. He was known as the “Bull”. He was a very warm hearted generous man because I did interviews of old-timers when I was first elected business agent in the ‘80s who remember him as a business agent. I was very curious about what was back then and how was he... And by that time, maybe the automobile still wasn’t there for a business agent. They called them “walking delegates” because they walked, particularly in the central cities like Chicago and it was the same for New York. It was all in the central cities so basically you could walk, and they were known as walking delegates. Then in 1905, Bull Tagget went to the ironworker convention in Philadelphia and asked the general membership would they accept the metallic lathers’ union local, the metallic lathers’ union of New York into the ironworkers charter. The convention overwhelmingly voted yes because Mr. Bull had great relationships with the ironworkers going back right from the beginning when they were all formulating. For instance, in 1903, 190... Actually, it was about 1901, 1902, there was a big strike in New Jersey. And the Bull put all of the ironworkers that were striking in New Jersey to work in New York so they could feed their families and they won the strike by this brotherhood across the Hudson River. There was no bridges built then. You had to use ferries and everything else. But that was our relationship then with the ironworkers and the Bull did not want to go with the wood, wire, and metal lathers, for the reasons that he believed they were weaker union  and they end up being a weaker union. And he appealed before it really got settled, with Gompers making his moves with chartering an international unions back when the ironworkers would they accept us. They did. But...the hierarchy said no, it’s not a good idea because the head of the lathers’ union came in and spoke to the leaders of the ironworkers. And he says, “If you take away New York, I will not have an international union. They’re too... They’re too integral, too important for us so please don’t charter ‘em.” We never got a charter so we would have been, if accepted by the delegates at that convention, we would have been ironworkers since 1905. 8:47 Instead, in 1907, Gompers makes a ruling that unless you are chartered by an international union, you will lose your jurisdiction. So in 1907, I have it hanging on the wall in the union hall. We were charter by the Wood, Wire, and Metal Lathers. The Bull never signed the charter. Never signed the charter. His signature is not on it. And it was a deal where the secretary of the Lathers’ International was Terry Ford, who was a business agent which is now the Metallic Lathers’ of Local 46 of the Wood, Wire, and Metal Lathers. So I can imagine there were deals or what have you to facilitate our organization to join. Now we pulled out of the Lathers three different times, because they came in and they tried to push us around. And Bull would say, “You’re not pushing us around.” So up until 1924, when he passes away, we pulled out 2 or 3 times. He said, “Just go to hell.” [Did you do it...as an independent union?] Yeah, we were going independent and then Gompers probably got all bent out of shape and sent telegrams to get it back in here again. And the ironworkers wouldn’t take us so we had no choice but go back again. So we would go back again. Those were the formative years in the trade union movement. There was a tremendous amount of flux. A lot of people didn’t know what was going on. Because in the beginning, we were part of Local 2 of the ironworkers. Local 2, if you look at the boards, they lost their charter. And what happened was there was a guy named Sam Parks, one of the walking delegates, who stood up to the international union in a lot of different ways. The international union is...you take the urban centers where the strength of the labor union was created and still, whatever strength it has is in the urban workers. And we evolved our own way... And when people from the outside come in who don’t have much knowledge or are looking to make a national deal, and subjugate you to something that you negotiated out of your agreement and then they’re telling you you’ve got to do it for the good of DeMoine Iowa or someplace else you were talking about. So there was is friction and Sam Parks ends up going to Sing Sing because they said he was corrupt and everything else. He gets out of Sing Sing, ok, on an appeal, went back in again. And then they took the charter away from him. He ends up dying in Sing Sing Prison in Ossinning , New York. But he was sort of a model of what a walking delegate was and the Bull was his pal. So they used to walk around the city of New York and try to straighten out jobs and what have you, ok? And the international union said there would never be another Local 2 again. 11:20 But at the meetings, and this is what’s interesting about reinforcing ironworkers, ‘cause that’s because that’s basically what we are when it comes to the ironworkers. In 1902, I believe  it was, or 1903, we were part of the Local 2 Housesmiths of the International Ironworkers. The bridgemen, or was it structural... I think it was just the bridgemen’s international union. And ahh... we made...the men back then made so much noise. Did not represent them as well. You know, you only care about the grid iron, the structural steel, you know, etc. and on and on it went. And they finally said, “Why don’t you just get out of here and form your own local. We don’t need your headache.” So the guys just walked out. They severed their ties with Local 2 of the ironworkers back in 1902 before their charter was lifted and I think it was lifted in 04. And there will never be another Local #2. So when you look at the Locals, there’s 1...#3 is Pittsburgh, and our 46 gets an “L” after it to represent the Lathers because Springfield, Illinois I believe it is, has the first 46. So they’re a mixed local. We are lathers, so they figured we’d want to keep the number. So there’s a lot of pride in a lot in different things and one of our prides is in our locals numbers so 46 is...that’s us. That’s your identity. So the ironworkers was gracious enough to say, “No, we’re not going to give them a new number. Let’s just put an “L” right after the number.” We’re now known as 46L. CHUCKLES 12:44 [Were there any other lathers locals in the ironworkers anymore?] No. Here’s another piece of history. In 1970...in 1977 I was on the Executive Board...in 1977...of my local and...they had an eastern seaboard conference of lathers . And at that conference, the beginning of the dissolution of the Wood, Wire, and Metal International, the Lathers’ International... it was about beginning. What it was...it was shrinking membership, same phenomenon that you see today with some of the international unions. So with shrinking membership, lack of revenue, loss of revenue. So they had made a proposal and we all voted at this conference in New York City that we would take the whole lathers’ international and make it a subdivision of the ironworkers. So that every local union in the United States would then, whether it was Cincinnati or... Because it was spread out the way other internationals locals were... There were local unions all over. And it was voted unanimously to be accepted as a department of the bridge, structural, and ornamental ironworkers. That was voted down for some reason. Whatever higher powers at that time did it. So now that’s ‘77. In ‘79, a big vote comes in and the carpenters are making, the carpenters international, UBC, making a big push to take over all of the lathe local unions and take over their jurisdiction. Fifty years they were attacking the jurisdiction of the lathers. Finally, they weakened them to a point that they were able to put the Bull on the line. And so now you have 46. Now 46 is a rebar local with lathe. Our revenue at that time perhaps was about 65-70% rebar and 30% traditional wire lathe sales. So we’re not about to become carpenters. So...in ‘79, there was a referendum. And it was interesting how you voted. I had to vote to become part of the conferences with the understanding with a side letter that we voted...I think only four guys voted not to join to join the carpenters. [Yeah.] So anyway, we voted with all the other lathe locals to vote at the conference ... because there was a side letter that you would immediately were chartered by the ironworkers. So all those lathe locals went with the carpenters and became a division of the carpenters international union. We  became ironworkers, a part of the ironworkers. So then over the years, I’ve met some of those lathe locals, like Chicago had a very strong lathe local. And...I was at a bar one time down in Washington at a conference and I heard some guys arguing. So I say, “What’s going on? I heard you say you’re a lather.” “Yeah, I’m a lather.” “I’m a lather too.” “But you’re an ironworker.” “Yeah, but we’re both lathers. We served the same kind of apprenticeship for the same kind of work.” And I says, “What’s this all about?” “Carpenters are trying to steel our studs. We’re doing the studs in Chicago. You guys never did it in New York. We’re not going to deal and capitulate with these guys.” “You got it, no problem.” Now the two of us start picking on the carpenters. LAUGHTER Because we were both lathers, even though he was a carpenter lathers. The carpenters international did the same thing. A lot of them kept the same local numbers but I put an L after. But the carpenters never promoted the work, never had any type of education with the architecture or anything else. So they have allowed the whole trade to die. And so when... 16:00 You mentioned before about going into restore, ornamental plaster, all the ancient stuff... A lot of times, we’d get calls from New York City to go and restore a ceiling in a theater in Jersey and some place like that. They never taught the skills to their new apprentices so we became the depository of basic lather skills throughout the country. There are a few still left. I think Minnesota has a strong lathe local. California builds the stucco. That’s plaster. [Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah.] Down in Florida, those places are very antiunion...the right to work. [Yeah.] It’s about...I guess...five or six lathe locals within the carpenters that still do it traditionally, but we do New York as ironworkers. 16:50 [Do you still work in the field then doing this kind of thing?] No, that’s a whole other story. [Ok.] So in 1981, ahhh... well, actually in 1977, I’m on the executive board. In 1979, I run for business agent and it was in the basement of a Catholic church on the west side of Manhattan, Sacred Heart. So we went there and I got my card and I have always been a person with ideas. I don’t like to knock anybody and I’m not interested in personality [?]. “I’m looking for future vision and where we can go as an organization.” I was always running campaigns like that. And there was the establishment. And the establishment was always, I guess, very conservative. They didn’t want to think outside the box. They saw me as an enemy rather than some asset. So now we have this big election. It’s for business agents. Starts as a full-time paying job. And I had to very rocky history about gaining employment with the establishment not particularly keen on my ideas. And the ideas were very simple. Let’s have a political action committee where we can engage the politicians so we can keep their feet to the fire. Let’s have the technological change committee so they can watch what’s going on in the outside world and in the development world to see if there are new materials coming out so that we can protect our jurisdiction or the threat of being eliminated by technological change. Oh you can’t do that. Oh, my God. But anyway, the members sort of liked those ideas and it was a fascinating, it’s like a movie. Sometimes I think I live in a movie. There was the first machine. There were three  machines. And it was all by secret ballot. The first machine we’re up 24 votes, which means that we were the 4th and there were four business agents. We were... basically more votes than the incumbent for that 4th position. The second one...we’re up 47 votes so now amazingly, everybody comes over and he says, “Hey Bob...how are ya doing?” People... All of a sudden, you see people taking their buttons off and putting your button on and really...interesting human behavior to say the least. I said, “Listen everybody, calm down. There’s another machine to go.” I had no idea what was going to happen. I’m down, like, 48 votes. I lost the election by one vote. It’s interesting what happens. I’m a religious guy. The good Lord has a plan for us and we just got to execute it to the best of your ability. So now 1980-81 comes and I’m running for re-election because we have two year elections back then. I’m going to run in November of ‘81 for office again. I came so close and I wanted to be a business agent. I really wanted to do that. It’s good work. You do a lot of things for a lot of people. I mean, you can do some wonderful things. So that being said, the business agent who beat me by the one vote, passes away from a heart attack. LAUGHTER And back then, we had special elections. There’s no president appointed like from the ironworkers. I’m a firm believer of democracy. I’m the product of the vote, not of an appointment. 19:51 So... here we go. And there was a convention of ironworkers in 1981. Now remember, in 1979 which was grand for ironworkers, newly minted[?] ironworkers. The first convention we were going to attend is the 1981 convention. So the fellows asked me who I’m supporting and said, “Are you going to run for the convention.” I said, “Well, do you want to know something. #1, I haven’t been working steady. I don’t think so. That’s traditionally the officers, it would be an upstart type of thing. I’m going to concentrate for November.” That’s the real election. The other one is just for the convention. So I decided not to run. In the meantime, this fellow passes. A special election is set up. I win the special election. They all go to the convention and I’m running the whole local union with only two weeks on the job. And what I did is I brought my whole philosophy and ideas and everything to the job and they all come back and say, “What are you doing around here? And I says, “Well, I can only get one contractor. It’s the biggest contractor in New York. He has over 50 jobs going at the same time. A brilliant business man. I admire a good business man. So all throughout all this, I’m majored in economics. I understand what the risk and reward kind of stuff, but I didn’t like what he was doing. He wasn’t paying the benefits. So I shut him down. They all came back and said, “What did you do?” I says, “He’ sthe biggest guy. Some of us...” I don’t care. I really don’t care. Either he pays his benefits or not. You can now undo what I did because you’re back running the show and I’m going to back out to where I am as a business agent just in the one area. The bottom line is that as long as I was here, I had to make the decisions. So from that point on, not only was it the thinking that there was this type of a radical in the house. There was also this thought process that maybe he’s resonating what the membership always thought. Maybe there’s a hunger and a thirst for leadership and for guts or what have you. So from that point on, I’ve been re-elected by my members. It has been a wonderful journey.  21:54 In 1999, when the business manager retired, I became the... I ran for business manager and I won that office. For 30 years I’ve been blessed with this wonderful job to be able to help people, to give them strength. The whole idea of a union officer, and this goes back into the history. Why was there a thing called business agent, walking delegate? Well, the men, the workers, they tried and it was so difficult...that really, you bent over in our case case or working very hard. You don’t have time to cogitate and think about, “Do I need a better pension plan? Should we have an annuity? Should we think of a vacation plan.” So you elevate your own to be a full time, to be thinkers, and doers and to create a better world. So as you work hard, you expect that elected official that you put into office to be full time. He doesn’t have to worry about earning a salary from the boss. Is it intimidating? Is it independent and free? And he can make decisions in the best interest of the member and not any other reason what-so-ever. You have to elevate them. You can’t expect a man to work hard all day, for seven or eight hours, and then have the where with all, even during the day, to make decisions about the union. So the whole concept of a business union, this is where my friends in the C.I.O. and I have a debate about all the time. Because the business union isn’t like...it isn’t a dirty word. It’s not a dirty prospect. We weren’t artificially created by legislation in Albany and any place else. We were rank and file, lifting up, figuring it all out. We created a business agent position, a business agent. There was no business managers back then. Put them out there full time, have a dues structure. Run it like a business. You have to have an office and eventually a telephone. So you add a telephone and you had to have electric lights. Someone’s got to pay for the lights. So this whole idea of a business union that many of the C. I.O. look at it as a detracting thing. To me it was something that... Look it, we flourished because they realized that this was the way to run a business. 24:05 Now, the union has the union ethic. You have what we believe in. Besides that, the union has to have rhythm. It has to be run like a business, like have secretaries. Financial secretary as part of my job. I have to run it like a small business. Besides looking out for the welfare of the members, besides negotiating with collective bargaining agreements. Besides watching all the politicians and all of their chicanery and everything else. You know, basically, you have to run it... And when I meet with this group, particularly the municipal unions. They’re divorced from this concept. Like, we have this frictional thing, like, we have our own pensions. Each term, we secure collective bargaining agreements for the employees. We bring it to the membership and if they ratify it, and they usually ratify it, we then vote democratically. The men decide where the money goes. So suppose you have a $3 package. Three dollars an hour raise. We go to the members and say, “Well, look. Our analysis, the pros that we hire say that we need a dollar for medical, because we’re slipping a little bit there and medical costs are rising. So we recommend that if you put into your proposals democratically that you put a dollar into your medical. The rest of it, right now, if you want to put pension annuity envelope, whatever you want to do. They get up and give suggestion A and suggestion B. And they vote on it, right there by voice. And we end up with about 4 or 5 different selections. The men then say, “Okay. Fine.” We’ll vote on whether or not we want that $2 to remain in the envelope or not. I want a dollar in the  envelope, a dollar in the annuity, and dollar in the medical. Or I want a dollar in the envelope, a dollar... $.50 in the annuity, $.50 in the pension and a dollar in medical. They always religiously have given us what we asked and what we needed for their own protection. So it wasn’t a matter of negotiating...going for a contact with a mayor or with a governor. This was something that we secured and then we voted on so when they appeal to us with their problems with pensions and other things, it’s kind of like... Did you ever look at it the way we look at it? It comes right out of our total package. So you’re saying that over 30-40-50 years, you’ve negotiated something that you didn’t really vote on. You didn’t have the interplay with your own members. Maybe they would’ve looked at it a little differently. So now when these pension funds so [?] and the tax payers were up in arms. We‘re with you in Wisconsin. We’re not going to run. We’re labor people. But understand that maybe your model might not be the best model for the perpetuation of the union. Your union, not ours, because we’re ok. 26:56 [Well, does that make you think maybe in a way that the silver lining within this economic crisis is that some of those public-sector unions are going to have to rethink how they structure their unions or what kind of approach they take to their memberships where do they go in the future?] I hope so, I hope so. Because we’re also active in the Central Labor Council of New York City which is a million people strong, so it has this tremendous potential. Unfortunately it hasn’t seen the fruition of that potential, but never the less it’s there. We have a new, for the first time, a full-time administrator of the CLC. It used to be like a part-time job with a pension but with a million people that you represent. [I can’t imagine that.] No, it was kind of... That thing was structured not by the building trade. We were just part of it. It was structured again by that mentality that you just asked me a question about. My hope is that yes, that they re-visit. Let’s say for instance. If they had structured it differently and it teachers’ union or the municipal clerks’ union or whatever. And I say, Ok, fine, Mr. Mayor and his bargaining committee. We would like to have $3 an hour raise. We will decide where the $3 go. They could never come back to those folks and say, wait a minute. There’s too much money going into the pension, there’s too much... because you took that money yourself and you allocated it yourself and it was part of your money. Instead of having negotiated a 2% increase in the pension or 1% or whatever, you controlled your own destiny. And by controlling your own destiny, you have a lot more, I guess you have a better right to say what you want to say rather than have now be the subject of a whipping boy, between the tax payer and the politician. That’s what’s happening. So I would hope that they would look at our...and not look down on us. I used to get that feeling that... All right, all right. You’re educated. I got it. We’re just as educated. I was just explaining it to one of the fellas. I was on a panel with the Regional Planning Association in New York. The Regional Planning Association was always involved with transportation issues, whether it was mass transit, whether it was bridges, or what have you. All of a sudden, they were commissioned, because some people came out of the American Heritage Foundation who took over. We’re going to have a nice little union busting document that we’re going to create particularly against the building trades and it was full of all sorts of falsehoods and misconceptions and what have you. I was asked did I want to be on a panel. I  would call up the president of the building trades, because I’m vice president of the building trades also, as business manager of 46. And I said, “Gary, do you want it?” “Naw, I don’t want to get...to hell with them people.” So I said, “Would you mind...? I won’t go to represent the building trades. I’ll go and represent #46.” And he says, “No, no, no problem. You do it because, you know, you’ll be ok.” And I said, “Yeah, I know I’ll be ok.” 29:52 When we got on the panel and it’s a strangest environment that you live in sometimes. On the left hand side was a non-union builder of affordable housing who, he and I had been at each other’s throats over time. On my right hand was one of the major CMs in New York City. It was a Tishman person, big name. And then, hmm, on the end was this Mike Locker [?], who we’ve been friends, who we run all the kind of new interesting stuff that we’re doing with corporate campaigns and everything else. And another one was a non-union developer who became a union developer. The most friendly of all of the people other than Mike Locker, who’s out of the labor movement, was the guy who was non-union. He said, “You know, they work hard. There are certain things that, if things could change somewhat, I would become a union developer because of the skills and apprenticeship training and safety and everything else.” The union, Tishman, was knocking the hell out of the unions so... With a panel, and if you’ve ever been on a panel, you know this. You gotta seize the moment. You can’t let somebody say “Ok, fine. You’ve got one minute and that’s it.” What it was, and I tried to explain to the folks there, and it was everybody from the press. The Times, Crain’s, the Post, it was just a whole bevy of people, people from different communications. And I said, “Look it, you really are right now in the Harvard Club. Now, I could never ever afford to come to the Harvard Club nor could I ever afford Harvard University.” And I admire them because I had a professor from Harvard one time a long time ago at CCNY and he has impressed me ever since with his knowledge and as a teacher, how he elevated my thinking and understanding of things. But let me just say something about that. It’s 96 degrees out and its 100% humidity. You’re in an air conditioned environment, nice and cool and comfortable. When you leave here, please don’t forget the men and women who are working out in the construction trades now, in 100% humidity, plus 95 degree temperature. Ok? Breaking their backs...as you go to your other climate controlled environment. As you work in your office in air conditioning. Then in the winter time, when it’s nice and toasty warm in your controlled environment. You think about us out there. Because, no matter what, we’ll never complain. And I’m not complaining. I just don’t like some of the attitude that you people have that you think that we’re menial and that we’re less than you. We’re a lot better. We’re your fellow Americans. We fight and die for this country. But understand when you look at the skyline also. A painter paints, painting or a mural. A poet who writes a poem. An author writes a book. A sculptor sculpts a statue. We guys in construction, here in construction, we sculpt the skyline. So when you look at that skyline of New York, you should think about the hands and the brains and the heart that built that. Don’t think about the negative, how you might be jealous of the fact that we make a high hourly wage. But at the end of the year, perhaps we make less than you do because of weather, because of unemployment and other things. So we’ll never complain to you, but we do want to be appreciated as a fellow  American. That we’re just as integral to the American dream as anybody else. And the American skyline is ours because we built it. And there was silence. I mean it was just like silence. And that’s what I wanted to do. I wanted people to understand that we don’t complain. We’re not people that do, but we damn well demand respect. 33:20 [You raised an interesting point. I’ve noticed this a lot in the interviews I’ve done here in Chicago and we talked off record before we started the interview. But I’m always impressed on just how smart the guys I know in the ironworkers are. People that work in the ironworkers. They’re really good problem solvers. It seems to me that and there’s a lot of individual initiative that’s required on the job. Maybe they don’t have college degrees, but maybe you could talk just a little bit about that because I sense... maybe they’re not book learners but a lot of bright people are in the rank and file of the ironworkers. Could you comment a little bit about that?] Oh yeah. This really has been a fascin... We have a learning center, where I mentioned that we have our own museum. We also created a showroom. And the showroom was created to show new architects, and existing architects, and engineers the creativity of the craft of lathing. And when you walk into it, each one of those, those ceilings and walls, were created by an architect or an owner who went to a lather and said, “Look, I want...maybe bizaare. I want to put a cracked tea cup in the corner of my living room.” Now these are wealthy people and these are real things, ok? So... I listened to the lather and said, “You want something to do? Let’s build a cracked tea cup to show in the creativity center.” So in our showroom, we have a cracked tea cup and the crack is a bead that which we would use to terminate or expand and contract plaster and elements, ok? So the bead itself became the crack in the tea cup. So I said to the guys, “What else?” Well, one time a guy asked me...again, sorry for the expression... “I’d like to have a ceiling in the shape of an umbrella.” An umbrella...and we built it. So now we have... [Cool! Laughter] We have a ceiling, just a mock up, of an umbrella, inverted, ok? Created with the hands and the ingenuity of the wire lathers who were problem solvers, which is what you’re asking. So we have a tooth ceiling on a declining plane, ok? That is used in acoustical plaster so when you look at that... I said to one of the guys, “Did you ever build one of those?” He says, “Absolutely.” So I said, “Ok. Do me in the corner, build please for me a saw tooth ceiling that you have created by an architect telling you not necessarily on a drawing but ‘create this for me.’” When I was serving my apprenticeship I was always amazed and that’s why I wanted the show room to show the craft. So we have saw tooth, we have inverted umbrellas. We have acoustical plaster, where you could literally stand in the middle and then you have a stage where you could have the perfect intonation of the voice. Move slightly this way, that way and the whole tone changes because of the acoustical plaster. And the plaster itself is secured with the wire lathe. That’s what the lathe is hooked on to. 36:21 So we did all of these kinds of ceilings, perhaps 8 or 9 of them. That came out of when I was an apprentice boy in about 1963. The old timers would tell me that...literally on a piece of paper, an architect would come in and say, “I want this shape.” And you’d just say, I don’t know...but I drew it. Right? [Yeah.] And they had to do that. And what they would do is that  they literally would build it on the ground and chain it up and secure it into the ceiling. So every time you look at an old building, ok, that has, or an old theater, you can look up at this craft that these guys...a lot of times just created out of experimentation and their own creativity. There was a problem solved. We were working for an architect. We wanted to work, because that’s our employment. This was going to pay by the end of the week and you’d be able to feed the family. But the creativity was never... The architect had the vision and dream. It’s the men’s minds and hands that created it and solved the problem. And so many times when you would read a drawing, you would call up the architect and say, “Did you realize that you just put a light in the middle of a sprinkler pipe and in the middle of a duct? And the electrical light is not going to work.” Well, shucks. Well, tell us what you want to do with this because you’re the architect and we’ll just... Ok, let’s solve it. You want it over here, ok, now we have to frame the ceiling differently. We have to do a bunch of different things. And the same thing with architectural concrete when we do the rebar. Many times the people who think these things up are... They want it, but they wouldn’t have the slightest clue how to build it. So you give it to a craftsman. The craftsman uses all the generational history that he’s learned that has been passed from generation to generation with the craft and makes it happen. There’s nothing that we can’t build. When went to the Museum of Natural History – like I was telling you about the cultural days when the members and their families enjoyed the culture of New York City-there’s a big whale in the middle of the Museum of Natural History. We built the whale. Now somebody came to use and said, “We’d want to replicate a life size whale.” What do we do? All right, fine. We frame it out of metal. We’ll tie the wire lathe on and put the beads in the right place. Make sure that the eye sockets and everything on the side of the whale with the help of the architect who designed it but we built it. We built the whale. And sometimes when you go into places, in a hotel lobby. There’s trees and there’s rocks. We build that out of wire lathe and they plaster over these...cement plaster and other products. But they’ll say, “Build a rock.” And the creativity of the Bronx Zoo. We do a lot of work in the Bronx Zoo. We had a place where the elephants. They wanted us to build a place for the elephants to be comfortable. And when you deal with people from the Zoological Society, they want to think like an animal. The animal that they’re building the exhibit for. So this one was interesting. What it was was that the zoologists wanted to have a good place that elephants could scratch his back side. LAUGHTER So anyway... Alright fine. What do you need? So we built the first one and the elephant didn’t like it, so the zoologist was, “Well, you got to change this.” Ok fine. We experimented with four or five different installations before the elephant was happy. The zoologist was happy. Most importantly, that we were creative enough to be able to adjust whatever it was that once we knew what we needed... Not the elephant, well, maybe the elephant too. With both the elephant and the zoologist, we were able to do it. And loved the job, pleasing the elephant and pleasing the zoologist. So that’s the kind of stuff that you’re trained to do in your apprenticeship, particularly that you’ve got to think on your own. You have to be creative, that you will be presented with a problem every day. You’ll have stuff that doesn’t fit where it’s supposed to fit. You’re going to have mistakes in the drawings. Lord knows there’s a lot of that. And you’re  just going to have to build around it and you’ve got to get it done at the end of the day. There’s no excuses. You’re hired as a schooled craftsman. So we’re very proud of that and I imagine that’s what you’re hearing from guys. How . . . every day is a unique day. You never know what’s going to be presented as far as an impediment for you to complete your task for the day and you have to get around it. Otherwise the project falls behind. It’s money. They don’t make any money until they turn the key and have tenants, whether it’s an office building or apartment house. We’ve got to deliver on time, hopefully ahead of time and under budget so that they hire us for the next job. This is really... We’re gypsies. We finish a job and we move to another job. Many times you might not work with the same men for 20-30 years because these are large locals. We’re large. We have 1500 members. So you might not work with a man or woman for another 15-20 years, but that one experience that you have, that most of the time is really a great experienced. And you share all of that as you look at the skyline as your career develops and you say, “Wow. I built that and I built that. My blood and guts are in that one.” That’s the sculpturing of the skyline of New York City. So yeah, the creativity, the thinking on your own. Thinking outside the box. That’s right from the beginning. You are taught in training to do that. 41:36 Because if you can’t solve the problem, they don’t need you. They could just have a non- union, unskilled person. If it’s a mechanical job that you do, like a factory. And buildings are very complex. To put up a building is quite a complex event. It’s really interesting. Because if you watch all the trades work in a big city, particularly where there are these time lines that you have to have done. It’s an amazing thing to watch the cohesiveness of the trades as you learn how to work with each other also. So you’re not only learning your trade and learning to work with your fellow tradesmen, in our case lathers, you’re also are learning how to work with the other trades in conjunction. So that the product that you’re going to produce is produced on time. You can’t be fighting and arguing over geography. On job site there is only limited places where you put the materials. You really have to really think it through, ok. The carpenter has his stuff here. The ironworker has his stuff over here. The lather has his stuff over there. The pipefitter... and on and on it goes. So all of these things have to be coordinated and many times management doesn’t have the slightest clue. The trades themselves have to realize what has to be done and how you do it, and then cooperate with each other to make it happen. All this problem solving is, on many multiple levels, is not just so simple. There’s always some problem. Many times there are problems that you didn’t think of yet. As we sit here, there could be a problem on the job tomorrow or Monday that nobody ever saw before because the technology and materials change. There’s constant change all the time around you and you have to adapt. 43:08 [Well, I know we don’t have a lot more time because people are coming to your door but I did want to ask you another question because you’re obviously a thinking man about all these things. What do you think the labor movement. Obviously we’re in an anti-labor period again in the United States. Labor is on the defensive. Membership is down. Economy’s not helping even the building trades. What’s your twist on where you think the labor movement in general  might go, how they need to strategize for the future if they want to remain a vital element in American society? What can they do to move themselves forward and maybe help developing countries as well.] That’s a complex, complex problem. I’m a student of history also. [Yeah.] And as a student of history that majored in economics in college, I’ve always followed economics. I love to watch what’s going on in Wall Street because it’s our pension plans. There’s a lot of different things. I think that the assault on the labor movement began basically... It’s always been there. But there’s these ebbs and flows. For instance, Teddy Roosevelt, when he was president, was more progressive. He was known as a progressive as a Republican, the last great Republican in my mind. As were Nelson Rockefeller and some other liberal Republicans. [Yeah, they’re gone aren’t they?.] They’re gone and they destroyed the...they destroyed the eastern wing of the republican party. As a result, the Republican party was always non-existent in most areas of the northeast because of that. Because they appealed to the working men particularly in the building trades, in that they would say that we are socially liberal but we’re fiscally responsible, so we don’t go into budget deficits and everything else. And that appealed to a lot of people because they have to balance their own books. The far right Republican Party now is nowhere near whatever they were. But when you look at the ebbs and flows, so you had, you had the gilded era, that you mentioned before, where the wealthy capitalists just completely raped working people and in the beginning, as I studied it, I came to the conclusion... America has always been a cheap labor nation. And one of the ways is immigration and technological innovation. So when I look at the labor history and our problems, that number 1... I keep being told that we are a right-of-center nation and if we’re right and centered nation, many Americans themselves aren’t too happy thinking about a union because they were told about union bosses. They were told horrible things about unions. So right from the beginning, when Gompers was trying to put this together, there was an anti-union ethos. It went high and low as the economy basically goes up and goes down. The membership would go up in boom and decline in bust. We’ve had panics in this nation. Just recently we saw what happened in the market this week. But that goes back to the 1893. It goes back to after the Civil War. But as a cheap labor nation, if you look at the garment industry for instance. The garment industry began in New England with farm girls, who were not educated, who would work 12-14 hours a day, 6-7 days a week, and be exploited. As the women in Lowell and other places began to organize, the cost went up so we’re a cheap labor nation. We got to move it down to the garment district in New York City where we had a lot of immigration coming in from Eastern Europe and Italy, and all the places like that so we could exploit them for cheap labor. That got expensive because the unions and the ILGW [International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union] got organized. So now they moved to the Carolinas. At the Carolinas they have their cheap labor again, with the Blacks and the poor servant white girls going to the factories and working. I mean, that’s Norma Rae. You remember the motion picture. They organized and got too expensive. Then they found Central America and Mexico and they moved the jobs there. They started to get a little too expensive. They moved to China, Thailand, Sri Lanka, you name it where it is right now. In search of cheap labor. So I often wondered, when they’re teaching their  MBAs, Harvard, MIT, and Wharton Business School, do they really predicate everything on you must have cheap labor because that’s the only variable? Land costs the same. Materials cost the same. So control your one variable of course which is where labor and keep it cheap. Now in the face of that is the union. No, we should have dignity. We should have decency. So we have to come to grasp with the answer... What environment do we live in? Expose it for what it is... and one more time, appeal to the American people’s decency. Because the labor movement strength and weaknesses were strong when the American public is with us and we’re weak when they’re not. And right now, American people are suffering terribly with the policies that the Republican Party and the Bush era’s tax policies where the rich don’t have to really pay any taxes that we have to pay as a percentage. What they’ve done sucked that money out of the economy. It’s simple economics. The more money you make, the less money you spend, because you bank it, you want it for prosperity. So there’s a certain threshold after which you’re not going to spend any more money. If you got a Bentley, you’ve got a Bentley. You’re not going to have two Bentleys. So the spending of any human being declines as the income goes up because it becomes harder and harder to spend a lot of money. And they don’t invest in America. They’re investing in global economy. And I’m coming to a point now where I’m wondering whether or not a lot of people that we have to listen to in the mass media are really treasonable and not patriotic. Because we’re moving all of our wealth overseas, whether it’s the jobs or whether it’s the corporations and their headquarters and all their tax loopholes. General Electric not having to pay any taxes last year. What has become of America as a nation? So if we can appeal to the American public to one more time, look at the labor movement as a good, as a decent thing to do. It’s the only thing that’s going to help working people rise because they’ll have collectiveness there’s strength and in individuality, there’s weakness. But they’ve been taught right from the first day going to school about American exceptionalism. American individuality. The manifest destiny, that you are your own rugged individual. And you don’t need anybody else. Ronald Reagan is going to march into the movies and go off some place and take America with him. That’s not real life. That’s a movie. That’s fiction. So somehow or another, we got to solve the problem of communicating both with the politicians with our vote and American public that you should look kindly upon the unions. Not as union bosses. Not as detractors of the American way. Not as anti-American. Not as an anti-individual, but as a method of lifting all the individuals to a higher plain in sharing the wealth of America as best as we can. Until we decide that, whether it’s with tax cuts and we’re able to do that for the general public, we’re going to be beaten up constantly in the press and the media because they don’t want us. They’re are fascinating things... I can go on and on... 50:30 We had a meeting out in Jersey. This is interesting. We had a corporate campaign going against Sam Zell. Sam Zell is the guy who bought the Herald Tribune...excuse me, the Chicago Tribune and he ripped the pension plan apart and put it all into his pocket and declared bankruptcy. He was a very unscrupulous person. But he owns Equity Resident...Residential Equity and the biggest INAUDIBLE in the United States of America. They build on non-union jobs. So we decided to go into a corporate campaign rather than just the traditional stuff. As  we’re going through this thing, you got to realize how the wealth of American had shifted so much to a handful of people. And those handful of people, because of the limit of what you can spend, the concentration of wealth just gets greater and greater. It doesn’t trickle down like we were promised through Reagenomics and all that. It’s not real. It’s a make believe story and it’s something out of a movie out of Hollywood. So when we look at it as trade union movement, I’ve watched it happened over the years. We have lost tremendous purchasing power and we’ve been reduced in this country as working people, union or non-union, to a point where it’s getting depraved. And when they’re talking about taking away the social safety net, whatever’s left out there, the labor unions were the ones who supported Social Security and helped Roosevelt get it through. We supported food stamps and heat programs, so that those less than us could have a safety net. Now they’re talking about dismantling and there’s no safety net, putting us back into Hoovervilles. Anybody who knows the history knows about how Herbert Hoover and the Republicans were so paralyzed by the stock market crash in ’29, which was the end... October ’29, that by ’30-’31...’31 was a power story. Roosevelt gets elected in ’32 so the nation near a revolution because you had the Nazis rising in Germany. You had the Socialists rising, and the Fascists rising in Spain and Italy. And in America, we had Father Coughlin. We had a lot of people out there and the Communist party was growing. So Roosevelt saved capitalism, but he was never appreciated for that. And they just wanted to keep going back to those original Gilded Age model where we were subjected as working people, to 10-12 hour days, a miserable existence, because we are less than they are. And there’s a whole list of Calvanism. And how Calvanism has taken over the economic mind of the United States of America about this being pre-ordained. We talked to rich people, wealthy people who were born into it and they believe they were preordained. We’re different than you and we just don’t get it. I go back to...what you were saying about building tradesmen and ironworkers having a good brain. That’s very offensive because maybe you were born with more in life but I’m still an American citizen. I still vote. You vote once, I vote once. You breathe the same air I breathe. You drink the same water I drink. You travel on the same roads that I do. So yes, you are wealthy, but you’re not better than me. That’s not America. That’s something else that’s become foreign to the American dream and we’re not going to... I’m not going to tolerate it so... I was more than happy to do this because I want somebody to realize that... You know, we know what they’re about. We want them to become Americans just like us and become patriotic and understand that this nation is a one ship. If this ship goes down, we all go down with the ship. It is very important that they get back again to be patriotic and care about their fellow Americans and not be so isolated from the rest of Americans that it becomes a divorced concept that they can’t even wonder how a person doesn’t have enough to eat. There are millions and millions of children that go to bed hungry in America. This is the richest nation in the world. How can these things be? What kind of a conscience has this nation adopted, with the Paul Ryans and others, the Ayn Rand concept. There’s a whole other thing about Ayn Rand, Rand’s objective has completely consumed Republican Party as far as it is concerned the right wing. And I tell ya, I could go on about this. Charlie Rangel was a congressman, he’s my congressman from Manhattan because I  live in Manhattan. And I asked him a question, a Q&A. It was a director’s fundraiser. I said, “Charlie, you’ve been down in Congress a long time. I would like you to think a little bit outside the box and listen to me and just give me some guidance, because you’re the man in Washington in the House of Representatives.” I said, “Look it up. There’s a philosophy called objectivism that Ayn Rand...from Atlas Shrugged...created objectivism.” I was a devotee myself years ago when I was much younger. I was interested in it. What happened was I drifted away because I went back to Catholicism and go back to my humanity. But anyway, I still understood the philosophy. It’s built on the virtue of selfishness. And Paul Ryan, in his Congressional office, before a staff worker begins working for him, they must read Atlas Schrugged. Now you have to understand what Atlas Schrugged and objectivism is saying. Ok? So you understand the methodology and the reasoning behind Paul Ryan and the Tea Party. Because that there is the virtue of selfishness in saying there is a handful of people that are the thinkers the world, they are the ones that matter. The rest of us are just out here. We’re not really part of a society. The true good creators of wealth, etc. etc. And objectivism, time and time again, is the virtue of selfishness that really, because you earn the money, because you are the creator, because you are the one, you’re John Gault, you don’t have to share anything with everybody else. You earned it and it’s yours and that’s all there is to it. The rest of society can go to hell. Now if you look at the whole platform that they’re running on, whether it’s the destruction of the unions, the trade workers, whether its...the tax breaks for the rich. Whether it’s de-assembling the social programs and social safety nets, what is it all about? It’s about objectivism and how that philosophy has captured the right wing of the Republican Party. As long as you are a Democrat and stand up and say, “Wait a minute. There are all these fallacies in our philosophy, and we’re not going to tolerate it. We’re going to talk about the true nature of the American people and tell the Republicans all about it...” What did you just say? Then he went into very interesting... His answer was... And then he says, “You know, I’ve been talking to the Monsinours and the bishops and I’ve been talking to the ministers and the Rabbis about how America has to begin to look at its soul again, whether or not we are our brothers’ keeper and everything else.“ I said, “Charlie, that’s what I just said to you, but I’m trying to give you the tools to attack the people who are trying to de-assemble all of that.” Then I said, “But I really love the answer that I gave you because that is the answer. But what are we going to do about it when we counteract those people in debate for the American mind and American soul and their vote.” You have to understand what these people are all about, what their philosophy is. Just listen, you know, Rand Paul, he’s a senator, right? He’s the son of the Texas congressman. What is his first name? Rand. Where do you think the name Rand came from Ayn Rand. When are we going to start thinking about what’s going on here? Ron Paul named his son Rand. What higher honor can you give a person than to name your son after that person. So that philosophy is grippin’ him. So when you listen to Ron Paul or Rand Paul, think about objectivism. Think about the fallacies that are in that philosophy and attack those philosophies. Don’t attack the individual, but attack the thought process. So I talked to another congressman about it. And he said, “What are you talking about?” I says, “You guys represent me. I’m a tradesman. I’m thinking through all this  stuff as best that I can and you’re not listening to me. You’re going to continue to lose the debate. Americans are big hearted - we’re not selfish. The virtue of selfishness... Once they realize what these people are all about and how greedy they are, emotionally greedy, monetarily greedy. They would then say, “Wait a minute. I want to reject that because I want to share with my fellow Americans this wonderful American experience of self-governance - what our nation is all about. We’re not going to have rich or poor. We’re going to have a huge middle class in this country that can share all the wonders of this nation, not just a handful of people that have it every day while the rest of us don’t. That’s not the America that I know or the America that I want. But someone has to answer to these people. I’m only a laborer official. You’re the guy that can take the Congress floor. You can get people together. You can challenge this. You’re in a state of mental depression. I got it. You allowed this, not the Senate, the Congressman... You allowed a handful of people with a filibuster to destroy a philosophy that you were trying to... Why don’t you just make them into telephone book? They would have ran out of energy. They would have not stayed up there forever, reading a telephone book. Because they’re lazy. Republicans like to play golf. They don’t want to be reading in a filibuster. But anyway, so I’m frustrated with my, our own people who are supposed to be support us politically and they don’t want to think outside the box of the traditional thinking. We’re not going to survive either as a political party, a Democratic party or as a labor movement. Finally, it’s a question of thinking of outside the box, we look at the vulnerable points of our adversaries who are trying to destroy us. Take advantage of those vulnerable points and bring them to the table, make them understand that were all Americans. It’s our future too. [Perfect. Thank you so much. I really enjoyed. It was a pleasure to talk to you.] END 1:00:05
Ironworkers;Michael Richards;1978;2011; Counter No./Time Topic 00:01 [Well, first of all, tell me your name.] Michael Richards. [What year were you born Michael?] 1978. [What town were you born in?] Fullerton, California. [Did you go to high school there or...?] I went to high school in Plecentia which is exactly next to it. [What kind of family background... Labor background?] Labor background? Third generation union ironworker. My great uncle on my mother’s side was the first. Then he got my Father in after            my mother and father married. Shortly later I came along and then ah...I got in. And since then, I got my little brother in. [Now did you start in an apprenticeship program at the high school or...?] I was nineteen. I had gone to college for a year. I had some economic trouble. I asked my Dad for a loan and he offered me a job as an apprentice ironworker. [It sounds like something my Dad would have done.] Yeah. I asked him before if I could get into the ironworkers right out of high school and he said no. He didn’t want me to be an ironworker and so I went to college and I asked him again and he said no. And then when I asked him for the big loan, he got me the job. [Now why didn’t he want you to go into the business? Was it the safety?] Well, I think all ironworkers want better for their children. I just had my son. At first I told a bunch of people that I’d never let him be an ironworker but since then, I’ve changed my thinking on it. I mean, it’s provided everything I have basically. 1:36 [What local did you apprentice...?] 433 out of Los Angeles, California. [Did you do a four year program?] It was a three year program but hmm... I messed around a lot. It took me six years to get out of apprenticeship. [Laughter] Yeah. [Is that like going to college on the seven year plan or something?] Yeah. Kind of. A lot of disciplinary problems. I would disappear for 6-7 months. Instead of taking a 3-month summer, I’d take a 6 month summer. And then I’d have to re-apply or go before the Board. But since I had the family connection, I was able to get back in every time. And every time they told me it was my last opportunity. [They were kind enough to let me back in.] Yup. [That’s great.] 2:22 [What kind of jobs did you do as an apprentice?] I started out as a welder helper. So basically we would hang floats for the welders to stand on and move machines. Re-set machines. Bring materials up. Bring the consumables up, like wire and sticks, stuff like that. [You just mentioned a term, the float. Tell me what a float is because I know what it is but I’d like to have it on tape.] A float is ahh...usually a 3 by 5 wooden platform, consisting of an angle iron frame and 4 hemp ropes which are usually 1 inch manilla ropes. And you tie them to certain points on the building. They hang off the parameter of the building, multiple floors above the street level, so that welders can get to what they need to weld. It’s basically a suspended platform. [And is it... They’re tied off... Where are they’re tied off?] They’re usually tie off to the floor beams so they hang down slightly below the floor that you are accessing it from. And ahh...there’s a special knot to tie them too. It takes a little while to get the hang of them, how to hang them. It takes two guys to hang a float and you have to work in perfect concert, otherwise somebody’s going to end up with 200 pounds of wood in their hands and that’s not good on the edge of a building. 3:54 [So besides that, and besides working as an assistant to the welders, what else did you do?] I worked my way into the raising gang. And, it took some hazing to get into the raising gang. I got a lot of jokes played on me before... [Like what kind of things?] Like...where I came from, it was a structural local so we didn’t do any rebar. And the top position was a connecter and that was like every young guy’s goal was to be a connecter. And I wanted to be a connecter. I was in good shape. I was built for it. And people would say, “Hey, you want to connect?” And I’d say,  “Hell yeah. You know?” Thinking it was my shot. And they’d say, “Go connect this power cord in the outlet over there.” Oh yeah, funny joke. You know? But finally I got the opportunity to work in the raising gang. And then I worked my way up from the ground crew all the way up to the connecter and then...ahh... I was on a raising gang foreman for a while and then became a general foreman after that. 5:08 [And what was that gang responsible for?] Well, we take this structural steel off the truck that showed up in the morning. Shake it out. And then we’d mark the pieces, for piece numbers and location. And we actually hooked them on, each individual piece to the crane. The crane would then take it up to where it goes in the building and the connecters would connect the pieces. Columns were vertical members, and beams and headers were horizontal members. Basically, we were responsible for erecting the structure primarily just getting it up. And then there were other crews that came back behind us to make sure it was straight, deck it, and all that other stuff. [How do you know which piece of iron goes where? Do you have a blue print on that?] Yeah. It’s all on an erection print. Then the erection prints will give you locations of every piece number. As a raising gang foreman, you get the prints and you are responsible for thinking really in three dimensions. Vertically, horizontally, and what carries what. You have to know what you have to put up before everything else can be attached to it. So you have to think...to look at the print and actually think backwards almost, as to know what needs to come up next piece comes up. [Yeah, so you have to have a pretty wholistic grasp.] Exactly. It’s a lot of conceptual thinking that some people can’t ever do. It’s tough. 6:50 [Then after that, what did you do, besides the gang work. Did you do that for a long time?] I was a connecter for a long time. When I left Los Angeles, I was a connecter. I moved to Tulsa. And I applied in Tulsa as a connecter. I also had a welding certificate at that point. My Father taught welding in the apprenticeship in Los Angeles. And so I have multiple disciplines that I was good at. And when I came to Tulsa, I made my name as a connecter. There was a really giant building being built and I wasn’t a member of the local yet. I was still booming. And they asked me if I connected. And I said, “Yeah.” So I went out there and we didn’t have a really good raising gang foreman and I was correcting them all the time. So they gave me the raising gang foreman position instead. After about two weeks, I was a raising gang foreman. About six months later, I was running the entire job as a general foreman. [So that’s a lot of responsibility.] It was. And I know I was young at the time. I had... [How old were you? Still in your twenties?] I was 28, running a $300 million job. GIGGLES [Did it keep you up at night?] Yeah. I would actually dream about what we were doing tomorrow, the night before. And I had a one month old baby when I got the job. So... [So you weren’t sleeping much anyway.] No, not at all. It was tough. I get emotional thinking about how hard it was. [I can imagine.]  8:40 [Well, how did you get from that, then, to...you’re in Tulsa, right?] Yeah. [How did you get from... By the way, that local you were in. That’s in Los Angeles all the way to Vegas, right?] Yeah. It’s... [It’s all that territory?] It just north of San Diego all the way up to...like...not quite to Pismo Beach but up the coast quite a ways. And then east all the way to Vegas. I started my apprenticeship in Las Vegas and then I moved my membership over to Los Angeles’s hall where I’ll finish it out. And then I met my wife in Southern California. We decided to move to Tulsa. So we moved there. It’s a funny story how I transferred. I went fishing with my wife’s grandfather in Tulsa on a vacation. [Did she have family roots there?] Yeah, her whole family is in Oklahoma, in Tulsa. She just lived in California at the time. And we had been trying to buy a home in Southern California and just couldn’t come up with the money because the housing bubble was so large at the time. So we...we were in Tulsa and I was fishing and her granddad got me drunk. I started looking through the paper and I found a house that I could afford. But I really wanted to look at it so I went and got in the car and drove around. I couldn’t find it but I ran into another house and I called the number on the sign. The realtor came out and about an hour later, I bought the house. GIGGLE [You got a mortgage without knowing what you were going to do?] Well, I was pre-qualified in California, but I hadn’t found anything in my price range. [Sure.] So I bought this small ranch in Tulsa, outside the city. And I, I’m still not a member there. I hadn’t asked the business agent in the local if I could work there. And I didn’t know anybody. So I went to the hall the next day and I told the business manager that I just bought a house here. I’m a journeyman ironworker out of Los Angeles and I wanted to know if I could work. And he said, “Well, we’ll see if you like it here. Whenever you are here, just come in and we’ll talk.” So that night I went home to my wife’s grandparents’ house and her granddad had a dinner guest who ran one of the largest erectors in Tulsa and he gave me a job on the spot even though I wasn’t cleared through the hall. And when we moved out two weeks later, I just called the hall and said, “Hey, I got a job...” which is a no- no because you can get in trouble... [Because you’re going in another jurisdiction.] Right and I had no permission. I wasn’t cleared in or anything. And they said, “Oh, if so and so wants you, you can work there. So I did for a while. I kept asking them, over and over again, when I can I transfer in. And they said, “Well, we don’t know because you’re new here and we don’t know if you’re going to like it.” So I said, “Ok, well, you know when can I transfer?” I kept hitting them up for it and finally they heard about me and said, “When are you going to transfer in?” And I said, “Well, I’ve been asking you for months.” So that’s how it went down. I transferred in and shortly thereafter, I ran for recording secretary. Nobody opposed me. I got in and I worked my way up. 12:16 [Were there many in Los Angeles or Tulsa...where there many guys, say, under 40, who were involved with in union activity? Or was it mostly just work?] No. I’d say mostly younger men in LA, it was just work. It seems to me like most people don’t get involved until they’re almost too late. You know? Where they can’t relate with the younger guys that they’re trying to interact with later on. I was in a unique circumstance where I got into the local. I never missed a union meeting. We give away a watch every 12 meetings you attend so you can get a watch  annually if you attend every union meeting. And i t’s a gold watch. [That’s an ironworker’s watch, right?] Yeah. I have three of them. I‘m not eligible anymore because I’m a paid official. I have three of them the three years I was in the local. I helped to write the resolution that created the position I’m in now because we needed an organizer. So... I wrote the resolution. We ran it. Got it passed. Got hired on full time. And now I’m out in the field so I no longer... [Work on the job.] ...right. I don’t construct buildings. Now I try to organize non-union shops. 13:39 [So what year did you travel from the Los Angeles area to Tulsa?] 2007. [And what year did you become a recording secretary?] 2009. And then I became full time organizer December 2010. [Are you...] 2009, sorry. [Are you, they actively organizing?] Yes. Every non-union company within my geographical jurisdiction knows who I am. I’ve been actively recruiting, actively organizing, multiple NLRB {National Labor Relations Board] cases. I’ve been really, really pro-active as far as organizing is concerned in my area. [How’s that going?] Yeah, it’s pretty tough. GIGGLE My Dad asked me... He called me and said, “How’s it going?” And I said, “It’s going all right.” “Well, what’s the learning curve like?” And I said, “Dad, it’s like jumping off a cliff.” I went from knowing everything I needed to know about erecting iron to knowing nothing about labor law. Really just feeling around in the dark. My first campaign was horrendous. I just blew it to hell. I probably could have got sued. But luckily, they didn’t know as much as I didn’t know. So... [It wasn’t because you were violating any NLRB laws.] Yeah, myself, and I didn’t know it. But I educated myself eventually and now I’m pretty good at it. [How did you educate yourself?] I read all the time. I always have a book. I attended some trainings through the international and they clued me in on a lot of things I didn’t know. They would loan me organizers. [To help you, assist you?] Yeah, I mean, really it’s just man power. I’m going to go out on a house call...in rural Arkansas, on dirt roads and stuff. They don’t want you going out by yourself. So I would bring guys from all over the country really. They would go with me. Some of them had a lot more experience than me and we’d talk in the hours that you spent in a car, you know? And you’d get an informal education that way. [You just mentioned Arkansas. How big is the, what is the geographic size of your local?] I have all of Eastern Oklahoma so anything east of Oklahoma City to the Texas line. I have five counties in Kansas, 5-6 counties in Missouri, and 5-6 counties in Arkansas. So it’s like that corner there. [It’s quite the area.] It’s huge, yeah. I take me, ahh, to get from one end to the other...five hours, not stopping. It’s big. 16:36 [When you’re organizing, you said you made house calls. You go to ironworkers and try to talk them into joining a local?] Yeah, yeah. My first...ahh...real campaign, ahh, I didn’t know shit. I was literally just handed the keys to the truck. “You’re an organizer now. Show us what you got.” So I went to the biggest non-union job in Tulsa. I walked up to the guy and I said, “Hey, are you hiring?” And he said, “Well, what do you know?” And I said, “I’m a connecter from California.” He says, “We might be hiring.” So I was hired on as a salt and I work covert. And I spoke to the men on breaks. I tried to organize a little bit of revolt. Didn’t work out for me. I went out on a single person economic strike after there was some difficulty  where I was a...I was afraid for my physical well being because of some things that happened. And so I went out on a single man economic strike and then NLRB didn’t find in my favor. And that was a big learning curve on it. But...hmm...because I was able to get into a company and...and get inside and figure out their entire structure and meet every single worker. [Yeah.] And I’m really good at being a connecter. So...I was the best connecter they’d ever seen and I taught some of their guys things accidentally. The guys working in the field, they really trusted me and really respected me but t, the the leadership of that company, after I left on the strike, they really...hmm...tore me down to the mat. And it was a big learning curve. A lot of people were really excited at international about what I was doing. But the end result was nothing really ever happened. So it was a learning experience for me, but no one had ever really done that in probably a long time, getting in and salting the job. [Were there workers on the site that you basically got pretty close to and stuff?] Yeah, I mean, really personally close. [Then, did that...when the thing fell through and they were bad mouthing you?] I had guys that I would call after the fact and they would say, one of them in particular said, “I have nothing to say to you.” You know? And I said, “Why’s that?” He said, “Well, our whole relationship was a lie. You lied to me the whole time.” And I said, “No I didn’t. I just didn’t tell you everything.” You know? And he hung up. I haven’t spoke to him since. But other guys, ahh... They would, like, call me later when they had problems. Like, the company is doing this and that to me. What do I do? [Yeah.] And, I don’t know. So some of them finally have that avenue to go to for resolution on certain problems. But other people really didn’t take it well. 19:37 [How did you...like, that was your first organizing attempt... What do you do differently now?] Now I’m more forthcoming. I tell them who I am and what I’m there for. Hmm... I met with some stiff resistance...in that avenue as well. [How do you find out...ahhh... Are you going to a job sites and talk to people or do you get a name of a few workers? How do you know where to start? If you know there’s a place you got to be in a town in Arkansas or Missouri or whatever...?] Well, I generally know who the contractor is because they’ll beat out one of my singnatory contractors on the job. And that’s how I get my leads, from them. They’ll say, “This big project is going to so and so.” Then I’ll go to the job and I’ll start following them around and figure out who the guys are, where they’re staying. Contact them at their hotel or motel or wherever they’re staying, because usually they’re from out of town. Then I’ll start talking to them. I’ll offer them meetings, like where we could meet and I’ll pay for whatever, dinner, beer, so we can talk and start dialog. Try to get their...ahh...their complaints. I need to have a complaint, something I can latch on to where I can generate a campaign around. It could be as simple as they don’t provide us with drinking water during the day and it’s hot. That can be a campaign. But if they won’t talk to you at all, you don’t have a campaign. So... It’s getting to know who they are and where they’re going and where they’re staying and a lot of covert stuff. Hmm... I’ll go, I’ll go through their trash. I’ll go through their company’s trash. I’ll go to their headquarters and get in their dumpsters and pull out their trash bags and read through their mail and anything they throw away. Employee rosters. Get phone numbers from there and call them and talk to the people cold, you know? See what’s going on. Sometimes they hang up.  Sometimes they don’t answer. Sometimes they do. All kinds of stuff. [Is that working better than your original...?] I don’t know that it works better. It’s just more...like a...transparent. You know? There’s no...ahh...cloak and dagger, lying, hurt feelings type stuff. These guys get hurt feelings when they think you’re somebody you’re not. You know? And so...ahh... But even that cloak and dagger stuff eventually led to some, a good outcome. People call me still to this day about, you know, problems that they’re having on their jobs. I have actually been about to recruit some members away from that company and into our membership. 22:23 [Do you have an apprenticeship program?] Yes. [Do you have an active role in that too?] Yeah, I’m an instructor in the apprenticeship. [What area do you teach?] I teach safety, I teach history, and I teach math. I’m an OSHA 500 instructor. And I use that in organizing as well. If a company’s, you know, beating the contractors because they’re cutting corners on safety, I go out and watch them. Take photographs. Document violations, turn them in to OSCHA. Just as an organizing tactic to drive their costs up to be more competitive with our contractors who follow the law to the T. And I found that to be...ahh... I find it to be effective as far as cost measures are concerned, but not organizing as in breaking membership into the union. But you gotta do what you gotta do. 23:22 [So what’s the... What keeps you going in that role of an organizer? I mean obviously it’s different than just being an ironworker.] Yeah, it’s... I tell you one thing. It’s not the money. [LAUGHTER] My wife...ahh...makes good money and she complains to this day that I’m working more hours than ever and making a steady paycheck, for sure, but not as much as I ever did. [Tell her it could be worse. You could be a musician.] Yeah... [LAUGHTER] True. [So it’s not the money. Obviously there’s something else that...] I think it’s just my passion for...the union. I mean... I’m going to get emotional again...ahh... Everything I’ve ever had from the day I was born was...provided...not provided by the union but, through the union by...my wages set forth...provided everything that I had. [Yeah. So in your family, I mean your Dad, obviously and you.] Yeah, my Dad had a... My Dad didn’t even go through high school, you know? He dropped out when he was 16 and joined the Navy when he was 17 and got a GED. Like basically a piece of paper, a GED that he didn’t actually have to do any work for. That got him into the union later on but...ahh... My Father is dyslexic. He can’t hardly read but because of the union, my Dad was able to make the money that provided for us. [Yeah.] 24:52 [You know, one of the things that I noticed...and I’m talking to a lot of the ironworkers... It’s funny you should mention your Dad being dyslexic because I was talking to one of the instructors from one of the locals here. He does a lot of teaching and he said he gets a lot of guys who are dyslexic. It’s clear they’re learning disabled that even if they were never diagnosed for it.] Some of them can’t even read at all. [That’s what he was saying. But I also noticed that a lot of... The guys always seem pretty smart. I’ve interviewed a bunch of people, I haven’t found one that I’d consider a lunk head.] Right. [And they seem to be very creative, good problem solvers. Maybe not book learners, but good at figuring stuff out. And is that kind of your experience, too, with ironworkers?] A lot of them are kind of mechanically inclined, even  if they are not academically inclined. But...ahh... You have to be... You have to be able to think conceptually. It’s not something that we find that’s really taught in school too much anymore. [Yeah.] Everyone’s getting away from the...ahh...like trades and... You know, you used to have wood shop and auto shop and all these programs are being deleted now because they want everybody to go straight to academia but...ahh... When I was in auto shop, in high school, I had two periods of auto shop, my first two periods from 8 am to 10 pm, or, 10 am. I had auto shop and it’s because...I loved it. I mean, I had a hot rod and that’s what I loved to do in the morning. Why go to school when you can go to the shop. They had lifts and everything. 26:34 [What kind of car did you have?] It was a 65 GTO. I still have it. [What kind of engine? Sorry.] A 389. [Does it have a manual transmission?] No, it’s a power glide. Yeah. [Does that disappoint you? Would you rather have one? GIGGLE] Well, when I re-build it, I’m going to have probably a 6-speed manual. [Do you have that in Tulsa now?] Yeah. Yeah. I’ve drug it all over the country, really. 27:00 But, hmm... They don’t teach that at school anymore. My auto shop teacher when I was a freshman, we could only go one period a day. He said, “You know, you guys need to realize that not all of you are going to college.” He said, “60% of you...” And he meant the whole school when he said this. “...are going to make a living with your hands.” There’s things in this world that need to be done with people that can use their hands. Not everybody can just sit behind a desk all day because... You can have all of the people in the world behind a desk but then nothing’s going to get done. And so that really stuck with me. And that’s where I ended up, even though I went to college, I ended up working with my hands. It’s been...I consider it a noble profession really. [Sure.] 27:56 [So, you have a Woody Guthrie T shirt on. What’s the connection between your job and that? Or, music in general?] Oh, I’ve always loved music. I mean, you know, you go through that typical teenage years when you have that tough spot. But Woody Guthrie... With being now connected with Oklahoma and Okemah not being far from my house. I just...ahh... I didn’t even learn of Woody Guthrie until I was about 26 probably. I never heard a Woody Guthrie song until then. And then, I really identify with it even though there was a generational gap there. It’s like, this is as good today, or as true today as it was back then. You know? I’m going through the same things but...you know...obviously different variables. But ahh... I just love the music. As simple and basic as it was, it still speaks to the same things as today as it did back then. [Have you listened to him in the raw form? Or do you listen to, like, Wilco and...] I’ll listen to both. Musically I listen to everything. I wouldn’t confine myself to one genre. There was a time when you wouldn’t catch me listening to anything but hard core metal or anything like that, but that was in my teenage angst years. Now I listen to just about anything that speaks to me, really. [Are there any hard core metal bands or bands outside of the main stream spectrum or whatever that are in your mind addressing the issues like Guthrie did?] Rage  Against the Machine did when I was in high school. [Are you a fan?] Yeah. And Tom Morello now, he does too, but his band has obviously disbanded. Ahh... I’d say he was one of the more modern labor-friendly voices in music. There’s probably a few more but they’re not as big as...or doesn’t have as much broad appeal as Tom Morello does. 30:16 [So in Oklahoma, do you have any local bands to listen to? Because you got...] Well, our music scene, it tends to come out of Austin for some reason and then it comes right up the turnpike, so we get a lot of bands from Austin that tour our local venues. I’m personal friends with the three guys that own all the venues in town, so I get to go to any show I want to and... I have a... I still keep my music connections pretty solid. But Tulsa’s music scene, it seems to have...gotten a lot watered down. It’s not as vibrant as it used to be. Yeah, there’s no more...ahh... The Church Studios just re-opened after a big remodel. Nothing has come out of there really to speak of. Ahh... [Have you incorporated music into your...] Organizing? [Yeah, or to your history classes?] No, I took a music... I took a labor history class out of IV Tech in Indiana, on line. There was a music portion in that but I haven’t used them in my class. My students tend to be younger so we’re talking like 18 to 25. They’re not too receptive to folk music. [No, I didn’t think so.] I mean, even though... Maybe later on, but they still have that, like, testosterone at 120 and it’s like, it’s not going to happen. It would really be punishing them, instead of like enriching them. Do you know what I mean? [Oh, I understand.] Even though they will appreciate it later. Like I said, I didn’t hear my first Woody Guthrie song until I was 26 or so. And then... I don’t think I would have appreciated it at 18. Do you know what I mean? Pete Seeger, or any...nothing. Not at that age. But later on, sure. 32:29 [Well, I just have one more question and that is... Like, where do you see the labor union in general? Do you have any grand ideas about that? I’m sure you think about that, right?] I do, yeah. Hmm... In my sleep even, you know? Laugh. I don’t know where it’s going to go... I know it’s not going to go away as long as I’m around, it’s not going to go away. But I think we’re going to have... I hope we’re going to have a cultural swing where we go back to our past and back to a strong union background...or... Even if it doesn’t deal with labor unions so much. It’s like workers’ rights and eventually, hopefully, people will come around and see that, you know, working a Macjob or working for Walmart, there’s no future. It’s... Walmart is basically, in my opinion, your new company store. The people that work there only make enough money to spend their paychecks there and feed their families and that’s unfortunate. I’d like to see people take more pride in “Made in America” products. Hmm... I just...really realized that...ahh...the people that create jobs in America aren’t looking out for labor. They’re looking out for...ahh...stock market prices...ahh... That this balance sheet recession we’re going through now will kind of wake people up, I’m hoping. I don’t know that it will. I’m really hoping that people realize that there’s more to life than working 40 hours a week just to be able to feed the family and live in an apartment. And break even or even some times going a little bit in debt. It’s like that goal of being middle class where you can afford to have vacations.  Afford to send your children to school and get ahead. There’s so much in the mentality with the guys that I deal with, day in and day out, in the non-union side is, “I’m getting by. You know...I’m doing well. I feed my family and...” Yeah but... You worked 2500 hours last year and did you go on vacation? Well, no, we can’t afford to go on vacation. Well, did you buy a house? No. Why would I buy a house? I can’t afford it. I have a nice two bedroom apartment. You’re paying somebody else to life in that apartment. You’re not creating any equity. You’re not living the American dream. You’ve got a 20 year old car, you know, that runs six days a week and the seventh day you’re working on it instead of spending time with your kids. Hmm... I hope people will come to it. But... It’s going to take effort on my part and the rest of our parts to make it happen. [It’s been a pleasure. I really enjoyed it.] Thank you. END 35:45
Ironworkers;Bill Satler;1950;2011;Counter No./Time Topic 00:01     [This is Bucky Halker and I'm here at ironworkers #63 and I’m here with Bill Satler.] Yes. [And Bill, tell me what year you were born first.] 1950. [And here in Chicago, or where...?] Born and raised right here in the city and I still live in the city. [And where did you grow up in the city? What part of the town?] Northwest side, northwest side. It’s called Mayfair. [Did you go to high school?] I went to Catholic grammar school in the neighborhood and then I went to Lane Tech, which was a technical school which helped me out, helped me become an ironworker, to tell you the truth because... We had structural drawing, architectural drawings, and machine shops that taught you a lot about how metal was formed and made. Drilling and tapping and whatever. So it was a technical school so it really helped me become an ironworker. [So did you start getting into ironworking right after you left high school?] No. I went into tool and dye because that’s what I was good at in high school. And I was apprenticeship for two years. And I found out that I hated being in four walls. So...and I had a friend that was caught with drugs and the judge said, “It’s either Vietnam or jail.” And he was a good buddy of mine and I had a girlfriend that wanted to marry me...and I said, I'm just going out there and see if I can be Johnny’s best buddy in Vietnam so we joined the service. We went to Vietnam together. Unfortunately, he didn’t come back home. He got killed. So...that’s what I did right after that... Then when I got out of the service, the State of Illinois had a program because so called baby killers needed to have a job and they’re trying to put us in a place that we belong. So the Goldblatts Building on State Street, it used to be State of Illinois, (de)apartment there that would test us for that aptitude. And I tested for being in the...like seven different things I tested for. And they said you could become a policeman, or you could become an ironworker, or you could be a number of things. So it came down to saying, all right. What do I want to do with the rest of my life? I says, “In order to be a policeman, you actually get shot at to shoot at people.” It doesn’t make any sense to me. So...I became an ironworker. And the funny thing about it was I thought I was going to be a big rough tough structural ironworker. And they had a apprenticeship school, Washburn Trade School, back then. It’s not there now. And I walk in the first day and there’s about seven lines of different trades. And one of them said #63 and the other one said Local #1. And I got in Local #1’s line by mistake. I get to there and I’m waiting. I get to talk to the head honcho and he says, “You sissy. You’re one of the sissy #63 guys. Get over in that line.” I thought I was really doing something wrong. You know... A big rough tough guy from Vietnam. And the next thing I know, wait a minute. What’s a sissy #63 guy? Well, the rest is history after that. It’s the best thing that ever happened to me. 3:11 [Did you start out at a particular work site? Do you remember the first job you had?] I remember it like it was yesterday. It was 111 Chestnut. It was a high rise that Mayor Byrne actually moved into. It’s across the street from the Hancock Center. And, it was pretty neat because I was always afraid of heights. I didn’t like heights. And I was with some peoples, and this is the beautiful thing about unions. If you do everything you’re suppose to, the brotherhood of the unionism is...that...that they take care of you. They find your weaknesses and help you out. And so they helped me overcome that and one of the ways you do that...is we started on, like, the 44th floor of a 60- story building. And when I finally got to 66, I was fine with it. [Not clear on number of stories here] So...but... If you get in with the right crew and do...and you’re not a trouble maker, the unions are outstanding for that, for helping out their fellow man. So it was kind of funny, there were things that would happen there. And you say, ok, this is the right thing. Every Tuesday at 9 o’clock, a woman across the street would wash the windows with...topless. So that’s when everybody had their instruments out, surveying and doing things that you could be doing on the job that the whole building would lean to the left... GIGGLES ...when that would happen. So one of the guys... We all chipped in and bought flowers for this lady. And so we got the flowers together and sent the guy over there. And he... We didn’t see him the rest of the day. That was... It was pretty neat. Things like that happened back then. It was a lot more fun back then. There wasn’t a lot of, insurance people, safety people telling you, “No, you can’t do this.” As long as you did your job, everybody pretty much left you alone. It was just a great time to be an ironworker. 5:28 [So were you an apprentice when you did that? First year apprentice?] First year apprentice, yeah. And things would happen after that, you just say that I’m glad I belong to this brotherhood because... Even though some of its boring, you play a game, that you say, all right. I can out do myself, more than I did yesterday. So you’d work harder and try harder. And at the same time, you’re also watching the other trades and you see what they do so before and after you, so you know better how to do your job by watching them. The apprenticeship is everything. If you want to talk about apprenticeship, Al Pellacore, the guy that’s named... This building is named after,,, [Yeah, there’s a plaque out there, right.] ...was one of the finest ironworkers, finest human beings you ever wanted to deal with. And fortunately, he was our apprentice coordinator. So you hear stories about unions saying, “Let’s get everything we can and get as much money as you can. Let’s screw the big guy.” But it wasn’t like that. Al Pellacore would say, “Listen, 8 for 8. You get paid for eight hours, you do eight hours.” And what he would teach you... He was an old Navy guy... And he was an officer but he was the highest ranking NC, non-commissioned officer could be. And he was the most giving guy. Everybody that went through his program...all the guys that I graduated with, are the main guys in the industry today. And that’s because of him as far as I’m concerned. But that’s one of the great things about unions. You get people like that to teach you, there’s no stopping you. You can build the world. In fact, that’s one of the stories he told us. He says, when he first got started, there was an interview with this old timer. And they asked him, “Was there ever a job you couldn’t get done?” And the guy would say...and the guy says, and this is after 50 years in the business. And he says, “I always thought that one job was going to come through that I couldn’t get done. But I always surrounded myself with people that knew what they were doing. And as a team, we always got it done.” So those were the lessons to be learned as a young man. 7:35 [So did you... Were you an indentured apprentice for that period or did you just...?] No. [Some of the guys that I’ve been talking who did four years with the same company, you know.] Well, you’re not going to believe this. I don’t know if anybody can say this. I have only worked for two companies in 40 years. I’ve never missed a day of work. I mean, for sickness yes, but never from lack of work. I’ve been blessed. I lied to you. It was three. Engineering Erection I was with for two years and then Northern Erectors I was with for 18 years and Area Erectors now, the rest of the time, so it was actually three. But it was two at the apprenticeship. And I’m glad I did that those first two years with Engineering Erection because that’s a whole different trade. That was curtain wall and windows, where the rest of my career was in miscellaneous iron and ornamental iron that knowing the two of 'em, made a better ironworker out of me. I knew the system. [Were you a welder too?] Certified welder. Yes. And it's... It’s one of the things this...this slight depression or recession is done. When I first got started, only maybe 20% of the ironworkers actually knew how to weld. And that’s a sin because you say, “All right. That’s what ironworkers do.” But there wasn’t the incentive. There was plenty of work doing other things. So... Today there’s plenty of incentive to get to learn as much as you can... Get your 30 hour OSHA. Get your safety things in order. Get your welding in order. And what it's doing is it's not only making a better ironworker, its making a better union. The unions have more to sell. And that’s what this hall is doing. They’re encouraging you. You don’t have to pay union dues if you go through this, go through the separate programs that they have going. They give you credits for that and that’s great. Because if unions are going to survive, there is only one way they’re going to do it: By producing people that know what the hell they’re doing. 9:51 [Yeah. Why do you think... This is not a question that I’ve asked anybody else but you brought it up. The ironworkers are pretty good about that, quality control I guess is what we could call it, with their members. It seems like a lot of other unions have a hard time doing that.] Exactly. And that’s why #63 is one of the finest unions you can talk to. The leadership isn’t a bunch of thugs that are just going to...flexing their muscles, saying “Do this or else.” These guys have computers underneath their hands and they look, for legal, you know, ratifications, safety ratifications, they create things rather than put out fires. They look ahead and that’s what your leadership should have. And not too many unions today are doing that. And it’s a sin. You might be starting now that the recession is in and they got to. Non-unions all around us. So... It won’t be #63 that will shut down unions, I’ll tell ya that. 10:49 [How did you see that...from, you know, working in various aspects of the trade. What were some of the biggest changes you saw from the time you first started, after you got back from the war. What kind of changes did you notice the most?] You’d like to think that ingenuity would be the biggest but it wasn’t. The biggest is safety. And when I say safety... OSHA got involved and even more importantly, insurance companies got more involved. So the days that I used to ride a ball on a crane, and a crane operator had to follow me go around in circles, going around, trying to throw ya, without a safety belt, and that actually happened. That’s definitely over with and that’s probably a good thing. But when you have kids coming out of college, telling these guys that have, you know, twenty years under their belt, that never had an accident, you know. And are very safety conscious and they know more about the business than anybody else, being told by the kid out of college that... And this is a fact. It’s not a prejudice thing. It’s a fact that they learned something in school and they learned by the books and they said, “This is the way it’s going to be.” And they don’t have a clue on how to actually be safe out there. And they sold the bill of goods to the general contractors and the owners who were building those buildings. They said, “The building is going to be a lot cheaper if you have no accidents and you should follow these guidelines.” In reality, it’s costing them money because it’s slowing down the process. Everybody is afraid to do anything. It’s like, you’re probably a damn good driver. As soon as a cop gets behind you, how do you drive? More cautious, slower. You know. And you’re not the person you could be. It’s the same with these kids. And I shouldn’t say just kids, there are old timers too that belong to OSHA. They take the fun out of the game and it used to be fun. You’d wake up in the morning and say ok. For an example, I’ve got pictures here of things that... There would be scaffolding that they had up to shoring and putting up this big beautiful ornamental piece and a carpenter comes up and says, “I can climb that just as fast as you.” I look at him and say, “Well, all right. Let’s try it. I bet you lunch.” So you have a race going up to 40 feet and down. And...and... You couldn’t do that today. You couldn’t just do something that was fun and build ya know relationship with the other trades too. You know... It’s a big happy family down there, even though you’d beat his ass going up the scaffold...so... You don’t have that today. You’re not allowed to be all that you can be. They kind of cut ya... It sort of reminds you of this stallion, running across that field. It’s a beautiful thing until you get a saddle on it. It’s terrible, getting that saddle on it. You’ve taking away what he is. I think that’s the biggest single thing that’s wrong with the industry. Yes, you need safety. But listen to the people that really know what safe means. And don’t drive it...Don’t be a policeman on it. Don’t, ya know... Don’t think that around every corner there’s someone with a camera because there is. It’s getting bad out there. So... That’d be the single biggest change that I’ve seen. The tools, the men, they’re smarter today. They get things done faster and the machinery is better today. And I see that owners, the engineering of these things, the valid engineering, there’s more of it being done now. Its being done cheaper and being done safer and it's not because of the insurance companies and OSCHA, it’s because they found out that if its done in the office before everybody else gets their two cents in it. It comes up right, it comes out safe for the men, and the next thing you know, it’s done faster. So that’d be the second thing that seems to have changed in the industry. So...but the biggest one is they took the fun out of it. 15:04 [Did you ever... You started out by talking about how getting in the wrong line, you got in the Local #1 line instead of the sissy #63. You know, have you had any jurisdictional, sort of differences with any of the locals?] Absolutely. I’m a superintendent right now of this company and I’m in charge of Local #1 guys too. So I schedule the men and I was just up in front of the Board of Local #1 and I probably shouldn’t say this as a matter of record, but it’s true. They don’t have enough brain power to blow their nose between all of them. They... It was election time and they didn’t like what I did. I sent #63 guys to do Local #1 guys work and actually, my guys were better. #63 guys were better than Local #1 guys, doing the work. You know... Local #1 guys are damn good at what they do but as soon as you tell them that there’s a 3,000 pound beam that has to go inside of an office building, 17 stories up, they’re lost. These #63 guys do it all day long and what they do is... They not only handled that 3,000 pound piece of steel and get it up there, the full pendant, put it together, and then clad it with some beautiful ornamental stainless steel, or brass cladding, or rails with glass. So you have guys that could do both. Local #1 guys, they want to be able to pick up the thing, you know, with a crane. Put it in position. Put a bull pin in there. Put a bolt in and lock it to the next connection. They say, “Hello, I’m a man and I deserve $45 an hour. Where these #63 guys, they’re taught to do just about everything that Local #1 guys just can’t do. So... I was up in front of the Board and they don’t want to hear that. [Yeah, I can imagine.] They don’t want to hear that but it’s a fact. [What about other unions, like glazers or carpenters. Did you ever have any run ins with them about jurisdictions?] All the time. But you see, not so much me or... In the early years I did because of the curtain wall with the glass. But... There’s one way to fight all that. Be better than the next guy. Half the contractors want #63 guys out there instead of the glazers and most of them do hire us, because we’re well trained and... We don’t ask for a whole bunch either. We actually ask for what we’re worth. 17:21 [It seems like that 63 guys, because I’ve talked to about seven or eight of them now and I went to the retirees luncheon the other day. They all seem, just from my vantage point, to be smart guys, almost all of them I talked to. I’d say they were good problem solvers. It seems like the jobs you’re doing, maybe because they have to have a lot of skills and you’re doing a lot of things, you guys have to know how to solve problems. Is that a good . . ?] Yup. The average education to my first year apprentice class was three years of college. That was our average. Now I just made it through high school. But we had guys in there with master degrees. And they’re leaders of the community right now. That’s where Richie Rowe, these guys come from... They’re all college kids. They work the industry and did some college. That’s what I said in the beginning. These guys do more on the computer than the Local #1 guys can do flexing their muscles and their extortionists. And you can have that on the record too. You know? So... You’re right. And I think it all started... with the son of a gun, Al Pellacore, the guy that I have so much respect for. He knew the importance of surrounding yourself with smart men. I think that’s the same with any football team or baseball team. You could ask some guys who could really kick ass, but you want them to play as a team and you want them to be smart about things. I feel you sacrifice a couple of miles per hour from a pitcher, if he can be consistent and throw the same ball every time. But I think that’s what they do at #63. You probably have 500-600 guys who tried to get into the apprenticeship program. They’re not just hiring because Uncle Joe is an ironworker. They’re hiring because they’re qualified. It does happen, but not often. So yes, we’re definitely the smart ones in the bunch. 19:20 [Yeah, it seems like that. Were there ever jokes played on you when you first started in the trade? Some of the guys tell me they were treated badly now and then but mostly it seems like you guys don’t raz each other too much.] I’ve seen some bad things, that people were treated wrong. Fortunately, no one ever did it to me because... One thing, I was always a very strong kid. And I never made any waves and I didn’t go along with any of the bullshit. After being in Vietnam and volunteering for some of the things I volunteered for... You have to treat everybody with some respect. And most of the time that happened. And if it didn’t happen, I’d be the person who would say something about it. So... That being said, there was times when you could have said something that was racially wrong, but was funny and actually happened. So you had to hold it back where there was some offensive jokes that were off color that you didn’t want to keep them going. But they pretty much knew that I was straight laced. I wasn’t going to put up with too much. And besides, I became the boss. This is a fact. Third year apprentice they made a foreman. The teacher that was teaching me in school was my helper. So I come onto the job, I have the truck. And I said...I don’t want to say names... But he’d ask me what to do during the day and then at night, in class, I’d be asking him what to do in class. So I was always the boss and so people pretty much treated me with a little respect. I earned it I guess...so... There was things that were funny. We had one guy that welded in some steel and I’m looking up at him and I say, “Dexter, how are you going to get out of there?” He welded the angle across his head and couldn’t get his head out. 21:28 And so another job I went to, there was another guy... McFarland and I had him put these stairs in. And I noticed that all of the doorways that was suppose to be at the platform, but the platform was half way through the door. And I says, “Do you think there’s anything wrong with this?” “Well, I thought the holes were put in wrong.” I says, “You turned the stair around is what you did. You had it going north instead of south.” So... And you know, those are funny things because this guy is a class act. He never made a mistake before, but the one time... What it was, it was two different stairwells. He just turned around in the stairwell. It’s an easy mistake. But when you move the platform half way across the doorway, how are you going to open up this door? So... Things like that happened all the time. Put something in the wrong hand and then someone says you got to cut something apart and you go out there... And they feel so bad because they are professionals. I wouldn’t have them in that position to do that, if I didn’t think they were capable. Everybody makes mistakes. You know? And it’s laughable at times. Another time, we’re carrying a ladder. I was up front and a guy in the back, and the next thing you know, the end of the ladder was down to the ground. I says, “Where did you go?” And I looked and he fell in the sewer hole. He went right down the hole and he’s still holding on to the ladder. I says, “You get off of that.” And I put mine down and we’re laughing so hard I couldn’t even pull him out of the damn hole because... “Where’d you go, asshole?” So... Stuff like that happened all the time. 23:10 [Now were you the guy... I think Bud Martens told me a story about... You were unloading some stuff off the back of a truck and it came down and it clipped off the end of your boot. Is that...] Bud Martens’ a helluva man. [Yeah, I really had fun interviewing him. He’s got great stories, great pictures.] Did he tell ya I had him in a 55 gallon bucket with a chain fall... [No he didn’t.] ... on the side of a building. [No.] He was a gang worker. I know those days are over. And was it safe? Yes. Would I be fined heavily for doing that today? Yes. Did I ever see anything like that fail? No. You took calculated risks because you’re professionals. And him and Larry Shoulders [spelling?]... I mean, there’s two guys that own companies who were head honchos that actually worked for me. And I never had one problem with either one of those guys, because they were such a class act. They knew what they did. I would tell them how to do something, I’d give them some stupid equipment to look for and they’d so, “Ok. We’ll do it.” Because they had confidence in me that I wouldn’t hurt ‘em. And that’s the sort of thing that with unions that once you’ve established that kind of relationship. I was... Larry was my boss when I was an apprentice. What do you see? Direction. 24:30 Bud Martens. First day on the job. Well, no, it wasn’t the first day... It was the first year on the job. Bud Martens and I were on the swing stage. It was 25 below zero wind chill. Water testing a window. You sit there with this dial with this needle and you push it in because there was some leakage in this beautiful high rise. And the owner of the company, Norm, was sitting there smoking a cigar going like this. It’s 70 degree temperature inside. While we’re 25 all day long with a water hose outside, 30-40 stories up. And I looked at Bud and I go, “Bud, I’m not going to make it as an ironworker because this sucks. There’s nothing good about this.” [Yeah, that’s great.] If you interviewed Bud Martens, you got a good interview because he is definitely a class act. 25:26 [What were some of the more memorable jobs that you worked on over the years that you can recall. And I know you have some photos and we’ll talk about those in a little bit.] What was funny about my apprenticeship is... The Sears Tower was being built when I first started. I worked on the world’s tallest building for over a year, maybe a year and a half, 3 stories into the ground. We’re putting cat walks in everything and doing all the stairwells and everything under the ground. I never got to the top of the building until...well, I shouldn’t say never, but the main thing that happened, the antennas were put up. But we had to put the cat walks and the ladders inside the antennas of the Sears Tower. I have a picture here of me, standing at the top of a ladder, with my foot hanging over the side of it... Where is it. Right there. That there is the antenna of the Sears Tower with me standing at the top off a ladder. Now I would be fined heavily to do...heavily right now if I did that... [Because you’re not tied off or anything.] No tie offs. [So is that... There’s a ladder there. Is that going up the anterior then? And your just kind of hanging right on the edge...] There’s seven stories of steel going down like that going down into the building. I think it was like 4 stories up. So...I’m sitting at the very top that is the highest point of the Sears Tower right there. And I actually have another picture that shows my foot, taking a picture of it over the city of Chicago. That was the next picture, I took it myself...that my foot was actually over the edge of this thing, over the city of Chicago. That’s a neat picture. I couldn’t find that one right now though. So the Sears Tower was a big part of the apprenticeship program. We did all sorts of stuff there. It was all interesting, first time stuff. And I was fortunate to do it during its infancy. Bud Martens was just learning' how to do that stuff. 27:31 We also did a lot of stupid things too. When I was young, and again I was still an apprentice and I was the boss... We were doing a bunch of stairs, three story stairs in a big housing complex out in the sticks. And they would... And we were in competition at times because the pre-cast guy had this 300 ton crane, a big crawler. Once he parked there, you couldn’t get him to do anything. So I told this guy that was in charge of the crawler, the pre- cast. I says, “Listen. We have about half an hour in there. I’m going to get in here with my crane, throw these stairs up, and then get out of there.” He says, “No you’re not. I’m going in there.” And I says... I yelled at my guys. I hand signaled. I says, “Bring it in.” So he started his crawler. I stood in the way of his track. Now his track is this big. And he come right up and he hit me right in the back and I just stayed there. And I’m telling those guys, “Get that trailer. Get that truck in there.” Then I don’t have to worry about getting them over here. So the foreman of this pre-cast guy was a huge man and he was hot. He said, “Git your ...” I was always taught that you could bluff your way out of a lot of things, but if something does happen, you have to control over whatever happens. And one of the control things that I thought of at the time was: If this big old ugly guy is going to haul off and hit me, I’m not going to protect myself. I’m going let him hit me. I’m going to fall to the ground...and I’m going to say, “Ow. I need an ambulance.” And later, right in front of that track, and my guys are taking care of it. [LAUGHTER] That was the kind of attitude you had back then. You do whatever you want... I guess there was not much different than the gladiators. The Romans. They worked together as a team and they did what they had to do to get the job done. And the reckless part, it’s kind of neat that you were able to do something like that. I don’t know if you’d be able to do that today. It just doesn’t happen that way anymore. So... There are so many kinds of things like that that were happening so... 29:54 [Well, maybe we should finish this portion and take a look at the photographs. How about that?] Well, this is roughly what we do in Local #63, the interesting stuff that we do. And one of the things that I like to talk about at the unions is this job right here. Now, you know Vector... Vector made these. This is a job that... A Pakistan Indian, a rich man, came to the United States and bought a steel mill in Pennsylvania. He believed in the American Way, so he wanted to go with union, with re-building the plant. And he wanted to go union with the men in the plant, which is unheard of because the steel mills were going crazy. They were going bankrupt daily back then. But he believed in the American Way. While that was all happening, his daughter dies and so... The opening day... They wanted a memorial, both for the opening day of the plant and the daughter... Well, Vector... They commissioned this professor from the Art Institute, you might know him, but I don’t know his name but... He knew astrology. He knew the planets and the stars. So he came up with this piece that’s...what do you call it...a time piece. [Oh, like a sundial?] A sundial. That’s exactly what it is. And what he had is a hole in the top. Its 14 feet in diameter and on the date of the birthday of the kid, the sunshine through, and it shines on her face. Comes through and shines on her face. And then on the big day of the opening of the plant, it comes through there and it shines on the plant date. That’s the... We had to put this in precisely. Now, the reason I bring this up is... It wasn’t that hard to put in but when I called Pennsylvania, and I says, “Listen, I’m coming in. I’m a union outfit. I want to work with union people there. And I want to do things right.” And the Pakistan guy wanted to do the same. So Lottie was the business manager over there and he says, “We all heard about this. We’re glad you called. We want to be part of it.” So he says, “How many do you want?” I says, “Three guys.” So I get out there and there’s four guys out there. And this guy introduced himself as Lottie. And I says, “Lottie,” I says, “I only need three guys. I can only pay for three.” And he says, “This is so important to our community, that I'm coming, I want to make sure the job is going to be done. I’m not charging you for my time.” So it all worked out well. We stayed at the house there. They took me fishing. It was just a great thing and such a great feeling to know wherever you went, you had a common cause with the unions and if you did things the right way, you always had a friend wherever you went. So I mean it really worked out well. Plus it’s just a great story because of the... [Yeah, it was a great story.] 33:17 [So what about these other things? Maybe I’ll make copies of these when we’re done. I’ll just shoot some of these now. Show me what else you got.] Something like this, this is a Greek church and this is brass... [Oh, it’s a Greek Orthodox, yeah.] We installed all that with the respect of the church because the Eucharist is always there. And so not only...respectful of the church, but we also got the job done. It’s really neat. [Now where is that church?] It’s right down the street. [Oh, that’s the one you see when you’re just going by on 290...] No. This is Chicago Avenue. Then Augusta...Augusta and that would be about Western. [Ok.] But then, this here? This is Soldiers Field. We worked on a helicopter. We had 27 picks on that helicopter putting it in. And we did it without a hitch, no one hurt. But these were things that were entrusted to us. And this is what 63 does. These are actually speakers... [Oh, gigantic speakers. Yeah. That’s what they are.] Soldiers Field. [Yeah.] Yeah, so we do that. We also do simple things like that. You look at it and say, ok. It’s a nice looking thing, but we actually silver-sided these rails in place, polished them, in place. So the same guys that pick up thousands of pounds and bring them to the hire rises, they also are capable of doing work like that. [Yeah. Now what is that wheel on the top?] That’s brass. [Brass, all right.] That’s brass. You don’t see a seam. 34:58 I went to Germany back in ’92 and the owls was on the Washington Library, in Washington, but this is in Germany. These owls are in Germany. So I went there and built the frames that were going to...to figure out the rigging, and how we were going to do all this back on the block. So I was there a couple of weeks. This is the full plumage. You can see up there now, the eagles? [Yeah.] So... It was . . .What was interesting about Germany is that... [How did you get those in place, just with a crane?] Yeah. The ironic thing is... The guy that did all this? Never delivered these. He delivered the owls... [And that was it...] ...and that was it. He had a real rough time fabricating. So the actual leaves were made in Boston. So a lot of work that I did, never showed up to Chicago. It was funny. One of the guys, this guy here... You just look at it, you see a guy polishing brass. But the interesting thing about it is and this is in Germany. And I found it interesting in all of my... I like to look at people and see how things are done to see if there are better ways of doing it. He’s using his knee to push the brass up to the buffer. Now what do you think happens to a knee when its buffing like that? [Yeah, I...] It gets hot. So I go up to him and I... I speak English and he speaks German. And I says, “How do you do that?” And he smiles at me. He drops his pants. He stands and drops his pants. He had a wooden leg. [LAUGHTER] And I said, “That’s ingenuity. You find the right guy for the right job and you’re going to make some money. [LAUGHTER] So there I... They take me to dinner out there one of them nights and he comes up to me and he says, “I want to apologize.” And I says, “Apologize for what?” He says, “I want to apologize for Hitler.” And I says, “Well, you’re not even old enough to be his grandchild.” He says, “I just want you Americans to know that us Germans didn’t all feel the way he did.” He says, “He was wrong.” So it was just a real nice thing to do... [That was nice.] And a lot of places I go to, things like that are said and done and you just say, “The world is a nice place and it really isn’t as big as you think it is.” You know? It’s pretty small. 37:24 [Now these are the Harold Washington Library, right?] Yeah. [These are up there now.] Yeah. This is an interesting one. This one’s...the world headquarters of Wriggly Chewing Gum. They’re over there at Goose Island. [Oh yeah, I heard they were moving completely out of the old building, yeah.] They’re moving here. And what this is is a sky light above it. This is about 40 feet higher than... So we had to engineer scaffolding to hold up the thing as it was temporarily put in place. We also had an engineer how it was going to all go into place. So this is all made in Germany, all this steel. So if you look at it...this whole thing is designed to look like Wriggly Field. It’s a baseball diamond. [That’s interesting. I hadn’t heard a word about that. That’s fascinating.] If you ever go by there, you can look at it and say holy cow. But you say, who does that sort of thing? All of this is precise within an 1/8 of an inch. Every grid system. So in order to do this, you have to have some quality men. And this separates the men from the boys. When you get it all put together and it ends up at the side and ends up where it’s supposed to be, you did your job. And so that’s what Local #63 does. It does the things that... This is what the industry expects Local #63 to do. This separates the men from the boys. Would a good glazing outfit be able to do that? I haven’t seen it. Maybe there is... [Did that come in in sections?] You know, it came in in grid sections that... Well, it went to a shop in Elmhurst that each individual piece was together. And then they would make it in 10 foot grids so they could ship it on a truck out to us. [And each grids got to be in the right place so it all fits together on the edges?] Yeah. The elevation. It’s hard to get the elevation. How do you know what elevation to set that? How do you know exactly where to put that that it’s all plum, that it’s going to hold itself. And this is all done by 63 guys. Start to finish. [Did you guys do the rigging under the grid there too?] Yeah. We did the shoring, the rigging, the cutting, you name it. We did it. And under budget and on time, so that’s what we do. 39:57 This is called the Spirit. Ahh... I get screwed up here. This is inside a high rise. And its...its only one part of it. There’s three pieces of it and there’s about 30,000 pounds worth of steel. This is aluminum. 30,000 pounds of aluminum. That, that we had shoring put in place. Oh, this is upside down. This is like this. Chain fall. [Oh yeah. Now you can see the people on the ground...] Yeah, and there’s three pieces. Well, there was a window open there. We had a crane and we’d bring it in. It never touched the ground. This is one piece and there’s three pieces. Well, we built this shoring in here and we put a beam across and then we... This is all on wheels. So when you’re finished with this piece...this is the middle one. Then we slide over and do the next one. But...ahh... Being that it had to be done, that it never touched the ground, and they wanted it done on the weekend...so they can keep the atrium open... [Yeah...] This is interesting because I actually...the one day... flew to New York, went to Grand Central Station, jumped on a train, went to Hudson Bay and...seen...talked about how we were going to rig it, what we were going to do. Got back in the train, go back in the plane and made it home in the same day. So...and it worked like a dream. [So is that hanging from a big beam out there...] There’s a beam going across? [...to the ceiling, like a whole super structural?] No. This is all scaffolding. [Yeah, that is.] This is scaffold. And the beams going across. You tie it all in. There’s actually two beams that go across, so that they keep it tied together so it won’t fold in. [Yeah.] So we do this all the time. This is what Local #63 does and we’re good at it and you don’t know too many other trades that can do what we do. [Yeah.] And that can be trusted with it. This here is totally precision. You look at all the different steel in different directions... There’s not a mechanical connection. It’s all welded. You say, “Ok. That’s kind of neat, but where do you start with the pitches, different angles. And to be trusted with something like this that’s also going to hold glass so the centers and how do you look at pictures. Look for angles. And to be trusted with something like this that was also going to be holding glass so you know all the centers had to be bed and nuts for the glass, for all your water proofing. And so, this is what we do. The structural guys couldn’t do this any better. If they did, it would have been the other building. [Yeah, I guess that’s why I said that you guys are good, you’re smart. I mean, if you didn’t go to college, you’ve got to be smart to do that kind of work. And...it can’t always be right. I mean, even if the engineer gives you the right plans, right?] Well, yeah. [You guys have to jerry rig all the time or figure out and problem solve yourself to make it work, right?] Well, the main thing is you start off with the right line so if the pieces don’t fit the line, it’s a red flag right off the bat. So you know something is wrong. [Yeah.] Well, what do we do about it? Let’s measure it. 42:52 This is Great America. This is the first rides they ever had. When they first opened up about 20 years ago, 25 years ago. And it’s the one, when you first walk in there. It’s the big merry-go-round...er...ferris wheel. Not ferris wheel...with the ponies and elephants going round and round? But we did this... This is a sideline. We just did this real quick. This is a neat one. This is the Board of Trade. That’s the... This is the Goddess of Wheat. This is 35 feet, and if you go there now in the new section, this is the big atrium on the 12th floor. This steel behind is only 3 foot wide and its probably 45 feet high. And the trick was that the Art Institute had to re-do her... She used to be in the inside of the old building. They took her down and they had to re-do her, to make her...to last another fifty years. So they had the Art Institute students and the professors come and re-do her. So we designed a thing that we had some bar joists and then some plywood that we put her on, and when they were finished, we were able to bring her up with a hard board behind her. Then take... Then after we got her straight up in the air, because we were worried about it bending, you know because you’re laying flat. And... This here, you can actually go to the Art Institute and they have film... They had a camera crew watching us do it because it was going to be a learning tool for the students. So... and by the way, when you’re handling something like that, it’s priceless. How do you handle priceless stuff? You know, if you drop it’s not like you’re going to go to Grandma and say, “I broke your teacup.” [Laughter] So the pressure is on, but the guys that you work with are up for it. This is...what was laying down and again, we have the same shoring, towers, and the beams and picking it up and... [And I can see that if I go to the Board of Trade now?] 12th floor. Go there right now. It’s a beautiful thing. [I’ll have to go see that.] You look at it...but really look at it, and say, “Holy shit, how did that happen?” [Yeah.] Because it’s inside of a high rise now. How do you get... This is the backing for it. This is the steel. How do you get this all on the 12th floor in the elevators are ten foot long. Piece by piece. And it’s as strong as can be. And there’s even steel underneath on the 11th floor that needed to be put in the main floor, column by column, to support it, there’s so much weight up there. [So you had to figure all that out in advance.] Yes. [How could you test it? You had to trust that you got it right, right...from the beginning?] I was 32 years old when I did that. [Wow. Were you nervous?] No. I was too young to be. I was too stupid. You just say, “This is a job. Let’s get it done.” And again, I had people around me at all times. I was the boss. But we worked together... If you go out into battle, you’d want the guys to come in with you that I had because they would do anything for ya. It was such a special thing. This is a monumental staircase. We do this every day. And it’s cantilever and there’s probably 4,000 pounds of steel up there, and concrete. You notice there’s no columns. [Yeah. How does that not fall? Was this on Michigan Avenue?] We’ve done 50... [Lots of those, ok.] But yeah... Every fancy stair looks like this at the bottom and I got a couple of pictures I think. But...so... 46:27 But when you have quality guys that know that, see, there’s a bunch of steel on the floor here. And there’s a bunch of steel up here. When you fold and weld these things, it all stands on its own. So there’s a science to it. But there’s Kentucky limits too. How high do you keep it up because when you kick the tempered legs off, its going to deflect. So...and... Beings that it’s cladded with glass, you can’t have much deflection in this. [Yeah, because otherwise it would all break.] So...that’s when 63 and Local #1 are just miles apart. You put a Local #1 guy in and he’s gonna say, “What?!?” 47:00 [Did you do the stairs in the Apple Store on Michigan Avenue?] Ya know, it’s funny you say that. We’re gonna be re-doing all of them. I’ve been there. In fact, I got the job. I just bid on it. [Well, yeah, I heard you mention Apple and I thought maybe you guys had done those stairs.]. Yeah, we just did North Avenue... [Oh, you did.] That’s stainless steel. All that glass there on the frontage. [Yeah.] In fact, if you’re ever at the Apple Store, just see the simple thing like the rain gutter on the floor. It goes all the way around the building. Every piece is lined up perfectly with the granite floor. It’s exactly welded. It is exactly the same centers all the way around. I mean it’s a work of art, just the gutter system that your standing on and spitting your gum into. But that’s what Local #63 does. This is another stair case that we did. And again, I just brought two of these just to show ya. This, you know... Not only did we do the steel, the same guys that muscle in these thousand-pound stringers, which we also do the glass and we also do...same guys. So...these are talented guys. And the other one... 48:06 This one... This is the CTA Barn, or Pace, in Schaumburg. If you ever go there, it’s between Higgins and Sheldon Road, right there. There’s like 20 of these. But if you look at it, each individual one is kind of interesting. But in order to get them all in line... This is where the buses go underneath and keep the people from getting rained on. It’s a depot. But if you look at it, it’s kind of neat because all these pipes and everything had to be just right. You talk about 20 feet in between with radiuses, you gotta be on the money. And that’s Local #63 does. Wow, that’s great. Very impressive.] 49:46 And what you see here is probably only about 1/100th of what I’ve been involved with 63. But Local #63, you probably multiply that by a hundred again. We’re a big outfit and we do this stuff, but there’s probably ten good outfits that can do this all day long. And that’s, as far as I’m concerned, Al Pellacore. These people kept coming up, coming up from the way. . . It all starts at the top as far as I’m concerned. If you have good leadership, it’s an easy thing, it’s an easy thing for the men to follow. And to be part of because they know it’s a good thing. [Yeah. Well thanks. I appreciate it.] It’s my pleasure. [Lots of fun.] END 49:35
Ironworkers;William “Bill” McGleam;1944;2011;Counter No./Time Topic 00:01 Bucky introduction    [Please tell me your name if you would please.] Bill McGleam. [And Bill, tell me what year you were born.] 1944, December. [And what town were you born in?] Right here in Chicago. [And what neighborhood did you grow up in?] Ahh...basically in Canaryville, which is down by the stockyards. Then when I was about 10 years old, my mother and father moved to Garfield Ridge, which was a new development around the South Side. A little further south and a little further west. And that’s where I’ve been for the rest of my life. [And how did you get from that neighborhood to ironwork? I mean, did you go to Washburn or did you get an apprenticeship? Or how did you get started in the trade?] Well, I got drafted in 1965. Got out in ’67 and my uncle’s wife was married to George. My uncle’s wife’s sister was married to George Martinkis who was one of five ironworkers in this local. So my Dad had a party in the basement and all the Martinkises were over and they asked me what I was doing. I had a job as a mechanic at an auto dealer and they said, “Well, they’re taking the test for apprentices at the Ironworkers Local. Go head and take the test and maybe you can be an ironworker.” Its been all uphill since then. 1:45 [Sure. And then do you remember your very first job?] Very first job, yeah. It was at 7200 South Lakeshore Drive. It was a 20 story high rise, all concrete. And you walked up. There was no man cages or... They brought material up, but you walked up the stairs every day. I started my first job, it was from the ground up. It was in September of ’68 and I thought boy, this is beautiful. You’re outside. You’re on the lake. You’re getting a view of the city not many people see. Until winter came. {Laughing] Then that was it. I got my dose of working outside for that winter. And it was cold, right on the lake. [When you first started, what kind of work were you... Was that Local 63?] Yeah, 63. [And what kind of work were you doing on that first job?] That first job was a sash job, putting in windows in concrete openings. So we had to put a sill down and put jams in and drill holes in, wall plugs and screws. And put the sash in after we had the frame in. And put the snaps on and caulk it. [So was that the curtain, curtain wall?] No. [So this was just one window at a time.] Yeah, yeah. [You just pop it in.] Individual units. Individual windows. It wasn’t a curtain wall. [Yeah, now... I know there were some disputes between the ironworkers and the glazers union. Now would that have been a job that glazers might have wanted to have?] Well, it could have been but it wasn’t because the company that I worked for, K.D. Walls, that’s what they did. They did a lot of store-front fabrication and they had a manufacture up in Wisconsin that they bought these pre-fab units and then we put the frame in. And then snap in the pre-fab...the pre-unit or, you know, whatever you want to call it...right into the opening and that was it. Pretty basic. [And then after you did that job, what kind of work did you do in the years that followed?] Well, from Arcadia, one of the guys I was working with... His father-in-law was a big superintendent for... I can’t remember the name of the company, but I went to a high rise down town. The First National Bank II. So it was just west of the First National Bank. It was a 32 story steel curtain-wall panels, column to column, floor to floor, big steel panels, so that was a big switch. I got to see them tear the old First National Bank down. Did some work on the original First National Bank. And then this was the First National Bank II, which was probably one of the last buildings in Chicago that ever had a guide derrick to raise up the steel for structural ironworkers. So I got to know the structural ironworkers and I mingled with all the ironworkers on the job then, not only #63, but Local #1. 4:50 [And what was a guide derrick...what was different about that?] Well, your... Today they use the tower cranes. This was a guide derrick which was a pole that stuck up that was guide off with guide wires and then it had a boom that came off of the guide, the main post. Then it would swing 360 degrees and they had a couple of 'em and the operator for that was all the way down on the ground. So then a cable run it all the way up the building and he would... It was all communications over the phone. So the operator never could see anything. [So everything had to be done with basically some kind of walkie talkies?] Yeah. [Wow.] With telephone wires. Yeah, and so it was... [And the crane, did that bring up the whole curtain wall or did it bring in those... I’ve seen some pictures where they had kind of framing and then the windows popped inside the framing. How did that...?] This was...that was more used for the structural guys... [Ok.The guide] ...because it had...not a big swing but it was used for hauling up the steel. They’d set that on the roof and then they would set their columns in place. For us, for these steel curtain wall panels, we had a monorail system that we would set up maybe 10 floors or 5 floors above where we were going to set these panels. Trucks would come in with the panels, pre-made, flat, and we’d hoist them up onto the monorail and then we would drive them around the monorail to the positions where they were going to go. And then we’d set ‘em. So we used the guide derrick to pick them up and hook ‘em on to the system we had, I think, the monorail. Then we’d go around from there. We actually didn’t use the crane itself for setting, just to lift them on to the monorail. [And then were you one of the guys that was like, taking those and putting them into place?] Yeah. I was an apprentice on that job, so I did a little bit of everything. You had a chain fall that you had to... Once you hooked them onto the monorail, you had a chain fall. You’d bring it around to position and then you had to manually let the chain do the work. So... They had all the apprentices do all the pulling of the chains. So you had big arms by the end of the day. 7:18 [I’ll bet. Did the older guys pull jokes on you guys when you first started on the job?] Oh, well... This particular job, there was... It wasn’t much nonsense on this job because they were...it was...a lot of German family and it was all business. They were all kind of relatives. They liked you or they didn’t like you. If they liked you, you got... you got treated good. If they didn’t like you, they’d give you the dirty jobs. So you worked hard to impress them, so you’d stay on the job because it was a good job. I was there for almost a year. [On the one building.] Yeah. [Wow.] So that was a good job. 7:56 [And did you work...like...some of the guys that I talked to worked for the same company basically, like 15 years... Did you?] No, my first ten years, I worked for different contractors. [All in Chicago.] All in Chicago. Yeah. But the last part of my ten years, that was in the mid ‘70s. Work wasn’t very good around Chicago so I worked in Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, up in the Taconite Range up there. [Oh yeah, yeah. I remember you were telling me you were up in the Hibbing-Virginia area.] Yeah. That was another cold winter job. [What kind of work were you doing up there?] Structural. [Is that with the open pit mines or?] No, you weren’t in the pits. You were building the taconite plant where they brought the taconite ore to the mine, from the mine to the plant. Then they crushed it, pulverized it. They put it in a ball machine that went around, and they would put water with the dust and it would form a ball. Then from the ball, they would put it in a kiln, which would get it hot to where it would not melt but it would become a solid ball of taconite. Then they would quench it. From there, it’d go onto an oar  boat. From the oar boat, it would go to a steel mill. So it was a pretty elaborate system. And if you look on a GPS today up in Hibbing, the same taconite mine, the same plant, is still there. [Yeah. And how long did you work on that job?] Well, I was up there from September ' till maybe May, June, something like that. It was fall to spring. [And what kind of...because you probably weren’t doing curtain wall stuff up there.] No, it was all building this taconite was all set in structural steel. A lot of welding and everything had to be pretty precise. Machinery moving, just about everything. It was interesting. 10:05 [Then after that, you came back to Chicago again?] Then I came back and worked in the Braidwood Power Plant. [Oh...] The nuclear power plant. [Oh yeah, I’ve been out there a couple of times.] So I figured an hour and a half drive is better than a day drive to go to work. GIGGLE I worked there for the summer of ’77 I think. And then I started with the Chicago Park District as an ironworker. I worked there for 26 and a half years. [Now, they used to have a pretty big crew on the park district, right?] When I started in ’77, July of ’77 in the Park District, they had 30 some ironworkers. They had the north side, the west side, the south side, and the Lakefront. It was a mix of Local #1 and #63. [And which area did you work out of, which region?] In my full time, I worked there at all different regions, north, south, east and west. [And what kind of work did you do for the park district? Just got you everything?] An ironworker did everything. He was like a “do all.” Anything that was broke, he fixed because some of the park district buildings were, I mean, from the ‘20s and early ‘10s...just popcorn concrete and everything is kind of falling apart so you had to fabricate, repair, try to fix something that would work, to make everything work. We helped electricians. We helped the plumbers. We had trucks with cranes on ‘em. We did hoisting. We did, we did everything. It was one big...ah... All the trades were one family. Everybody helped everybody out. [And did you do, like, the fences in the park and the playgrounds, all that?] Right. When I first started there, there was all cyclone fences. And the summertime was notorious around the pools. The individuals would cut the fence and get into the pools at night. Then you’d have to go and replace a section of fence to secure the pool the next morning so... But then after they started a capital improvement program, all the cyclone fence was replaced by wrought iron. So that was all wrought iron fence. So now when... They couldn’t really cut the rot iron fence but they... The individuals would back a car up to it, put a chain on it, and pull the sections out, or just run into it. There was never ending work. [And did you work on the Lakefront too?] Lakefront: We maintained all the boat slips. They had a crew that just stayed in the harbors all summer long. They had Burnum Harbor, Belmont Harbor, Museum Shores Harbor, Jackson Harbor. And then the ice would just rip everything up through the winter and then we’d have to go in and fix it all up, band-aid it, replace it, new fabrication. Everything was just non-stop. Non-stop. 13:27 [Now Hank, did he work with you? Hank Lichte?] Henry Lichte? Yeah. Him and I... I started before him, maybe about two years. And then he came aboard and we worked together for a couple of years. Hank was fun to work with. He was a little more... He was older than me because he had two more years in the trade, so he had a few more tricks than I did. 13:52 [And a lot of guys that I’ve talked to talked about safety changing over the years. Maybe because you worked for the park district that it wasn’t a big deal. But when you were working on the high rise, was there any safety equipment at all when you started?] Well, when I started, you were... Like the first job that I was on, there was an opening at the edge of the building. Well, there was no safety belts. There was no parameter cables. There was nothing. You just ah... For me, it wasn’t too scary because I started  from the ground up. So it was like a baby walking. Start slow and build yourself up. There was a couple of incidences where on an windy day, you would really have to be careful. And then after a while, there was a couple of jobs where our boss would come out to the field superintendent and he’d say, “Listen, take a rope. Tie it on to the ladder. Tie it on to you. Make sure nothing falls out of the building.” Just keep working, because you didn’t want to go home. But today, it's all about safety, which is good...which is good. Nobody wants to see anybody take a dive off the building or have an accident. [Were you ever injured on any of the jobs or see other people get hurt badly or anything?] I can’t say I was ever injured on the job, other than stepping on a few nails here and there. Or getting a sliver in your arm or something like that. No, I really never seen anybody get hurt bad, other than a broken arm or foot or, you know, nothing got smashed. I did see a guy take his fingers off one day, but that was about it. 15:40 [And over the years, did you have to get involved in any strikes or anything...or is it...?] Well, what really... In my mind, what really drove me to being a union brother was, that the job I was on downtown, the First National Bank. And I don’t remember what it was about, but it was a solidarity movement of unions downtown. And it was a day’s march. We marched up and down a street downtown to show a force of strength for solidarity. We ended up at the Picasso. There was speakers there. I’m sure it was probably in the summer time, in June, when contracts were up so, I’m sure it had something to do with that. But I thought to myself, my God, all these people. They’re all united as one. And I’m part of it. That made me feel good. So that really drove the union brotherhood into me at that time and it has grown ever since. 16:55 [And you mentioned that you worked up on the Iron Range. Did you ever go any farther in the field? Did you ever go to... I know when I talked to Rich, when he started, he used to boom out a lot and go all over. Did you ever do a lot of that or did you try to...?] No. [Was Chicago usually busy enough to keep you around?] Yeah. I knew... By that time, I knew a couple of contractors that... It was just that there was just no work at the time. And it was... You have to make your mortgage payment and feed your kids, so you gotta do what you have to do. That was the only reason. Otherwise, I never would have went there. Some people just boomed out because they like to travel. I couldn’t do that. I would have liked to, but I couldn’t. Rich? I don’t think he was really married and had no kids at the time. [Yeah, that’s what he said.] And the guy that...I went up there first. Came back and then I brought another guy back with me and he bought Rich’s trailer that Rich had up in Minnesota. So we kind of knew each other then. But Rich is...yeah, he’s been boomed out a little bit. It wouldn’t be good for me. 18:07 [Did you have any sort of rituals, like personal or as a crew, when you were working on jobs? I know they do the topping off, but are there any things that you remember?] Well, just a couple topping off parties, that’s it...at McClure Court and First National Bank II and couple other buildings. It was no big deal. It was just, you know, fun for the day. Sandwiches and drinks. 18:38 [What did you think, in your time, because you started in the ‘60s...from then to your retirement. Any major changes in the way the industry was run or in the work that you do that seemed... Did it change a lot? I mean, did your kind of work change a lot because of technological change or...?] Yeah, there was... You could see...from wall plugs and screws holding everything together. A lot of technology changed from individual windows to curtain walls and systems of windows and...just, you know, the systems that they use today to where... There’s a edge of the building, there’s a little pocket  that holds a clip that the clip is put into position all the way around the whole building and then the windows attach to that clip. Then one window snaps in and stacks...snap and stack and you just keep going from floor to floor to floor. Nothing that... It’s such a routine. In the old concrete days, concrete’s not perfect. You had to shim everything and make sure everything was plum and level and... Today, it’s just...everything is... [Precise.] ...precise with all their instruments. Snap some lines and measure out and put a clip in and it's gotta be perfect. 20:11 [It sounds like when you worked in the park district especially, because you had to be a jack of all trades. You had to do a lot of your own... You had to think up a lot of stuff yourself, didn’t you?] Well, yeah. We used to... We used to have kind of an access to a steel supply place. We would have to go, go to the job site, whether it was a fence job or a, an opening or windows or... And then we would measure and figure out what we would need in material and if we didn’t have it, we’d have to go get it. You know, we always got a supply of angle and flat plate. A to Z. [Yeah, you kind of had to kind of do it all on the fly.] Yeah. You can’t imagine the abuse that the buildings in the park district takes...take...after 100 years. Some of these buildings are probably 100 years old. You have to use your imagination and keep going. [Yeah. Was that kind of fun in a way, creative, or just drive you crazy?] All the above. [LAUGHTER] All of the above. It was... It was a challenge. Some of the stuff was a challenge but it was... It wasn’t a one person job. You had 3-4 guys would go and one guy’s idea would be good and another guy’s idea would be better. You put them all together and it would make the job simple. Everybody’d help one another and the job would get done. 21:44 [Hank...Henry Lichte told me about... Did you work on...or have something on the Buckingham Fountain? Weren’t you the guy...?] Yeah, yeah... [What was that story? Was it tied in with your Dad?] Yeah, my Dad worked for the park district. He was a stationary engineer, Local #399. And when I was a kid, part of his job was to maintain Buckingham Fountain. Well, Buckingham Fountain had...it was... The pumps were run by these big electric motors that are still down there. And it would force the water through openings and make the fountain...is...look like what it is. And it would be all switches and toggle switches, everything would be controlled by one person in a little pit on the side of the fountain. So when I was a kid, my Dad used to tell me, “All right, turn this switch. And move this here.” Then the next I know, the water would go up, the lights would change. I used to think to myself, “Wow, look at that. All the lights.” I had no idea what I was doing because I was little but...today, everything that... As far as I know today, when I left there, everything... The fountain ran from Atlanta, Georgia. [Yeah, that’s what I thought. I remember that there was a computer...] Yeah, through a phone system. [So now it’s on it...I mean it goes off like Old Faithful. It’s more accurate than that. It’s timed.] Yeah. [In the old days, they could kind of crank it on and off whenever they felt like it?] Yeah, they’d throw the power to the motors and that would be it. It would start pumping water. [So you got to actually go in there as a kid. Were you in there at night ever? I mean, could you see...?] Yeah, yeah. [Oh very cool. That must have been quite a...] Yeah, to change the colors, that was only at night. The fountain would just run during the day and maybe once or twice, they’d do...change the water pressures and make it go up and down. Do the dance, whatever it did. But the colors were at night. [Now did you work on the inside, in one of those sea horses or whatever they are?] Yeah, well, there’s... The horses are on Congress, just east of Michigan Avenue. [Oh, those. Okay.] There’s two big horses. I don’t remember what they call them. But one time...a... I don’t even know...for lack of words...it’s the statue people that come from the government that inspect the statues. Well, they wanted to get inside the horse to see if any  deterioration was happening. So we investigated the horse and found that up on top of the rump of the horse was a hatch. So we went there with the people. We took the hatch off and by the end of the day, there was four of us inside the horse. It was filled with some kind of concrete but the head was hollow and the body itself was kind of hollow. But it was quite interesting. [Yeah, I can imagine.] Not too many people go inside of a horse. It’s like a Trojan horse. 24:58 [Well, I think I’ve got enough information here. Anything else you want to talk about?] No, I just...have to thank Local #63 for giving me a very nice life. You work hard and you work hard, and you get results and a good life afterwards. I’m lucky enough to survive many winters, hot summers, but I met tons of brothers and sisters. So I thank Local #63...and you. [Well, thanks for doing the interview. I really appreciate it. It was a real pleasure.] Thanks. End 25:35
Ironworkers;John Ryan;1941;2011; [I’m sitting here with John Ryan. John, where were you born?] In Chicago. [And what year were you born?] 1941. What’s unusual, it’s... The date of my birth didn’t mean too much over the years but it was 9-11-41. [So it’s taken on... Yeah, its kind of hard to celebrate, isn’t it?] It has taken on a new meaning. [Yeah. What area of town were you born in and grew up in?] It was probably considered the northwest side of Chicago. It's Diversey and Kostner. I suppose the areas that might be familiar would be the Olson Rugs and Hall Printing. I went to Schurtz High School, went all four years there. [Did you get into ironworking right out of high school? How did you get into the craft?] Well, I thought I would go to the junior college. I went to Wright for a couple of years. And, of course, I finally decided that I wasn’t going to complete a college education. And that the best thing to do at that time, was to get into the building trade. The bus drivers and the other occupations that I looked at, they didn’t make the kind of money that the trade people make. They were up a little higher than the average person. So I thought, ok, that’s something that I would try. My introduction to that was that my Mom worked for the local as a secretary in the... [At #63?] ...at #63 in the Health and Welfare Department. She helped Ray Robinson, who was the apprentice coordinator at that time, with mimeographs that they made and the stencils that they made for the school. And I had an opportunity to see what some of that stuff looked like. So I had in the back of my mind, you know, some of the things that went on with the ironworkers. In high school, I got into the auto shop and the electric shop and stuff like that. It’s more physical. I like digging into things, the mechanicals. And I said well, the year that I got out of high school, I worked as a carpenter for some buildings downtown here. And had an idea and see what the ironworkers were like. I thought it’s better than what I was doing as a laborer for the carpenters. I could have gotten into the carpenters local or the plumbers local, because when I got married, my wife’s family was involved in plumbing. At that time, you know, they talk about who you had connections with and where you got your help from. We had problems at that time with minorities getting into trades and saying that we were discriminated against and they weren’t really. At that time they were discriminating against anybody that didn’t have a father, a brother, uncle or somebody in the trade. And I keep thinking about it and that almost, I thought, stemmed from the English apprentice systems where you get someone that got you into the apprenticeships, you know, and you had those connections that got you in. So, I decided I was going to be a tradesman. So I got into it that way. 3:58 [What was the first job that you worked on as an ironworker? Was it in the city and what kind of work?] Yeah, you know... I got married in August of ’63 so I had my application in as an ironworker to get in. Then in September I got a call. Thinking back at it now, starting in the building trades in September, going into the winter, that was really something else. So I started in September and I think one of the first jobs that I had that I remember... I worked for a fire escape outfit on the side of the building. And they were hanging these iron pieces of fire escape, the stairs, and the platforms and stuff like that. [The accordion ones that come down?] Yeah, on the side of the buildings. They were almost getting ready to phase them out. [I was thinking that, yeah] They were still doing it and still repairing it. And that was one of my first jobs. [And were you like a, were you a welder when you were doing that stuff? What kind of...] No, I was an apprentice. You were... [You did whatever?] Yeah. You did the gophers, you did the painting, the carrying and the hauling. Stuff like that, you know. [How long did     your apprenticeship last then?] My apprenticeship lasted for four years. At the time I was with that company, the fire escape company, they were talking about getting me in an indentured apprenticeship. The indenture apprenticeship at that time was you worked...hmm... You could work with one journeyman in an indentured apprentice where the rules were two journeymen and an apprentice. So they had some leeway, I guess in their bidding or whatever. And they could bring you into the shop to work, if there was nothing on the field. Well, I didn’t get the indentured apprenticeship with that particular company. I’m not sure what happened, but I wound up leaving there. And in our trade, you could get laid off, you’d go to the hall, and they’d try to find you another job. I did get another job with an iron company. I’m trying to think of the name of it at the time but ahh...Architectural Iron... But while I was there they did have an indentured apprentice with them who got his book, so there was an opening. And I was brought in as their indentured apprentice which gave me full time work. They almost guaranteed you the 40 hours. And you could make up those other conditions where you could work in their shop and get work or you could work with one of the men in the field. [So you were guaranteed a 40 hour week.] Basically and I remember one time, I think it was my 4th year, things were slow out in the field and I had to go... I had moved from the city. I went out to Schaumburg, which was way out of the way at that time. Their company was down at 1030 East 87th Street. They wanted me to come down and work in their shop. And I said, “Ok.” Well, I got involved because of my affiliation with my mom working in the hall and with the union. I was pro-union. So I would always go to the meetings. And there was, at that time, they were talking about things were getting really busy and they were looking for certified welders. In my 4th year, I was a certified welder. I went and asked my superintendent if they could loan me out. And I could go to work as a certified welder rather than going all the way down to 1030 East 87th. And he said, “Yeah.” So I got a job in January as a certified welder in the NBC Studios, inside, because I was certified. And the fella I was with, I had worked with before with another company, and he said, “You are the foreman because you’re the welder.” Even though I was an apprentice at that time, I was the foreman on that job. So I started as a foreman. [Were you comfortable with that?] Oh yeah, because I had worked already, you know, as a, the last year I had a number of years in, three years in already. So I was comfortable running work. I knew how to do things and the guy I was with, he worked with me on jobs and I was almost like running it then when he was working with me. 8:58 [So after you finished the NBC job, what kind of...over the next few years, where did you work? Any buildings that you might think of and what kind of work were you doing there?] Oh yeah. One of my first jobs that I worked on, I think, it was the... right there on Michigan Avenue and the River...oh, I can’t think of the name of that building off hand but it was a high rise. When I went to look at it and I looked at this high rise, I figured, oh my God. I don’t know if I want to go up that. And I found out that when you... The Prudential Building... [couldn't be this building as it was finished years before that] No, it wasn’t the Prudential. Maybe it was that... I can’t remember off hand, but when you start out on some of the buildings, you start out low and you come up, it’s fine. When you come in and the building is already 40-50 stories up, then it gets kind of...a little scary so to speak. But you get into it and it’s like standing on a floor any place. It’s your work area and you get used to it. We didn’t have all that tie off stuff that they have now...and when they started that, we felt like we were getting our hand strapped behind our back and then say, “Go work on the job.” I remember on that particular building, they used to plank the floors like every 5th floor or 4th floor, and it was open from where they were setting the structural to where the support was. We used to have to walk the beams out to the parameter of the  building...and ahh...actually look down into the building. So as an ornamental man, it was kind of leery but you got out there and you did it. 10:57 [Were you doing welding then too? Is that the stuff you were doing?] We wound up doing everything, all the welding and the burning and the capping and the drilling. And we had to know all those aspects of putting steel up. Or when something broke, how to fix it. [Now when you were working those buildings and you were doing that, especially welding, didn’t Local #1 have a lot of welders too or not? Would you be in competition sometimes with them or mostly did you get along ok?] We got along fine and even within some of the composite crews. We had worked on the Illinois Centers and those were composite groups. We had an ornamental man who was running the building, on the skin of the building, and we had a lot of welding on there. In those days, you went on a job site and you certified on the job site, you welded for 8 hours to take the test. And they’d get a day’s pay for taking the test, saying in fact, you were qualified to weld on that building, which I have managed to pass a number of times. I don’t recall not passing it. So the school that they set up, they prepared us for those kind of tests. [Yeah. That was Washburn? Or no, you didn’t do Washburn.] No, they already... Well, we did Washburn for a short time. We did our school there. Then they started the school here. At that time, ours was...yeah. We were just at Washburn. We had our own little facility at Washburn for the trade. 12:42 [In Chicago, did you work with the same company all the time? Some of the guys I’ve been talking to back in ’63 worked for the same contractor for 12-13 years. Did you move around, or just depending on what the particular job was?] Most of the time when you had a job as an apprentice, you stayed with that company for the four years. The company I was indentured to, I was with for like three years 'til I got my card. There were some labor conditions that I thought I was slighted on. And I made mention to them that I needed some correction. I thought I was going on to a job and somebody else came on it and I thought I was entitled to it, and they didn’t see my way. And I would do the indentured thing with them and everything. They let me go over a Mickey Mouse kind of decision. And when I left that, I thought, oh boy. What am I gonna do? I’m out of work. At that time, there were jobs around. You could go and get a job here and get a job there and the ironworkers, some of them were prima donnas in the sense that you don’t like the way I’m working, I’m going to go to work right next door. And so there were jobs you could go to. We had people going from job to job to job. Generally at that time, you stayed with a company for a long time, for years. While I was out looking, I managed to get...because I moved out to Schaumburg, I had stopped and inquired at Schmidt Iron, which was right out there, if they were looking for anybody. In fact, there was a spot and I hooked on with a fellow as a partner and it wasn’t about two years or less than that that he left to go out to Wyoming. I filled in a position as a foreman for them, and I had a truck that I ran for 12 years. I was working steady for 12 years. Then some other union things came up and we didn’t see eye to eye and it was time for me to move on. After that, wherever I went, I started on a crew and before you know it, I was running the work. I was always running work no matter where I went. You know, if you had a job, a couple of different jobs in a year, for me, that was a lot. There was a time... I’m trying to think of the years... It was in the '70s sometime, I believe. One year I had 13 employers. But things were really slow and what I did is that when I was out of work, I just didn’t sign up at the hall and say I was waiting. I’d get out on the street. I started going around, I’d go to job sites and I’d talk to guys that I knew. One fella that I thought of in particular, he was roofing his house on a weekend, and I stopped by and said hello to him. I asked him how things were going and he said, “All right.” And I said, “Do you have any work?” And he says, “Oh, my  apprentice is going on vacation for awhile and I’m going to need a man for a week or so.” Well, that wound up to be a couple of months. You know. And I never turned down a job. You know, they had one day jobs, two day jobs and it wound up being 1-2 years. 16:28 [Were some of them more interesting jobs? Are there any you recall because the building was a historic building or the kind of work you were doing...?] Everything from... I was on the top of the Sears Tower in the tubes. We put the ladders and platforms in the tubes. And then put the clips on the top of the Tower for the cover. And AP [Associated Press] came out and they wanted some pictures of... They started hanging some antennas off the up side and one of the guys came in, one of the press guys, and said, “I’m not going up there.” He said, “Could you go up and take some pictures?” And he said, “Don’t tell anybody.” And I said, “Yeah.” So I climbed up to the top and leaned over the side and took some pictures for them. From the top of the Sears Tower, my lowest job was I worked for the deep tunnel project. And we put ladders and platforms in the deep tunnel project, at Lawndale and 55th or whatever it was. And that was 250 feet in the ground. So I’ve been every place. [You’ve pretty much done the highest job in Chicago and the lowest.] Yup. One of the fascinating jobs I had was Ameritech. We were doing some work there. The terminology on the blueprints was "museum quality, stainless and bronze." So we had to do that kind of fine work and precision work and make precise cuts and make things look really great. Some of the other jobs that I worked on... I had three years at O’Hare Field, on the building of the United Terminal, and that was nice because it was so close to the house here, you know? That was nice. [And what kind of work did you do there?] The skin, the curtain wall on the job. Again, I was there a short time and Flower City made me a general foreman for 'em. So it was nice in that it was one of my first jobs I had as a general foreman and you’re directing. You’re putting people in position, working with the tools. You have to know what has to be done, but to get the right guys in the right jobs. So again I had three years there which was great. 19:08 [One thing I noticed from talking with all you guys is that it seems like ironworkers, one of the things that’s really distinctive about your craft is that you had to do a lot of different things, most of you, but you have to use your brains a lot. You guys have to figure out things all the time, like puzzle solvers.] You know, that’s exactly what we are because we get some of the conditions, and one of the unique jobs I had was working at Navy Pier on the connections on the roof tubing systems. You know... They get some contractors and designers that design things and sometimes you can’t put them together because they are designed to the point where you can’t... So you have to figure out how to put them together and get them together right and in the right sequences. So yeah, you have to interpret, you have to make do, and you get it done. Make it presentable. Yeah, sometimes...again, you know... Thinking about what you’re doing. There are certain things that are definitely plum and perfect and might not look good. So you have to make it look good. It may be out of plum a little bit, but it has to look good. So we have to know when to do that. 20:35 [Did you ever have to go out on strike? I know you said you are a real pro-union guy. Did you ever have to?] Yeah. You know we’ve been on picket signs. Even since I’ve been retired, I help out if they need some bodies for pickets. We’ve been on the pickets a number of times. [Are these mostly just one job site, they’re not like through the whole city or something?] Sometimes they can be, but what happens in our trade... It seems as though the negotiating group that we deal with are united and they hold to not working, but there's fringe companies that say, “We can’t stop. We’ve got to keep working.  We’ll sign our agreement saying whatever you guys finally decide on. We’ll pay.” So we’ve been able to have some strikes being effective and having a lot of our members still working. So that’s worked out. As far as a complete dead shut down, I don’t know that I’ve ever seen that. You know, we’ve been shut down to people who don’t sign the contract. 21:52 [A lot of the guys, too, have talked about the fact that in general around Chicago, it seems like employers and the ironworkers get along pretty well. Have you felt that way over the years?] Yeah. They negotiate well. When I got into the business, they were dealing with quarters and nickels and dimes. And they were able to settle on that. Even as the increase in the demands, they’ve been able to agree on so we haven’t been out on strike for any length of time. They finally agree to what we have and what we need. What is going on generally in the city as far as demands for wages and benefits. [Why do you think that the employers, the contractors and the ironworkers in Chicago, have been able to do that? It doesn’t happen in every other city. Do you think there is something distinct about Chicago?] In our local, we had 1000 members at that time. You know, there might be a little more now. It’s not like 10s of 1,000s. They agreed to the terms because it would put companies under. It would... I think what they see also is that it depends aren’t unreasonable, that we stay kind of within some limits. We have to be competitive in our bidding because we had people trying to get the work that we do. So we have to be in that range also. So, yeah, I think there’s a good relationship between the local and the contractors. Sometimes they play hardball but in the long run, they figure out what has to be done, in order to keep things going, stay in business, and make some money. 24:02 [I’ve asked the other guys about this and maybe you can answer it too. When you first started, did the older guys play a lot of jokes on you, do you remember? Or did you do that to younger guys? Some guys said they didn’t have any problems, some guys said they really got harassed when they first started.] I think what happens is that... I never had any jokes played on me or anything adverse. But there are certain people that get affected by practical jokes and other people take advantage of that. And so if you were susceptible to that or it bothers you, and they find you vulnerable, of course, they’ll needle you. But generally, no. I never had any problem with that. Other than tell an apprentice to go get some shoreline. You know... [Make stuff up.] Yeah. I remember we had one of the guys, who is a member now, he was working on a permit and it was strange because I’d asked him to get some MEK and I gave him a Styrofoam cup. He put the MEK in a Styrofoam cup and he took two steps and the bottom just fell out. You know? And it happened like a second or third time to the same guy. He didn’t learn. Well, you know, we try not to get too bad as far as jokes on guys. 25:50 [When you finish projects, do you have any ceremonies or anything like that that you did? Rituals, I know topping off was something a lot of guys did.] Usually we’ll have a flag raising when we finish the job. That was kind of a normal thing with ironworkers. Sometimes we’d do it with the curtain walls that we put up. I have a picture here showing one of the ceremonies that we kind of had... Hmm... The building themselves a lot of times would have a topping off party. Years ago it was tables set up with and they brought food in and liquor and everything. They’ve kind of gotten away from that because of the problems with the liquor. Of course, ironworkers are kind of prone to overdo it. It was strange because over the years, I remember, there were some people that were really bad as far as liquor went. It got to the point where as a foreman, if a guy came to a job after a weekend where he’d be partying or even in the evening, and he’d came back and he was still tipsy from the night before... Some people get fired. I’d  take the guy to the side and say, “Hey you can go home. Come back tomorrow.” Some of the parties kind of got out of hand but they’ve stopped that since then...and put the controls on that. 27:28 [Were you ever involved in any jurisdictional disputes with other unions? Carpenters, glazers?] I remember a couple of times, but I can’t think of a particular situation. Sometimes they just wanted your input and they’d take a testimony of the job you were on and what you were doing and how long you'd been with a particular company and that type of work. But nothing specific as far as...that I can remember we had a problem with. 28:13 [Well, I want to thank you for your interview. I want to take a look at your photographs and take some shots of those. Does that sound okay with you?] That would be great. [I might come back and ask you some questions about musky fishing too.] [But thanks John for your interview. I really appreciate it.] END 28:30 00:01 No introductory remarks. [John, why don’t you tell me a little bit about how you took your ironworking skills and put them to use in the hobbies that you’ve got.] Of course, knowing how to work with metals and drill and tap and actually tap things and bend things... I started when I retired, I had an old outboard motor in the garage. I was inspired by one that I had seen at a flea market that was a little bit out of my range. I decided I would work on it. So I did. I got rings for it and decals for it. I started with one and I have been retired now seven years or so and I started with one outboard motor and I have 37 now in the garage. [Wow.] I have a core of antiques, the oldest being 1913 and now I have a ‘13 and I have a '14 and ’15 Evenrud row boat motors. And I have a few others that are part of my collection. The other motors that I have in the late ‘30s and ‘40s I fix up and some are in the ‘50s. I’ll get and repair 'em and get 'em to the point where they can run. I generally don’t start them, the older ones, but they have compression and spark. And I’ll turn them over and it supplies me with some funds for my collection. But it’s fascinating. My wife was still working when I retired, so I would go out and my ritual was... I’d go to the coffee shop in the morning and meet my friend, chat a little bit and get home and start working in the garage. And all of a sudden it’s 3:30 in the afternoon and the day just went by fast. You know, I listen to some of the old timers that retired and they talked about they didn’t have any time to do anything. Well, wait, you’re retired. You got all day. And I’m trying to figure out now...and they would tell me and I know... Where would I fit work into this schedule? My days are filled. Busier than heck. Scheduled doing this or that or working on the motors. I got some competitive fishing that I do. It’s almost like my fishin' now is suffering because I’m not getting out enough. You know...and I’m retired. 2:32 [Did you ever make your own musky lures? Have you transferred into making spoons and stuff?] Oh, not spoons. I’ve made some wooden bait stuff that I’ve tried and I’ve caught fish on them. I did, however, start...oh...it has to be 12 years ago. I had a friend of mine that I fish with and I called him my net man. But he was like one of the gurus in musky fishing. He was president of Muskies, Inc. and president of our club. He went to Canada all the time. I kind a would like to get into fishing with him. And I said to him one day, I said, “You know, if you ever need somebody, I’ll fish with you.” Well, we’ve been fishing together now probably 15 years. And he and his partner produce the Chicagoland Musky Show. He asked me to get involved in it. Well, I started making some leaders because that’s one of the essential parts in musky fishing. You have a good leader so the fish can’t bite off the line. At that time he said, “Well, sell your leaders.” And I said, “Well, I can’t afford a booth. But what I’ll do is I’ll sell what leaders I have and some odds and ends that I want to sell and get rid of and I’ll split my profits with you.” Well I did. That was over 11-12 years ago. And I’ve been in his show ever since and bought the booth. Went on to making different leaders, again, working with metals and knowing how to put things together. And so, yeah, it did help me out, working in the trade helped me out dealing with that. 4:18 [Now the boat motors, what kind of work do you have to do, just strip them down and then you have to get all the old finish off. What kind of... What’s the process when you get one of those old motors?] Well, one of the first ones that I had... I had gotten involved and saw what the antique outboard motor club was like. You can go into their archives and get...and download information. And one of them was how to take an aluminum tank and fix it. And of course, I knew how to cut it apart in a certain spot, go in and pound things out. Get things prepped up and then go back and weld, aluminum weld this all together. I did try to get a Lincoln welder with a wire feed for aluminum, with the gases and everything that you needed for it. And it just didn’t work right. So I had a guy weld it up for me and then I cleaned it all up. You can buy decals and you can get paints that are close to what they were original. A lot of guys try to get the original. Sometimes I go overboard and get some wild colors, wilder colors, brighter colors that guys want to use for display. So sometimes I would go that way. You know, just cleaning the stuff up. Straightening it. I have had occasion where I gave up the idea with that aluminum because to do it right, you would have to go to the industrial quality welder and just a little bit overboard and the wire feed up in the handle and stuff. I could do it. I could weld it, but I thought ok, there’s a local guy that does it professionally. I’ll let him do that. So I haven’t traveled that road as far as getting' my own welder. 6:16 But it’s exciting to go and get something that’s ready to go in the trash, clean it up and then have somebody say, “Wow, I want that.” You know? [So you sell some of them?] Oh yeah. Oh yeah. I’ve taken some where I just kind of cleaned them up a little bit and sold them. And others where I’ve put too much time in and sold them. But it affords me to go on to the next one. [So what’s the market like on those these days? What are they going for?] It all depends. You can buy just a relatively...I would say find...anywheres from... My cheapest one was a $10 motor that I traveled to...Iowa, or Ohio...or Iowa to get. And I made a round trip going up toward Madison because I had to drop some motors off. But I figured it was a $10 motor but... Generally, a motor will go from anywheres from $70 to $100. And if you fix them up, you can get, depending on what brand it is and who wants it. I had a guy call me one time... I had some motors that I was selling at my musky show, and I would have sold them at a profit for $175 a piece. And I think that’s what it was. And I didn’t sell them. Nobody wanted them. So I found out how to post my stuff on Ebay. And I put them on Ebay and one particular motor was a Johnson '28, or '39, whatever it was. But Mr. Johnson wanted that motor. It was one that he was focused on, and he bought that motor for $400 on Ebay. I would have sold it for $175. So yeah, there’s some marketers... You gotta find someone who wants it, that particular one was... He was Johnson. He wanted a Johnson. That particular year was a '38 or '39, whatever it was, was his birthday or something and that’s what he wanted. I just had an Elgin. It was in pretty good shape. It was camouflaged in color. I sold it for $10. I put it on Ebay and nobody was bidding on it. It was in the wrong category. I probably had $30 in it. But for good ones, I had to get rid of it. I had it too long, so I said, “Yeah, go ahead and take it.” But it's fun. 8:57 One of the interesting things now... I just had one that I looked at... A guy called me up, talked to me at one of the shows two years ago. And it was a Chris Craft outboard motor. I had seen them and you don’t see them around. Chris Craft was the boat manufacturer. He puts the motors on. Right? And I kind of let go. So I was at my daughter’s house, painting, and I got a call one evening. “I just came across that motor and your card, and are you still interested?” And I said, “I don’t know.” He said, “Well, I’m out in Aurora.” “Well, strangely enough, my son just moved out to Oswego, and I go out there all the time.” And I say, “I’ll come by and look at it.” And I got this Chris Craft Commander from him. It probably would be, when I fix it up, might be a $350 motor that I’ll have $150 in it and my time and I got to get decals but... It’s just fun dealing with them. [Well, thanks again. It’s fun to talk to you about your work and everything. That’s great.] END 10:04
Ironworkers;Diskin, Brian;1953;2011;My name is Brian Diskin. I was born in 1953. 6/8 of ‘53. I reside at..ahh...between Champaign and Danville, a little town of Fithian, Illinois. [You’ve got me on that one.] It’s in the middle of nowhere. [Now is that where you grew up too?] No, I grew up in the little town of Rankin, Illinois, which is south of Kankakee, about 60 miles. I went Rankin high school, grade school, and high school there. And then got into the apprenticeship in the ironworkers as soon as I got out of high school. I was 18. [Which local was it?] Ironworkers Local 380, Champaign, Illinois. [When, in the apprentice program or after, what kind of work were you doing in the ironworkers...rebar stuff?] Well, we started out... The old business agent gave you a little touch of all aspects of the work. He started most of us out in the rebar. Then over to metal buildings. And then structural, ornamental, and then finally into the glazing in the window and curtain wall style of work. A lot of heavy rigging. 1:08 [So was that in the local...Champaign-Urabana local, was that for all the ironworkers? It’s not like Chicago where it got a little...] No, it’s a mixed local. [It’s a mixed local.] It’s a mixed local so we do all that we do all aspects of the trade. [What kind of job sites have you worked on?] Well, one of the biggest was, of course, the Clinton Nuclear Powerhouse. All the major buildings on campus. The first tallest building in Champaign was a 21 story. And I was a first year apprentice pumpin’ bolts on that job. But ahhh... We cover 17 counties in Central Illinois, so you may be doing a bridge on the interstate system or you may be out in the county doing a little county road or creek drainage ditch bridge. But, our major industry, which was in our area, is gone, which was the General Motors plant in Danville, where we used to have a lot of maintenance in that plant. Blaw-Knox down in Mantoon, where they used to make all the paving equipment. And we had a lot of maintenance in that plant. General Electric, Esco, where they made the grade line buckets in Danville. All those plants are gone. So our local now is not just a maintenance, as well as new construction, it’s almost all new construction. Very little maintenance left, since most of the businesses have packed up and moved on. 2:33 [How many members do you have in that local?] 258. Hmm...146 active journeyman, 42 apprentices, and the rest are retirees and pensionnares. [Are you still running an apprentice program there?] Yes, we still have an apprentice program. It’s a four year program. They go to school Monday and Thursday nights. It runs concurrent with the school year, local school year. They work during the day and go to school 2 1⁄2 to 3 hours a night, Monday and Thursday evenings. [Are you an officer in the union?] I’m the business manager of the local union. [What is that? What kind of work does that entail?] Well... Being the business agent, you can be a bail bondsman, marriage counselor, you do just about anything. But my main duties is I’m financial secretary/treasurer, so I run the books. I dispatch the men to the job sites. I handle all of the arguments between labor and management...ahh... jurisdictional disputes, where another craft is wanting to do our work. You go out and present your case and try to secure all the employment you can for our brothers. 3:45 [Are there many jurisdictional problems?] Every... Seems like every week there’s something that comes up. Mainly with the laborer and the carpenters, because they’re on a nation-wide move to encompass our jurisdiction. [So they would get more work for their own members?] Exactly. It’s easier to go after the organized than it is the unorganized. So it’s easier, in other words , it’s easier to steal other crafts’ work than it is to go out and organize a non-union company. [Is there any organizing going on in your area?] Yes, I have a couple active campaigns on some metal building contractors. I try to follow them on every site. I have taken some of their best people and put them into the local union. And with the benefits that we offer, it’s enticing for some to make the move. Some you can never get converted to come over, because the company lets them use all the tools and all the equipment to do side jobs on their own, so they feel loyal to these outfits. And ahh... But when they’re done with them, they’re done with them. No place for them elsewhere. No other place for them to go. So... [Is the university, are all those jobs union?] That’s a... We have a minimum of... Anything over $35,000 falls under the PLA that the east-central Illinois building trades has with the University of Illinois. [Project Labor Agreement: guarantees that all labor on the will be union. In exchange the union guarantees there will be no work stoppages or sympathy strikes.] Every project is under PLA if it’s over $35,000. And it’s been beneficial for both. We just entered into a new 3- year agreement with them for the next series of PLAs so... It works rather well. [When did you become the business agent?] Ahh... 19 years ago I got elected. I was 21 years, 22 years in the field and I’ve been an agent going on 19 years. 5:40 [Now when you were in the field, did you work on other sites outside the district sometimes?] Oh yeah, when work was slow. I worked in Detroit, worked in New Jersey, worked in Dallas, Texas, worked in Montana. Ahh... Any place that had... East St. Louis, Chicago a lot. Hammond, in the steel mills. Wherever there was work, you went. A guy had a family to feed so you made sure you tried to bring a paycheck home of some type. 6:15 [I know we’re going to talking about the festival in a little bit, but when you were in the field or even now, were there certain jokes or rituals or anything like that that you remember that the ironworkers in your local did?] Well... Every little job site, there’s a lot of sayings that the boys come up with that... Most of them can’t be repeated, but...ahhh... It just seemed like, you know, we always looked at it that it was a joint venture. So it was eight hours work for eight hours pay. That’s one of the biggest speeches I give to the new kids coming in. You don’t have to go out and kill yourself. You don’t have to run for these contractors, but it’s a good honest day’s work for an honest day’s pay. There’s a lot of old sayings, but most of them, like I say, you can’t repeat so. 7:11 [How did you see your trade change from the time you came on, it was probably, what, in the 70s...?] Yeah, 71 was when I got in. [How did it change from then until now? What are the changes you’ve seen?] Well, you look at the technology, it’s came so far. But what we used to do with chain falls and bull work. Now there’s a...the equipment is so much better. When I first started, we climbed iron. Now, with all the safety and OSHA regulations, you ride in a man lift, a scissor lift or a JLG. There is no more climbing of the iron. It takes a lot for the guys to get used, not having the freedom of movement that they used to have COUGH and a lot of them  rebel to wearing all of the safety equipment. But all in all, it’s been better for the industry. But the work has gotten a lot better with the more tools that the companies have finally started purchasing and being able to use rather than the old bull method. We did a lot of bull work back in the day. But now with the new equipment, it makes it so much easier. Even connecting, they do it on the lifts now where even an old man like me can do it again, now. But when you don’t have to climb that iron, your knees are wore out, your back’s wore out. All the heavy lifting over the years. Then the climbing really wears your joints out so... So it’s been better for everybody. The new kids, the youth that’s coming in, don’t have the drive. It’s hard to instill work ethic into people if they don’t have it. The young kids today, they want things now. They don’t want to save. They don’t want to work for it. They think you owe them something. Hmm... But when I came in, there was a bunch of old screamers. Everybody we worked for, they were rough, tough mean old boys. And they busted their ass every day, all day long. Then they drank beer in the evening. The next day, they did it again. But they did it every day. The youth today, they just don’t have the drive or the attitude. With the way the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training regulates it, you have to take whoever scores the highest. Hmm... And then the interview process, you look at some of these kids that are applying. They have college degrees and you know they’re not going to stay in...in this for...and make a career out of it. They’re using it for a stepping stone until something comes up in their field. They’re only after the dollar, not the pride in the work. I’m a second generation. My father was in the business. And we were preached union at the dinner table. Ahh...and to help the older member in the local. I can remember my Dad just chewing my ass if I’d be, have a slack moment and see an old timer struggling with a piece of iron packet over to where it goes. And if I didn’t go over and lend a hand, he chewed me up one side and down the other. Well, the youth today think that the older member has their job. And they don’t understand that one day, they’re going to be in that position. It’s hard to teach them to be able to look out for their older brother, because they’re going to be one one day themselves. And it’s the hardest thing to get across to them. I give them all the same speech when they come in. Pay your bills on three days a week. The fourth day is your playing around money. Your fifth day goes to the bank because you’re going to need it. This is not a forty hour a week job. Don’t go out and over extend yourself which, on apprenticeship nights, I go out and look at that parking lot. There’s $40 and 50,000 pickup trucks out there. [I was going to ask you about that. CHUCKLE] And it just absolutely... I never owned a new truck in my life, let alone have something like $40-50,000 to drive out onto the job sites. And tear it all to heck while you’re... I had beater vehicles that you just drove to work. Left your tools in it and you had a good vehicle to play around in. But yhey want it now and they don’t want to wait for it. And...they have beautiful homes that when the work gets slow, they can’t afford. And it’s hard to get that point across to them. Don’t over extend yourself because there’s weeks you may only get... The weather could be absolutely crappy where you don’t get but two hours a day, five days a week. You come home with a ten hour paycheck, and your bills are based on 60. It just doesn’t work. It’s hard to get across to them. They.... They just don’t quite und... When they go through the first down cycle, after that they  realize that what you’ve been preaching to them, works. My Dad told me that when I was first got in. When I got in, unemployment was $51 a week. You know you didn’t have much money to play with so you always tried to save. But ahh...a lot of them just don’t grasp that idea even today, when unemployment is $500 a week. You know? They just don’t get it. Until they go through one down cycle. Then they know. Then they come up and say, “I see what you mean. I see why you told us that now.” But ahh... It’s just different. They don’t have the... There used to be a lot of the father and son, but now with the way the Bureau’s got their nose in it. You have to take whoever scores the highest. And I always look at the guy’s hands whenever you’re interviewing them. If he’s got hands of a pianist, I don’t need him, because he’s never done a day’s work in his life. He scored very well and maybe very intelligent. But he’s not cut out to do any ironwork. It is a... It takes a little different breed to be one. 13:20 [One of the things that I’ve noticed about the ironworkers that I’ve talked to, you know, your age and some of the old guys that I’ve been talking to. Ironworkers seemed like a pretty bright people. I noticed that you are able to do problem solving.] Very much so. [Do you see that in the work here?] Well, one of the, one of the jobs that come to mind most... You know, it’s very easy for an engineer to set down when he’s got an eraser on his pencil to draw this type of work up. There’s an incident that came up over at the Clinton Power Plant. It was a full pan weld inside of a... You had to wedge yourself into a corner, to be able to see it, and it was a full penetration well where it would have been very simple for them to turn the clip around and make it so you could weld it from the opposite side. But the engineer wouldn’t listen. So finally one day, we were having a tough time getting that weld made in there because you couldn’t see it, let alone, even with the mirrors. When you get used to welding with mirrors, everything is backwards. So when you think you’re moving in the right direction, you’re not. Finally I had to get the engineer down. I said, “Show me how to do it. I mean, it’s very simple. And I’ll show you how to fix it, but you’re bright enough, you should have known how to design it to start with.” He said, “Well, how would you do it?” And I said... And he said, “Well, that would work.” “Why didn’t you think of it? You’re the one that’s a college grad and you should have all the drafting skills. Couldn’t you see this wouldn’t work?” And you do this time and time again. The architects, I think every one of them ought to work in the fields for a little while so they see exactly how it is that these things fit. Then they wouldn’t draw things up the way they do. You know? It may look beautiful when they’re done but they are a pain in the ass and not cost effective to build. But you see it on almost every job. The hardest part ahh...with getting a architectural or engineering firm to understand is that it’s not as simple as what the’ve drawn it...is to have them come out and look. To have them sit there and watch you try to do this, and to... There’s just no way that you can get some of these things to fit together. So the intelligence level of the member who has been fighting these architects, so to speak, for years, come up with pretty aggressive ways that sometimes get the work done. But they are very ingenious in the way that they do get it done. We’ve moved some monster equipment that...ahh...the way the engineers have you try to rig it and do it that you can’t do. But we sit down and we work it out. If the material withstands the pressure and if the cables and rigging  will handle it, we’ll make it work. But most of them are very, very mechanical. They can do a lot of things with their hands. Some of them are very, very talented. I’m a mechanic as well, but... I like to think that most of us could do just about anything, because they’re just mechanically inclined. I did get a few of that can’t tie their shoes but... CHUCKLE ...but that’s part of it. 16:46 [Some of the training or the experiences you get as an ironworker, do you have any hobbies related to that? Every now and then, I run into some guy that sculptures and doing art.] Well, there are a few of the guys. I’ve got one that does a lot of sculpturing and has actually sold a few pieces. I, myself, I do a little...fix farm machinery for the neighborhood farmers. I hung a sign out when I bought the farm and moved out into the country. Just hung a sign out there, “What now?” I mean, they come by with everything. From a broken aluminum lawn chair and they could buy a new one for $10. [Laugh] But they want you to try to weld it up. It’s about $15-20 with electricity just to start the machine. We see a lot of that. A lot of them think they’re welders until they come over and you fix what they’ve done. And you use 2-3 grinding blades to get it out of there but...then start all over from scratch but. I don’t do a lot of fabrication because it... It cuts other people out of work. The shop division do that work. I may build something for my neighbor or something on that nature or something for myself. You get asked a lot to do that type of work, but it just cuts into someone else’s job so you... I just don’t do it. But mechanic wise, I’ve build pulling tractors. Ahh... It’s been a... My son bought one eight years ago and couldn’t work on it. And I never mess with diesel motors. I play with Harley Davidsons and build choppers and drag raced Chevys when I was a kid. It was always easy to work on motors or transmissions or something on that nature. And then now I, as a kit, bought one. Bought the manuals and got to talking to the right people and I build motors and tractors for...as a side line I suppose you would call it. I’m quite busy with it. It won the State of Illinois in 2009, the first year I worked on this gentleman’s tractor. Built it from scratch and we won the state so, it keeps me out of the bar. It keeps me at home. Hmm... And that’s... That’s important, too, that you’re home. I’m not out on the road but...ahhh... It keeps me, keeps my hand in it, it keeps me occupied, and I enjoy it. It’s ahh... Before I started doing this, I used to stop quite a few evenings at the bar after work. That puts a pretty good strain on your home life. And that’s something that... 19:35 We used to have a lot of heavy drinkers in the business. We don’t any more. [Yeah, a lot of guys have commented about a lot less drinking.] A lot less drinking than there used to be. It used to be on a rain day, everybody would pour into the bars. Now they go home. With the laws the way they are, I think it has affected a lot of that, but I just don’t think we have that mentality in the youth that’s coming in to do that. There’s a few that still do, but they lose their driver’s license and then there’s no place to work them on the bus route, especially in rural Illinois where we’re from. If you’re not in Champaign, on the bus route, if I send you to a county road bridge, there’s no way you could get to it. So it’s changed quite a bit that way. But participation level I see in the union meetings, we make it mandatory that the apprentice attend...used to be ten out  of the twelve union meetings a year. We reduced it to six because they’re going to school two nights a week. And then they’re out one week a month, about three nights. Most of them have kids and family events, but the participation in the union meetings, I don’t know how to get them there. It’s a very, very poor turnout. There’s 10 or 12 or 15 of you that run the locals and the business side in a month’s time. They just don’t come. We’ve tried beer and sandwiches, everything but dancing girls to get attendance up. But I think you make them go to school and you make them go to the union meeting, you’d think they would get interested in the business and how things are run and the democratic process. But they do not show up. They just don’t come to the meetings. Once they become journeyman, there’s the same 15-18 guys that come to the meetings every month. Sometimes you don’t even have enough to have a quorum to pay the bills. And I don’t know how to get them there. We have a labor history class. I teach the foreman’s class. I teach the steward class. We have a good gentleman who teaches labor history. [One of your members?] Yeah. Tim O’Neill teaches it. He’s part of the local. And ahh...we show a lot of films prior to the meeting. Try to pick up anything that I can from your society, the labor history society, we get films from. And I show those DVDs before the union meeting, trying to get people interested in where we came from and how we got to where we are. The biggest effect I had out of them was when I showed the Haymarket Square riot film. And ahh...that got their eyes opened and what big business had done and old man McCormick, the way he owned the police. And shooting people and hanging people for donating $2 to buy a printing press. It opened these guys eyes a little bit. So we tried to show something about every meeting, 10-20 minutes film. And in our library in the city of Urbana, they have a lot of short labor clips so it’s helped... And I send a notice out with what the film is going to be, trying to get attendance up. We try to show those films before the union meeting. While the executive board’s meeting, we’ll have those films on. And then all of a sudden when it’s hot and they’ve been working all day, they just don’t come back into town for a union meeting. But I find that it’s more difficult to get the young ones to participate. 23:14 We had a fire at the local union. It burnt all down. And the average age of the guys that were volunteering to work on it was my age and up. The young ones you had to force in...where...and there’s four of them. We saved about half a million dollars building the building because we built it ourselves. But the participation always seems to be the old fellows, not the young ones. They want to reap the benefits, but they don’t want to put their efforts out without some kind of reward. It’s for the future. It’s your union office. It’s your history. It’s your future to participate in. I don’t know how to get them there. It’s difficult. 24:04 [You’ve been involved in this festival...so tell me the history of the festival.] Well, the festival... I didn’t get involved until... I believe it started in ‘83 or ‘84. It started out with just a group of guys that wanted to have some local competition. They got see where the lumber jacks have their competition. It’s always been on TV, where they race up the poll, where they cut the logs off. Where they chop logs in two. Well, they set up six events. The first was the knot tying. There’s six knots you have to tie, and the fastest time. [ Do you tie them with rope or do  you...?] You tie them with hand line. [Yeah.] There are six different lines and you have to tie these knots and the fastest time wins the competition. And they have to be tied correctly. So there’s a set of judges that watch them do the tying. The next is rebar tying competition. And it’s.... They tie a figure 8 tie, ten of them, in the fastest time. And you have to heal the wire and tighten it and do everything like you would if you were out on the bridge deck or out on the wall, tying up the bar. Then they have the split throw competition. It has to be 30 feet from the bull’s eye. And they’ll have a bull’s eye target with 50 points in the center. Then it spaces out. You must stick the spud into that piece of plywood at 30 steps. Ahh... The next is the rivet throw competition. And it’s just like they did years ago. They paint the rivets red hot, paint them red so they don’t throw hot rivets because a lot of these kids are rookies. But you get a lot of the older fellas that like to participate. There are very few left that would know how to run the forge, how to heat the rivets. And we do a hot demonstration up there for it. There would be a pitcher who takes it out of the forge, throws them up. We have a scaffold set up, 14 feet tall, with a guy with a catch can. And he has to catch the rivet and then put it in the bucket. And they count how many that they can get done in a minute’s time frame. And then the final competition is the World Champion Column Climb. It’s 40 feet to the top. Used to be that there was no safety equipment on that column when we first started. [I was wondering about that.] Now there’s harnesses on. The gentleman, you hook him up, and there’s a retriever up top so where he does fall, he can only slip before it locks. And he’s hung there and he’s only a couple of inches away from the column. But that was to help the insurance for the festival. But it’s amazing to watch a kid climb 40 feet straight up in 4 seconds, where most people can’t walk along that beam. But when you got a guy that’s busting in 4 sixes, 4 sevens, 4 one-twos, going up straight 40 feet, ahh, it’s something to see. It started out... When they got this first started, it was to raise enough money from the profits of this festival to put up the statue to memorialize the guys who lost their lives, working on the Mackinaw Bridge. Now it’s turned into an... International doesn’t sponsor it, but they will publish it and put it in the magazine to make aware when it is so that the locals can participate. But we have people coming from all over the country. They come in from the United States as well as Canada. We finally got the...raised enough funds with the help of the state of Michigan and the Bridge Authority. We got the monument placed last year. And it was... They commissioned a sculptor to do this and I can’t quote the gentleman’s name. But he used bolts, tools, equipment that they used to build this structure. And that’s a copy of a man with his tool belt on. But there would be a torch as a leg bone. Rivets for fingers. Levels...nineties, all the tools that we would use to build that bridge is incorporated into this sculpture. And....at the unveiling... Two years ago was the unveiling. It was just absolutely well received. They’ve started the... the City of Mackinaw is what they call the Walk of Fame. And anybody, any member of the ironworkers of the international union can buy brick with your name and local number on it. And they’re paving that whole area with brick pavers with guys‘ names on it who worked on the bridge. There’s a lot of guys that have lost their lives who worked on the bridge who are in the hall of fame for the bridge. We had up above the little pizzeria down town, Jay Stillwell, who was a member of the Marquette Local, and worked on the  bridge. He had a little museum above the pizzeria where guys had brought in their... There was a picture... There was a diver’s suit from when they worked down in the coffer [?] dams. From rivet tools, some spinning looms when they spun those big cables back and forth to suspend the bridge. And then five years ago they had a fire in the pizzeria and lost all that history. There was... Oh, it was absolutely devastating because there was guys who brought in their union books like you see out here. Their union books was in that museum. Their hard hats and a lot of their old tools. It was devastating. Hard hats from guys all over the country. Ahh... The festival was, when it first started, was kind of rough because there was a lot of boozing going on. Now it’s a little more family oriented. We’ll have got a climbing wall for the kids. There’s... So it’s gettin’, trying to push it toward a little more family oriented. Mackinaw Bridge ain’t very pretty to go up. Any time you’re up in the straights up there, it’s pretty and in the city, we’re well received. That’s one of the first and only places I ever really saw a sign that says “Welcome Ironworkers.” [LAUGHTER] 30:32 [How long has it been going on, the festival?] I believe it started in ‘83 or ‘84. [How many people w up, would you say...?] Well, it just depends on what the economy is like. Last year we had 110 enter the world champion column climb. Ahh... Total attendance is probably 500 or 600 people that’ll show up. And a lot of the locals will come by to watch the competition. We run the main event on Saturday where we run all the competition. Then on Sunday we’ll have the world champion climb. And then we have the old-timers events where the old timers get up and throw the rivets. And a lot of the young kids can’t pass them old timers. They’ll throw 37-40 rivets in a minute and the old boy catching them, he can catch them and put them in that bucket. It is brings a lot of camaraderie with the young guys that have worked all over the country or the guys from Philadelphia that come up. There’s guys from New York. There’s people from California, as far away as Seattle come to compete. It’s a good... It’s a good time for everybody. There’s food on the premises. The school has let us use their property and we have two permanent columns posted out there so we go in at the beginning of the competition, about a week before, they put the walls up so you don’t throw spuds out into the trees and loose rivets. And they have a nice beer tent and food venders there and bands that play. So there’s a lot of nice entertainment. But it has switched from mainly the old drinking and carousing and rough housing to more of a family orientated. People really enjoy coming. So I’ve been the announcer and the head judge for the last 22 years. The festival is going on this weekend. It got rained out all day yesterday. It was raining up there this morning when I called to see what they were doing. There’s a chance of it breaking up, but there’s a lot to do in one day, to run all those. And most of the guys probably won’t stick around for Monday because they got to be back to work. We try to end the competition about 2 o’clock on Sunday afternoon so give a guys a chance for 6-8 hours a way to get home so they can get to work the next day. [Is there prize money or do they just get trophies?] Well, you get a belt buckle. First place for the world champion column climber is a $1,000 gold belt buckle. And it gives them a little incentive, plus  $500 cash. So... But to be able to go up that column under 5 seconds, let’s just say, you have very little body fat on you. These kids got thighs that are huge and when they grab that iron, you can see the lats and the muscles in their back just ripple. But they train for this competition. They have a column in their own back yard and they’ll practice a lot of hours. [Do you think the International will ever back this?] No, I don’t think so because the chance of somebody getting hurt, that I don’t think they want to be tied directly to it where they would sponsor it. But they will put it in the magazine. We’ve asked for donations from them before. Even though we call it the International Ironworkers Festival, but it’s not really sanctioned by the international union. But we’ll have a lot of the dignitaries come. The president of the organization has been there a couple different times. Guys that are head of the district council because Mackinaw splits local 340 and local 25 out of Detroit. They split right up by 75 (I-75 interstate highway] so their representatives are always there. And it’s nice to see some of the big shots. Kenny Wall with the Triple Eye comes up and puts up a display. And...ahh...gives out a lot of information. Or Mack Wire who supplies most of the tie wire for all these companies has a display, makes a lot of donations to the festival. Carhartt comes and participates. It’s a... It’s a beautiful weekend for the guys. The weather is usually bone hot in the middle of the infield. There’s no wind coming through. But these guys, we run start out with the knots, move right into the rods. So by the time those guys are...by the end of the knots, we’re just moving right to the competition. I always save the column climb for last because that’s what they all really want to see...is the youth. We have a gentleman out of 340, Frank MacIntyre, the business manager back in the 80s, was the world champion column climber while he was business manager. And today, at 62 years old, can still climb it in 6 seconds. And that’s amazing. I don’t believe I could get up in six seconds now. I don’t think I ever could in the beginning. But... We’re going to have a working man’s climb competition. It’s not really a competition, but the guy puts all his tools on, just like you would if you’re out there working. You got your 6 or 8 pound hammer, hanging in the back. Your spuds, your crescents, your pins, bolts... and his hard hat on and his gear, and he’ll climb it just like a working man’s climb, to show the guy how it is. Because these young ones are training to race, not have anything around their waist. You know? But you put that 60 pound belt around your ass and try to climb that, it’s a whole different ball game. And do that day in and day out. So... But the crowd enjoys it. We have a hot rivet demonstration where a lot of these. It’s getting harder to find somebody who knows how to run that forge because a lot of the older fellas who did that are gone today. They’ve passed before us and we very seldom get a riveted bridge but every once in a while, you get a railroad trestle. [I was talking to somebody about that. Some of these old bridges now, we have them now, you see the old INAUDIBLE?] Yeah. And we have an older gentleman, he passed away 3-4 years ago. He was an old heater. And he taught us. So there’s like 5-6 guys that are my age, in their mid-50s, that know how to run the forge and how to get them to the right temperature. But to get a picture... You know, we try to set the forge as close as possible, when you do have a repair like that. Because to get a guy that could throw it two stories where they used to do it all day long, to practice, why, you throw a cherry red rivet 30 feet to somebody and he’s not familiar  with how to rattle the can to keep it in there. Or used to using the tongs to pick it out and stuff it in the hole, and then have the bucker hold up against it, while the driver rounds and mushrooms that head, it’s a different ballgame. These young kids never done it. [Why did that technology disappear?] Well, the structural rib bolt came in. Then the...which...had splines on it and you could torque it up and receive tie irons because you always had to bolt the iron up with connecting bolts, and then align the holes before you could...and make sure they were all tied iron before you could ever go to the rivet. Well, with the bolt...kept the iron aligned and you could draw it up tight and just slowly but surely, the technology got better in the bolt making and the tensile strength of them. And now even the June bolt, as it’s called, where you tighten it from the bolt side. And when it gets to the right torque, it snaps that end of the bolt off that’s in that little June gun. You know where we used to carry big heavy impact, that probably weighed 70-80 pounds that you lugged around with an inch air hose all day long, tightening the bolts. Now you’ve got electric pistol grip torque gun that you can handle with one hand and 110 electricity. So....and the June bolt would just hold the nut, turn the bolt itself, with that splined end on it. And when it gets to the right torque it snaps the end off and you move to the next one. Technologies came a long ways in the fastener method. But there’s a couple old bridges that go over...that we still replace the rivets in. And then when you do have a gang, you got to hunt to find the right people. And you got to have it set up close enough where they can take it right out of the forge and not have to throw them 20- 30 feet because you put a lot of them into a drink. CHUCKLE. If it’s over the water, you hear them sizzle when they hit and then they’re gone. [How do you use the knots? How is that used still?] Well, we still use a lot of different knots in...when you’re tag lining a line piece up. There are six basic working knots that we use most of the time, but we were taught in the apprenticeship school 33...how to tie 33 different knots. And with the technology today, you don’t use the carrot bend. You don’t use...hmmm.... In rescue today, you don’t use the running bowline or the French bowline or the Spanish bowline,where you could tie it where the legs run through it and line around the back of them to let people down when they were injured. Now they have the harnesses or the scaffolds but you use the bowline, bowline bite, running bowline. You use a clove hitch. Timber hitch and half hitches is about what you use in the regular working day any more. But a lot of those special, where you take the pressure out, like a carrot bend in. You take the pressure on a damaged part of the line and tie the knot around it so you are still utilizing the line, whether it would take the stress off of that frayed or damaged portion of the line so... But timber hitch, barrel hitch, scaffold hitch where you tie planks on it. You use those. A lot of the other knots you do not. [What about splicing cables. Is that still done?] Well, it’s... Now-a-days, we used to... When we were in apprenticeship school, we used to make our own chokers and sell them to the contractors, to give you experience in how to splice cable. Now if it doesn’t have that tag on it,  we can’t make it and sell them. We don’t teach cable splicing today, not in any of our classes anymore, because of the liability. Someone would come out and have that wedge swedged dog- knot on them, very few back spliced or eye spliced chokers you ever seen. They’re splices and got that wedge swedge on the end of them and it has to have that tag on them or you can’t use them. But we used to do that straight line splice, eye splice, and used to teach that in the classes. I learned out to do it when we were in school. Our old, the knot tier or knot instructor, was a real butt head. He’d have you tie the knots behind you back. So you wouldn’t... There were several that you worked with every day, he’d make you tie them behind your back. So if you couldn’t tie them, you kept practicing until you was able to pass. The ones you used every day, they’d become old hat to you. You just throw them on and you’re done. But now a lot of companies come out with a retractable for your hand line. So when you’re tag lining a piece up, there’s no sitting there, taking the time, corralling your line back up. Just...when they unhook it and throw it down, and zzzzzuuuuuup, here it comes right back to you. It’s not the same but... And it’s really hard to get a good strain on something that small when you got to put a big piece of iron in place. Things are changing. It sure changed a lot in the 40 years I’ve been in. From grunt and growl to the new equipment that makes it so much easier. 42:58 [Well, I think I’ve asked everything I needed to. Do you want to add anything?] No, not really. I just... that I think that the industry as a whole is changing for the better. I don’t know how we’re going to get the youth of today involved in the way that I came up or my Dad’s generation when they came through. How to instill the pride in the business and to get the...brotherhood to where they look out for one another a little more instead of me me me... It should be “we”... Like the man said, “There’s no “I” in team.” And if you can get these young ones to look out for the older members and to work as hard as what we did when we were coming through, they need to do so or the..hmm...the pride is the biggest thing I think in this... It takes a different breed of person to be an ironworker. I always tell these young ones to kiss her goodbye every morning because it might be the last time you see her. Don’t go to bed fighting at night. All it takes is one slip and you’re done. So make sure you kiss her goodbye every morning. And I tell them young wives don’t be chewing his ass. He’s worked hard all day. You may not understand it. But... And the young ones that do get it are the future of this organization. You can nurture that so they can pass that information down to the next generations. Because I don’t think there are robots that can do our work. I really don’t. They can do some of the welding I suppose but they got to put those sticks together. And the high rise is the future. Modular construction is coming where you set a floor at a time. They do that in Japan and other places now. You don’t see it here. Not yet, but I think you will, eventually. [Did you ever go on strike at all in your local, in your time there?] We were out three different times back in the ‘70s and ‘80s. Over a nickel or a dime. Working conditions have always been fairly good in my little area. We haven’t had many issues in the last 7 or 8 contracts that I’ve negotiated. We haven’t had much issues except when work’s down. You have no leverage so  you can’t expect a pay increase even though gas was $4 a gallon. If you don’t have any work, you don’t have any leverage to shut any jobs down so...to get your ultimate goal. Up there, they make about $42 an hour and where we’re at is $30.03. But the cost of living is so much different between the city and what it is down in the land of steaks and shakes and grain elevators, ya know? It’s a big difference. The two, couple times we were out, we were out 2-3 months. They offered a nickel. Went on strike for a dime. Out for six weeks to settle for a nickel. There was no rhyme or reason to it back then but...well, while I’ve been an agent, we have not been out on strike. I’ve always been able to negotiate a fair increase. The last two contracts were a year contract a piece, but we didn’t have any work but was still able to get enough money to keep the health and welfare with no cuts to it and put a little money in the annuity, but nothing on the check. And then work is here this year and I’m up for a contract again in May. And with the work load the way it’s going to be, we’ll be able to get a decent increase. But a guy has to be very careful about pricing himself out of the market. And the young kids think we ought to make what Chicago or Joliet makes. And our cost of living isn’t as high, but I don’t want to price ourselves out of the market to where another craft could... If you get too overpriced, the carpenters and the laborers in my area, the carpenters’ total package is about the same as ours. They make a little more on their check, but they have a little less benefits. So you don’t want to price yourself too high where they’ll use another craft to do your work, or you’ll let the non- union that are working for $9-$10-$12 an hour. You’ve got to be very careful. It’s a fine line to walk. The guys all want all the money you can get. Sometimes when you make those decisions, it’s not very popular. This last election, I just ran in June, and I never had any opposition other than my first election. And a young kid was complaining about I didn’t bring the contract back to the body, to ratify the vote. But we had to earmark the money into the benefits or we weren’t gonna get any increase at all. They offered zero. Rolled the language over, nothing. And after 4-5 meetings for negotiations, we ended up getting them to cover the cost of the welfare increase and what we needed into the pension or the annuity to keep that solvent. But if I brought that dollar five back to the guys, they wouldn’t have voted to put it on the health and welfare. They wanted it on their check. If I would have brought it back, we wouldn’t have gotten anything. That was the topic for the last two contracts, that I didn’t bring it back to the body to vote on, to ratify. But that’s a decision that you have to make as a business manager. You’re looking for what’s best for the whole group, not just a few individuals. If you can’t make it on $30.03 an hour, you’re not going to make it on $31.03. Chuckle. You know? It’s just that simple. You do what’s best. Sometimes it’s not a very popular decision, but that’s why you make the big nickel for being the boss. [Hey, it’s really been a pleasure. Thank you very much.] I hope it was helpful. [Yes, it was! Thanks!] END 49:22
Ironworkers;James Stanley;1958;2011;[I’m interviewing James Stanley. James, tell me what year you were born.] I’m James Stanley, a member of a Local #1 ironworkers. I teach the ironwork local #1 aspect to the Indians here. I was born in 1958. [And where were you born?] I was born in Chicago, Illinois. [And you’re from Lac du Flambeau?] Yes. [Did you grow up on Lac du Flambeau?] Well, actually I grew up here in Chicago. But my family is back in, is in Lac du Flambeau. My Mom’s up there and I go back up often and visit. I once was a student here at this training program that...which now I am an instructor. [Yeah. So you grew up in Chicago. How did you get into ironworking? What was the...] Well, my childhood buddy that I grew up with, here around the Indian Center. [You hung out at the American Indian Center?] Yes. [Oh, that’s great! That’s good. I’ve done some stuff with them over the years too.] Oh, well. We were neighborhood kids growing up and he eventually befriended a guy who was an ironworker and his friend ended up pulling me into the trade. He tried to get us both into us but my friend, at the time, didn’t have his GED so he couldn’t enter into the program and I did. So I entered into the program and was able to finish it through and become an ironworker. [And when did you first... What year, do you remember? What year you first started working in the trade and like what the first job was that you had?] Sure I do. It was August of 1989 was my very first day of ironworking down in Miami, Florida. It was very hot and it was very dangerous. We were walking skinny bar joist, putting decking into place. I was walking this bar joyce and back then, regulations for ironwork wasn’t as stringent as they are now. And so as a result, people got hurt a lot more often and I was doing dangerous stuff that today I wouldn’t do because I know better. [Yeah. How did you get from... So you were in Chicago. Did you sign in to the local here first or did you end up down in Miami and join like an ironworkers local down there. How did you get down there? From Chicago to Miami, that’s quite a distance.] I got down there by way of the Indian Ironworkers Training Program. They run the program here at Local #63 and I was a student back in 1987. And I graduated this program. It was a crash course into ironwork. And after completion, you were job placed somewhere in the United States. I chose Miami because it was warm climate all year round and I thought that it would work to my advantage to be gainfully employed in the trades all year round. And so I asked them if they could send me to Miami for that reason. And they said, sure. He made a couple of phone calls and he said, “Well, okay. We got you placed out of Miami. Just come on in Monday morning with your suitcase and your car and we’ll give you your travel papers and you can go down there. It was on a Friday and sure enough, Monday morning I showed up at the hall here, Local #63, and he gave me my traveling papers. I went and drove down to Miami. [So how long did you stay in Miami?] Four years. [And you were doing ironwork the whole time you were there?] Yes. I was doing ironwork for four years as an apprentice, going to school after work, two nights a week. And I did that for four years. And we were out for the summer for two months, but I still continued to work. [Did you work for the same company because you were apprenticing? Or did you do different construction companies down there?] Well, I worked for different ironworker contractors down there. Once a job’s finished up and if the contractor that you were working for didn’t have another spot available for you, you got laid off. Everybody went to the union hall to seek employment again. We’d sit around for a couple of days, and a job would come in, and then we would go out on that job. That job could last anywhere from a couple of days to a year. And so I worked on numerous jobs down there. I think the longest job I had was probably a year and a half with the same contractor. 4:49 [And what kind of work were you doing? Were you welding? Were you doing curtain wall? Or did you just do everything down there when you started?] We pretty much had to do everything. I done a lot of re-enforcing, tying steel. I’ve done welding. I was on welding jobs, as a welder helper and later I became a welder myself. I worked on some structural jobs. I’ve done a little curtain wall, but even though it’s a big part of it, I had to go to school for it. I’ve done some curtain wall, a little, but I’ve mostly worked structural re-enforcing and some welding. 5:28 [So did you stay in Miami for four years or did you stay down there longer than that? Or did you come back up this way after that?] I came back up here almost immediately, as soon as my schooling was through. The first chance I could, I was headed back up this way here. And I...so... The ink didn’t even dry on my union card before I was off, coming back up to Chicago. [And did you get hired on right away when you got back up here?] It was fortunate that I did, yes. For about two months, and then I got laid off in December. By that time, it started snowing pretty heavily and I jumped on unemployment compensation for a couple of months and then come February, I went in front of the board at Local #1 to see if I could transfer my membership from the Miami Local with the Local #1 union and I was successful in doing that. They transferred my membership, so I was a Local #1 member from that point forward. [And did you work a little... What year would that have been, like?] That was 19...93. [1993. Did you work on any site in downtown Chicago that people would know about? And some of the guys I’ve talked to were...now these were the older guys. Sears Tower. Some just worked on the Trump Towers down there. Some worked on the Hancock Building even. Are there some of the newer buildings down there that you were able to work on?] I’ve worked on the White Sox Stadium when it was first being built. The new one, of course. They call it U.S. Cellular Field now. So I worked on that. I worked on Lakeshore Drive reconfiguration. I worked on numerous bridges in the downtown area and all around the surrounding suburbs of Chicago. Some high rise buildings as well. 7:22 [So you know about #63 and you know about Local #1. What’s... In terms of the skills that the two different, like the workers of these different locals have... What is distinctive about Local #1? What is that, more of the structural kind of work that you do in Local #1 that #63 does? Because I know they’re technically ornamental.] Yes, Local #1 ironworkers have everything to do with the structural integrity of the structure itself. That’s all they do. They put that up and once they leave, all other trades, including Local #63, would come in and hang their stuff off the structure that we put in place. [And when you were working on that Lakeshore Drive, the whole reconfiguration, was that... Were you working with the concrete and rods stuff or...?] Yes. Re-enforcing... If you don’t know, you may not know it. But you drive down Lakeshore Drive and there’s... You go over a lot of bridges that you wouldn’t even know that you were going over unless you constantly took an effort to look at it. [So you worked on the project where they took those really, like, 90 degree corners out of there...] Yes, right. [...wherever they were and kind of made it easier to drive around there.] Yeah. [That was a big job. It took a long time.] I think the northbound was on the east side of Soldier Field or the museum, and southbound was on the west side. But now they’re both, northbound and south bound are both on the west side of Soldier Field and the museum. [Yeah. It’s definitely an improvement. Laughter] [I didn’t think it was a great idea at the time but...I think now that it’s done, it was a good idea to kind of do that. It makes a lot more sense.] 9:00 [So you’re working in the city of Chicago. How did you get tied in the whole training program out here? What was the route that took you to that? Because now you’re teaching a lot, right?] Yes. I’ve been teaching for the last 11 years, full time here at the National Ironworker Training Program for American Indians. I got into that... They had a position opening for that and a couple of us guys interviewed for that. They... The Bureau of Indian Affairs that funds our program, this time wanted a Native American to teach the training program, the training students here at the time. And so I, along with about 5 or 6 other guys in Local #1, interviewed for that position. I didn’t get it at first. Another person got it. He stayed here for a year and for reasons personal to him, he up and left. They called me and asked if I still wanted the position. I said, “Why sure!” So I came in and I started teaching in the spring of 2000. [You said there were other people who applied for that job. Are there a lot of American Indians in Local #1 or a fair number? There must have been if there were a few applicants.] Ahh... I would say, no, not really. [Not really, ok.] As compared to percentage of members there are in the whole of Local #1. But then again, maybe a lot of people just doesn’t...don’t want to come here and work on it. Because a lot of students that we train here, when they graduate, go back home to where they’re familiar with. They aspire to be over in that area where their families are. 10:48 [Now, let’s say someone comes from Lac du Flambeau. Like you’ve got a guy there right now that you’re training. Is he going to go... What’s he going to do up there? I know there are few highway construction companies up that way. Would he more likely to go to Milwaukee or Madison and be in one of those locals?] That’s the route that to my, he told me he’s looking to go. Now, just about 3-4 days ago, Local #63 had their test here, their entrance exam to get into Local #63. And that particular student didn’t try to get into, didn’t take that test. So he didn’t aspire to try to get into Local #63. He wanted to stay close to home, either in Madison or Milwaukee, in the Wisconsin area.  11:32 [So tell me, because this is kind of an unusual program. You are an instructor within this American Indian Program here. Do you help recruit the students or somebody else taking care of all that? How do you get students from... You got a guy I met from Buffalo, another guy from New Mexico or whatever, a guy from Wisconsin. How do they find out about this and how do they end up here, working with you?] Well, they would apply to their community center at the tribal hall, where the educational department is, and find out about the available schooling that’s available to the jobs. Usually we’re pinned up on a billboard with our flyer somewhere on there. Or a lot of the agencies already know about us and they talk to each others about us. So we send flyers out and we try to get the word out that our school is here, available to any Native American that’s enrolled into an agency. That’s normally how we...we get our students. I personally am not in the business of doing that. They have another person here that does do that though, recruiting. 12:47 [I’m sure you know this, but the Empire State Building had Adirondack Indians working on it. The Golden Gate had a lot of American Indians working on it when built those in the 1930s. Were you aware of this kind of tradition of American Indians getting into the ironworking trade? And these younger guys... Are the younger guys or women, even, that come in. Do they know about this or do they just... They don’t know about the history?] At the time when I was getting into this business, the ironwork trade, I didn’t know about my predecessors that started, who opened the door for me. But as time went on and years went by, I became fully informed, or very informed I should say, of the Mohawk Indians in the east and the other tribes that had broke into the trade. They were the ones who opened the doors for a lot of us. Along with other people that were trying to make the financial amends to train the Native Americans that would come here. Right now the school is a joint effort between the International Association of Bridge and Structural Ornamental Metal Ironworkers with the Bureau of Indian Affair that are able to train the Indians here. 14:14 [Do you know... Obviously you... The government, there are some people in politics, whatever, trying to cut a lot of government funding for all kinds of programs. Is this program and the BIA, is that threatened to be cut or is there a danger, do you think, for that being maybe funded at a lower level? Do you know anything about that? I’m just curious. Maybe you’re not party to it and don’t know about that but...] Ahh, as far as I know, I’ve been here 11 years. I think this particular program, the ironworker training program, has been around for...I think 1974 or 76. It’s been around that long. From my understanding, we don’t have any more funds after this particular class that is in session. They graduate and that’s it. That’s it. Unless we get funding from somewhere else, we might have to close the doors here. [And probably you’re not too happy about that.] Well, no I’m not. You know, I take it as it comes. If it’s meant for me to continue working here, I will. If it’s not for me to work in a field, then that’s fine too as well. It’s just in me to be laid off. Ok. That’s acceptable as well because, there’s not a whole lot of work out there so if I do get laid off here, I’ll go back out there. It ain’t like I’m going to be thrown to the sharks because I’ve been in the business for 27 years plus and I’m kind of old enough to where I’ll be able to take care of myself. I’m not destitute. That’s me, personally, but... I’m fine. I’m fine. 16:02 [So tell me a little bit about your work here then. What kind of... How big a class do you have? What kind of classes do you have to teach? What kind of skills are you trying to pass on to these guys.] Well, normal class size is about 20 students. This particular class in session, we only had... We started with 10, purposely, instead of 20. We kept our numbers low, because our funds are really low. So... With that in mind, we were able to run in the class. Without that, I would have been laid off a few months ago. So we kept it low, so we could run another class. I try to teach these guys how to work with their hands, with their minds, and have a good attitude when they show up. If you well know, Native American Indians have had a long history of a lot of alcoholism and that’s certainly no different from what I’ve seen when the students come here. So I work with them in that respect too as well. I try to counsel them somewhat, even though I’m not a licensed counselor. I do know places that take them and I do take them where they can learn how to not drink, as far as support programs. And I tell them that, you know, if it doesn’t happen for you that you’re not able to put a plug on the jug while you’re here, well, then we can  plant that seed and you can pick this up after you graduate, later on in life but... I try to teach these guys to not be lazy while they’re here. That’s one of the big problems I see. I try to get that out of them and point it out to them. A lot of them just aren’t aware of it, because they don’t have work background. So I try to get them to work with each other too as well. Communicate. A lot of them are quiet. And I try to get that out of them. But I try to also make them understand that the work that they’re getting into can be dangerous and it's very physical too as well. If they’re not able to perform in those manners, then maybe this might not be for them. But I also try to make them want to become an ironworker. 18:29 [So when they come in here, you try to teach them work skills and kind of be a big brother or counselor, an amateur counselor or whatever. Are you teaching them to weld or doing other stuff, do you give them basic skills of ironworking?] Sure. We teach them how to weld. We teach them how to set up the torch so they could cut the steel. We teach them rigging courses, how to tie their knots and make splices. There’s a knot for every purpose for what it’s used for. We teach them how to tie steel with a tie wire that’s rebar when you put the rebar in place. Teach them how to build columns, how to rebar walls, how to rebar beams and decks with dowels [?] coming up to simulate a wall. We teach them how to erect structural steel safely. We teach them all about the different sized diameter chokers. That’s the cables that they’ll be using to hoist the steel. We teach them hand signals that they will be using when they’re working with cranes. We teach 'em how to erect scaffolding safely. And teach 'em how to walk iron safely and hook up all the different safety equipment that’s available to 'em. We teach them when they have to use it and how to use it. We teach them about the foundation and the formation of local unions. It’s structure. They’re also taught how to work with stairs, putting in stairs, and transit instruments for shootin' elevations and making sure that the columns are plum. So we teach them a lot of stuff. A lot of stuff. [And you do that in how long?] Eleven week period. [Eleven weeks. So they come in here, from all over the country, and they kind of stay here and come five days a week and learn here.] Yes, 8 hours a day, 5 days a week, 40 hours a week. They are here for 11 weeks learning. I think of this as a crash course into ironwork. They have books that they go through. They go through orientation. That’s a week alone there. And they get assignments and lessons on structural, re-enforcing. We got math and a lot of blue print reading. They have to learn how to read the blueprints and then once they learn how to read the blueprints, then there’s assignments given into the blueprints. There’s quite a bit of safety equipment that they have to use as far as reading apparatus and stuff. 21:24 [And what about you, do you enjoy teaching as much as you did actually being out on the job sites? How do you like that?] I miss being out in the field, the camaraderie, but I also like it here. When work was booming and times were good, you know, a lot of overtime out there. I didn’t pull up stakes at the school here and go out there and work so I could make a lot of overtime. I enjoyed working here. It has helped me as a person. It changed me. It's caused me to be a better person and I see it and know it... For a person who, before I was a teacher, wasn’t much of a people person. It changed me quite a bit. It told me that some things aren’t so important in life as others. 22:09 [So do you feel a strong sense of brotherhood with the union as well from all your years of doing this?] Yes, yes I do. Being a union man...it’s a... I’d much rather be into a union. I know I’m a part of something. You know it’s the people that came before me that were responsible for forming the unions that had to fight for everything that they got upon which you think would voluntarily be given to them, us as workers. They had to fight for it instead. You know being a union member out there, at the time, and even today. I know work is kind of slow and maybe the unions aren’t looking so favorable in some people’s eyes because of the times. But at the times that the unions were being informed, there was a need for it and there’s still a need for it. And there’s going to be more of a need for it in the future too as well. I’m just glad I was able to serve in an apprenticeship for four years, going to school, learning about what I was getting into. Especially a lot of the safety stuff because our trade being the most dangerous and hazardous of the trades. I didn’t get into it to be in a wheelchair or to be hurt. And the union has helped me a lot with that, to work safe, to learn how to work safe. [And you’ve been doing it since, like, ’89 or whatever, have there seen more changes to make it more safer in the time you have gone up in the trade?] Yes. Now, a lot of the safety courses that are being taught weren’t taught when I was first breakin' into the trade. But me, being an instructor, I  had to learn these things because I had to teach them. And so...some of the journeymens that are working in the field these days never took these new courses. And surely I would say that non-union work sector, you know, wouldn’t be as informed. So yeah, I’m knowledgeable about it because I had to teach it. 24:33 [Well, I asked all the questions that I wanted to ask. Is there anything you wanted to talk about? I’m happy to let the tape keep rolling if you’ve got some things connected with your work that you would like to bring up it's fine with me.] Well...you know... I’m very glad that I’m an ironworker. Just to be able to go out and work, it makes me feel good about myself. I know the work is hard. Sometimes I get hot under the collar and wish I could have a day off, but when it comes down to it, I give it my best because I believe that... It’s very rewarding to the degree that I give it my best. It’s that much reward to me. I know that I did my best. I work with my hands and I feel like, hey, the things that I made are going to be there for quite some time to come. [Thanks so much, James. It’s been a pleasure.] Okay Bucky. END 25:39
Ironworkers;Roy Williams;1939;2011;Audio Interview Contents Counter No./Time Topic 00:01 Bucky starts with short introduction.           [Please tell me your name.] Roy Williams. [Could you tell me where you were born?] Chicago, Illinois. [And what year?] 1939. [Did you grow up in Chicago then?] I did. [What neighborhood and what area of Chicago?] Around Cicero and North Avenue. [How did you get into working in the ironworking?] My Dad was an ironworker. [What kind of work did he do in the ironworkers?] Set steel. Like all of us. [When did you start? Did you get out of high school and go to work?] I come out of high school in ’56 and work was very good. I went to work for my father. I served a four year apprenticeship. [Was that in Lo cal #63 or one of the other locals?] Yeah. 55 years this year, October 1st, it will be 50...55 years. [Wow. Do you remember the first job you did?] I do. [What was that?] My father was running the job, Wilson’s Sporting Goods in River Grove, Illinois, which is a suburb out here. [Yeah.] And ahh, I went out to work out there with him and a bunch of other fellas. They tried to teach me the trade on the job and then going to school. Made out pretty good. 1:33 [What kind of work did they have you do in those days?] Mostly helping the journeymen because I didn’t know anything. The journeymen, the old timers that I worked with, they tried to teach you. Of course, because of my father, they tried to teach me a little bit more than what I could really learn. Back then there was probably seven certified welders in the whole local. The local was only about 750 people at that time. So welding was the big thing. We needed welders. So they developed a squad, they didn't develop 'em. Washburn Trade School. We went down to the Washburn Trade School. They had instructors down there for us. As the years went on, we all became certified welders. That’s how you made your money. [Yeah. So did you do a lot of welding stuff, is that primarily what you did?] Yeah. [And after working on the Wilson job, what kind of stuff did you do after that?] From there I was... That job finished up and they sent me downtown to a 25-story building. And I had never been up in the air before because this was a short... This was a one story building at Wilson. So when I went down there, it was 25 stories and...you had to go up with the building. That was another experience. Its gonna make you or break you. [Do you get used to it pretty fast or...?] You had to back then, because they didn’t have safety equipment that we have today. Today you have all kinds of harnesses and safety belts and hard hats and... Back then they had nothing... [Is that right...] You didn’t have anything...safety wise. 3:20 [Were there a lot of guys that got hurt on the job back then?] Oh yeah. Yeah. Ahh. As the years went on, I was still in the apprentices... That job finished up. We went up to Fisk Powerhouse on 22nd and Carpenter. And that was a bad one. I seen guys get killed there. Young guys. Not ironworkers, they were from a different craft. But a lot of guys got hurt there. That was a tough one. But as the years progressed, more and more safety conscious. The insurance companies got involved more. Demanded that we have safety equipment and demanded that we wear it. A lot of times when we’d get it on the job, guys would refuse to wear it, because it was too cumbersome. You felt, if you were going to fall, you could hold on to yourself rather than trip over a rope or something else that you're tied off on. But today it’s a different story. You’ve got to be tied off or you’re out of work you know, if you’re on a high rise, which is good. It’s a good law. [Were there some jobs you worked on that were really fun or you remember well? Certain buildings, construction sites?] They were all kind of fun when I worked out in the field, because you were with the different guys. The men made the difference. Because they worked together, they’d help each other. You had fun that way. Back then, they don’t have the, they didn’t have the equipment that they have today. So most of it was what we call bull work. Pick it up and go with it.  Today they have cranes and different chain falls and things of that nature. But it was very interesting and I enjoyed it for the times I worked out there. Ahh... Then probably... I mean... 5:40 My father was an officer here and when he retired, the new group that was coming in asked me to run with them. And I was...about 20 years old, 22 years old, something like that. So I ran on their ticket and I won only because of my father’s name. His name and my name were the same. And he had a pretty good record. [Was he a business agent?] No, no. He was on the Executive Board for the local for many years. I ran as a trustee, which was the bottom of the barrel. I won that. I was there for two years. Then I ran for the Executive Board. I was on the Executive Board for nine years. Then they wanted me to run for business agent. So I did that. I ran for that and won that. I was a business agent for seven years. The business manager at that time was retiring and they wanted me to move up to business manager. So I was the business manager then. I got elected to that. I was in there for ten years. The president of our International at that time was trying to set up an ornamental department. There’s only 2 ornamental locals in our International, Chicago, this local here and one in New York. He asked me to set it up and run it, come to Washington, and run the department, which I did. I took that job. I had an office here and one in Washington. And traveled the country and that lasted about ten years and I got tired. I said, “That’s it.” I had enough traveling. So then I retired. 7:38 [When you were a trustee, what kind of work did a trustee do and then would you still be working?] Yeah, I still worked in the field. You come in to the union meetings once a month as a trustee. When the members would vote to pay the bills, the trustee would go over all the bills and make sure that there’s nobody fooling around with anything. And if the bills were right, I’d sign it. There were three trustees. I was one of them. [And then when you got on the Executive Board. Is that a paid position?] Oh yeah. We were making a ton of money back in them days. We’d make $4 a month and that’s no lie. And when my relatives heard that I was on the Executive Board, they said, “Well, what are you making?” I said, “Four bucks.” And then they’d laugh at you. Back when they established a $4 rate, that was for gas, for you to come from wherever you were coming from to go to the meeting. That’s how they figured it. They never changed it for years. So anybody that ran, they didn’t run for the money because there was no money involved. But the local didn’t really have any money back then...you know... Nobody was ever making any money. So then when I became, well I was on the Executive Board for nine years, when I became business agent, we started accumulating some money. I said, this is a slap in the face to the members and to the officers. We were the highest paid. We were getting $4. The other guys were getting $2. So where could you go for $2? You can’t buy gas for $2. So I got... When we accumulated enough money, I put a resolution on the floor and we got everything raised so everybody... They weren’t making much. They were making $30 I think then, which would fill up your gas tank, because we were required to go to all the funerals... Not funerals, but their wakes. A member died or got killed, an officer was required to go to their wakes. That helped pay for some of the gas. Plus on the Executive Board, you had two meetings a month. You had to come in here second Thursday of the month and the last Friday of the month for the meetings. Last Friday of the month was the union meeting as well. [And when you became a business agent, was that a full time position then?] Yeah. I didn’t work in the field after that because I was always in here. You were in the field chasing bad jobs. Jurisdictional problems, non-union problems and stuff like that. But you weren’t working on the iron. You weren’t working with the tools. [You go around to the different job sites.] I wore a suit every day then.  10:22 [What were the big jurisdictional fights you had or disputes? Were there certain unions you guys were always butting heads with?] Oh yeah, oh yeah. Mainly with the carpenters. Carpenters were always trying to steal our work. [Yeah.] Glazers, a couple of times with the glazers. [Is that with the window stuff?] Yeah. [They were in competition with you to put that in?] Yeah. [How did the carpenters, how did that come in? What were they doing that was in your jurisdiction?] They would get, like, punch out windows, stuff like that. They’d do anything. I mean, anything that they got assigned to do, whether it was theirs or not, and if we caught ‘em, we’d take ‘em to the Board. We had a Chicago Joint Conference Board and I would have to make up the cases here. And I’d take it down to the Board, and fight it before an arbitration board. I did the same thing when I went to work for the International. That’s one of the reasons why they hired me, was because of my expertise, supposedly, on jurisdiction. Because I could... Back then I could remember everything. Today I can’t remember my own name. [Do you remember what all the jurisdictions were?] Yeah. [And how specific they were? Yeah.] You had to back then. I’m not bragging. I don’t want to sound like I’m bragging but I had about 35 jurisdiction disputes and won every one of them. I was pretty good at what I did, not only for this local but for the International too. Because anytime you win a case with the International, which had to be heard in Washington DC, that went all over the North America. So if you won a case on a certain item, you’d send that out to all the different locals in North America, that are ironworker locals. Then they could go after that work, because now you had evidence saying that we had the jurisdiction of the dispute, we won that dispute. [Sort of like when you make a law case, you set a precedent.] Exactly. [...for the others to follow.] Right. So don’t be afraid to go after it, because we have evidence that we won this case, that’s your work. But that worked well, very well, so we were really successful. We put a lot of ironworkers to work and that was my main goal when I took the job. When I took the job, as long as I don’t get no interference from anybody else--I told the general president--if I don’t get any interference from anybody else, I’m not moving. I’m not moving out of Chicago because everybody had to move from Washington. I’m not living out of Chicago. I says, “I’ll open an office here.” I says, “I can be on a plane at O’Hare Field and can be anywhere in the United States faster than I can out of Washington to handle any problems that might arise. [He let you do that...] The boss says, “Go get an office. Get a secretary. Do what you gotta do.” We were very successful. I had the job two months and I had a heart attack. [LAUGHTER. That’s how successful you were, right?] Yeah, I was real successful. I had a heart attack. I was off work for about three months. I had bypass surgery and then...they screwed up my lung and everything. But when I came back, I was like a new man. Just worked night and day, I loved it. I really enjoyed the hell out of it. I felt good, then I felt good. I got a lot of help. Anytime I picked up the phone and I needed help in a certain state or city or something that I wasn’t familiar with, and if I had to go in there on a jurisdictional dispute, I just pick up the phone and call the guy in that area and that guy would be standing there at the airport waiting for me to come, because they knew I was there to help ‘em. We worked very well that way. I really enjoyed the work. 14:30 But then I had to go back in after probably 9 1⁄2 years, back on the table. They put three more stints in me. My cardiologist says, “Do you really need this job?” I says, “No, not really.” He says, “Can you afford to retire?” I says, “Yeah.” He says, “I suggest you do that.” So when I came back, I called the boss. I had a new boss by then. I told him, I says “I’m gonna retire.” “No, no no. Sit in Chicago,” he says. “Just sit at your desk. You don’t have to do nothin’ but answer phones. And if you don’t want to do that, don’t answer the phones. But if somebody calls you with a problem, could you...?” And he had another guy from here, one of the business agents, hired him as my assistant. And...kind of taught him a  little bit, the jurisdiction part of it. He was a go-getter. He was a tough kid and young. Today he’s the general secretary of this International. So that’ll tell you the caliber a guy he is. So then when I seen he could handle it, I said, “That’s it. I quit. If you’ve got a problem, call me at home...” I live not even two miles from the office. I says, “Call me at home or whatever. I’ll come and help you with anything.” And he did. For the first year he had a few problems. I worked with him there and I worked with him over here on jurisdiction disputes and stuff like that. Helped him a little bit. Because he’s a pretty smart guy, I didn’t really have to do much. He really knew what to do. Some of the older jurisdictional disputes that got lost somewhere along the line from here, from years back. I could still remember them, but they were not on file. Somebody took them out of the files. So I helped him that way. Other than that, he could handle it all himself. He’s doing an excellent job. 16:39 [Did you have to deal with strikes locally, like especially if you were the business agent?] Yeah, I negotiated a lot of contracts. I never put our guys on the street once. I never believed in that. I said, “If we can’t just sit down like men, we’re going to get this resolved one way or another. I don’t want to put people out of work. Okay? If we have to extend the contract for a week or two while we still negotiate, we’ll do that.” It will be retroactive back, it was always June 1st. We did that two times. Always got what we wanted. Had a good crew negotiating with me. They were all the ironworkers. We had some very good contractors. [So even on a small...or on a job site, you never had to call like a one day strike and have a bunch of scabs? You worked it out?] We’d put up a picket line once in a while on them. Yeah. [Put some pressure on them.] One day maybe, because this is a union town. Chicago was always a union town. Back when I was here, we very, very, very seldom had a union problem. Non-union problem. Today it’s, there’s a lot of them out there. Different type of people, you know. We had... If we had one or two every year...ah... I know when I started as a business agent, I had to solve... They gave me the soft side because I was the youngest guy. I had one non-union contractor and within one year, I had him out of business. He wanted them to conform and everything else. He didn’t want to conform. [Then he was gone.] He went out of business. 18:32 [What do you think is the biggest change in your work since when you started...or even when your Dad started til now, for the workers themselves. What is the biggest changes? Is it safety?] Technology changes. Back then, when you started a job, the first thing you do is put a gang box. Put all your tools in and your clothes and everything else in. That’d be the first thing comes on the job. Because you knew you were going to be on that job for a long time. Today, they re-fashioned all of the materials. They use cranes. New technologies. Now they give you a pick up truck. And you go there with a pick up truck with a welding machine and cutting torch and all the equipment on the truck, and you’re in and out of there ya know quite often. You can be there today and gone tomorrow. That’s the way they program is run today. Big difference. Back then, you’d see a truck come up and it would be loaded with iron. You’d have to take and unload that truck, all the iron, by hand. Nobody ever had a crane or anything. So we all had to do it by hand all the time. Today, they’ll send a big truck out with all the iron and it's already fabricated. Most of the time. It’s all fabricated, you pick it up with a crane, you set it, and you’re out of there, in a day or two. Big difference. Back then, there was never any safety. Today, they’re all safety conscious, which is very good. Drug testing. Back then there was no drugs. Guys would drink, but there was no drugs. None that we knew of back then. And as years went on, even when I was here, contractors wanted a drug testing program. I was all for that. And we had, at that time, some of the kids were coming in were on that funny stuff. People get hurt and it wasn’t their fault because they’re working  with somebody that was high. And finally we had to do something. I says I was all for it. A lot of my members were against it. Anybody who was against it, must have a reason I said. What are you afraid of? So. 21:00 [What about when you started, I’m curious too about when your Dad started, were there still Polish groups of workers or Italians or whatever, or was that already kind of disappearing by the time you came on?] Yeah, that was... They had everything back then. In my father’s day, they were all boxers, they were all fighters, you know? But that kind of went by the wayside after awhile. They all stuck together. I mean, nobody... You’d go out after a union meeting and go to a bar. Our hall used to be at 160 North Halsted Street back then. You go over after union meeting, they’d go to the bar, and someone got out of line and picked on an ironworker. He had to take on the whole bar, because it was all ironworkers. And that’s the way it was back then. Today it’s a little bit different. People are spread out after meetings and that. 22:04 [When you first started out on a job, did old timers play jokes on you?] Oh yeah. The boss was my father so they, they played some games with me. But that... Whether it was...not because of my father or anything, they did it to everybody. We did the same thing when I was a journeyman working in the field. We’d get some new kids coming in and you’d send him for a tool that there was no such thing as that tool. You’d send him up five floors or down five floors. You'd have 'em run his ass off all day long, looking for the same tool that there was no such thing. But then they’d catch on. Then they did the same thing as kids came up through the ranks. But nobody ever got hurt doing that. 23:00 [Did you guys have any ritual or anything when you finished a job? Some of the sky scrapers ...] Yeah, they’d top it off. On the big jobs, we’d top it off. We had little beer parties, stuff like that, on most of the big jobs that I worked on. I worked on, with one guy that ran a lot of big work. I was always one of his foremen. We’d always have...get the job done safely and at the end we’d have a little beer party for the guys with some food. Make sure everybody got home alright, no accidents and nobody got hurt. That was our main goal. 23:45 [Right now it seems like the economy really having a has a negative impact on the construction business in general.] Yeah. [What’s your prognosis for the future of the ironworkers? Is it still pretty good?] I used to be able to project work when I was working, a year down the line, two years. You had to do that when you were sitting in that chair in there and you’d say, “Okay. I got this coming up next year. Two years from now, I’ve got this coming.” You could see the light at the end of the tunnel. If I needed more men, if I needed more welders, whatever I needed. Today, there is no light at the end of the tunnel. I don’t see nothing. Of course, I’m not in the know like I used to be either, because I’ve been away from it now. But talking to with the business manager here now, Ray Dean, good kid, Ray Dean say you don’t see nothing coming either. Until they get this economy going, nothing is going to happen. Nobody can build anything. Nobody’s got the money. They're holding back. Today you’ve got to have 55% of the finance, I think it’s 55% of the building occupied before you dig a hole. Who the hell is doing that because of all the vacant property that’s down there now? Who’s going to build anything? Most of our work is downtown basically. I don’t see much work out there and I’ve been in it 55 years and this is the worst I’ve ever seen. I’ve seen some bad years back in the early 60s...where there was a lot of guys out of work, but you could see that work was coming, 6-8 months down the line. I see no work out there  today and I must have 300 guys out of work now. Some of these kids that are in here haven’t worked in a couple of years. I’ve been told some of the other crafts, guys that are in their early 40s, their business managers are telling 'em to go find work some place else. There is no work. Electricians, plumbers, there is no work. [Is that all across the country?] Yeah. Yeah. It’s not good. It’s not good. We got our convention coming here next month, so we’re going to learn more about what’s going on around the country. A kid that worked with me, who is second in command now, I seen him last week at his daughter’s wedding. I asked him how things were going in his part of the country and he said, “Just like Chicago. It’s dead.” That’s about all I know. 26:42 [You’ve answered all my questions. Is there anything you want to talk about?] No. It’s been a good run for a lot of ironworkers. I can see all them guys sitting out there. They all stuck together over the years. Sometimes we get in an argument with each other but that was the extent of it. Some guys, through politics, they get mad and leave and never come back again. And that’s human nature. But for the best part, it has been wonderful. If you talk to any of the guys out there and ask them and I bet they’d say the same thing. It’s been a wonderful future... Not for me. I’m through. I’m in the 4th quarter and the game is over. GIGGLE I’ve got two grandsons that are coming out Saturday to take the apprentice test. [Cool.] Whether they make it or not, I don’t know. My nephew’s two kids. He’s a business agent here and two of his kids are coming in and taking tests too, the apprentice test. One just finished Loyola. Smart as can be. Can’t get a job no where. Do you know what I mean? Maybe I’ll be an ironworker. I said, “Maybe my ass. You’ve got to pass the test.” “I can pass any test.” “We’ll see.” LAUGHTER But that’s where it’s at. Even if they pass the test, if they take 10 apprentices in a year, it’ll be a lot. I don’t see them takin’ ‘em because there’s no work. No we’re down. We don’t have any first, second or third year apprentices. We haven’t taken any in because there was no work. So they want to try to bring a couple in. They’ll force a contractor to take ‘em, if need be because you should have some. You’ve got to keep the trade going and that’s the best way. I don’t know if you’ve been in the back at the school. [I have, yes, it’s nice. It’s great.] And seen the school. Ray’s done a great job, but he’s got the money to do it. Back when I was there, we were stealing from Peter to pay Paul. We couldn’t pay the rent. But he’s got money in there now, in the general fund, and they can do these things. They’ve just built a big addition on there. I think it cost them $2 million. That’s all paid for. They’re doing very well, but they’re working hard. They have to. That’s about all I can tell you unless you need something specific. [No, that’s great. I appreciate your time.] It was a pleasure meeting you. END: 29:30
Ironworkers;Bud Martens (Real Name: Henry Arnold Martens, III);1940;2011;Counter No./Time Topic    00:00-00:11 Bucky: introductions and preliminaries 00:11 [Tell me your name.] Bud Martens. My real name is Henry Arnold Martens III. [The third?] Yeah, I have the IV and the V. My grandson is the V. [Oh that’s great. And what year were you born?] I was born 7-25-1940. [Were you born in Chicago?] No. I was one of the few that was born in a log cabin in Kentucky. [Where in Kentucky?] In Mackey Bend, Kentucky. It’s about 10 miles out of Barbourville, Kentucky. [So that only begs the question, how did you get from that log cabin up here?] Yeah. My Mother was from a farm down there. She had come up here to work at the World’s Fair in Chicago. And my father was from here. He was from Maywood. They had Martens Brothers Coal and Ice. It was a large, at that time it was a big industry, coal and ice. You have the ice all summer and the coal all winter. And...he met...they met. And from what I understand, he was a good tipper at the time. [Laughter] The two of them fell in love and they got married, and my older sister was born up here. Then they moved down there. I was born and then they realized to make a living they had to be up here. So they moved back up here. [Did you live in Chicago or back to Maywood or...?] We lived in Maywood for a short period of time. Then we moved to Bellwood and the house in Bellwood is still in the family. But after I married my wife, I moved a little further west, to Villa Park. [And then how did you get into the ironworking trade?] Into the ironworking trade: I knew at that time you had to be very intelligent to even think about going to college. You had to be very book smart, if you weren’t from a wealthy wealthy family. The family wasn’t that wealthy. But I knew when I got out of school, I wanted to make the most amount of money for my family that I could. And so when I went to... I went to Proviso East. And I went to trade school. In Proviso so I took all the shop courses. I was going to be a tool and dye maker. And, what I did was, when I got out of school, my grandfather had the coal yard still. He was renting shop space to a tool and dye company and to a iron shop. And he said when I graduated, I could work for either one that I wanted. He said that either one would hire you Bud, just to go over there. I went and I looked at the tool and dye shop and I said, “Well, I know what I’ll be doing there.” Doing, working on lathes and working on mill machines and everything. And I said, “What would I be doing in the iron shop?” And he said, “Well, you’d be laying out jobs. You’d be putting jobs together, welding the jobs and putting them on a truck. Taking them out and delivering them.” And, I said, “Truck?” I was a young guy. I was 18 at the time. And I said, “On a truck?” I told my grandfather that I was going to work for the ironworkers. And I started out and I enjoyed it. I started out with Popovich [exact spelling cannot be determined] Iron Works and I was a shop man. And I enjoyed the work so much and he actually went broke, went bankrupt. [This was Popovich?] Popovich Iron Works went bankrupt. And I had, because I was a young guy and I was making good money, I had saved all my money and I lent him money. He said he would give me the equipment to take and finish up the jobs in payment for what I was owed. And as long as my grandfather had the shop, I said, “Ok.” So I went into business actually when I was 19. And I made up all the materials and then I called the local. I talked to Moon Martin . [Oh yeah, I saw something in here from Moon , yeah] I had my Dad talk to him and said, “My son is just starting out and we’re going to install this and he needs a permit to do it.” And I got a permit from him to take and install. And then with the understanding that as I developed and got bigger, I would take and hire hands. I was young, and foolish. And what I did was I finished the jobs. I had a big pile of money and I bought a boat and went on vacation. [Laughter] That’s what young people do when they’re not thinking straight. [A power boat or a sail boat or what?] I bought a power boat. And I went to the Mississippi River. And we still have a place on the Mississippi now. The thing... I have to think for a second. But when I came back from my little...ah...experience on the Mississippi, let’s say, I needed money. I went through all my money. I needed money. I got a hold of Popovich and he was working for Builders Ornamental. He was the shop foreman for them. I went and saw him and he says, “Well, you can start in right here.” So I started in with Builders Ornamental and worked there for 5 years. After my kids, my children started being born, I said I need more money. And local #63, I could get about a dollar an hour more by working for them. So I said, “Ok, I’ll go on the outside.” I signed up. I went through... I signed up as an apprentice with them, even though I had so many years of experience. The more knowledge you get, the better off you are. So at first I balked at the apprentice because I knew how to do so many phases of it. But going through four years of apprentice training was still the best thing I ever did because you learn things that you thought you knew, but you’re a much safer, a much smarter person. 8:19 And then that way...I went through Washburn Trade School for four years. [Did Washburn have the relationship with the ironworkers in Chicago because a lot of you guys are talking about Washburn?] Yes, Washburn Trade School was our designated apprentice school until we developed this. [This. Ok.] Yeah. Moved into our own building. Phil Hottinger, who runs the apprentice program, he – you’ll see in the pictures – he was a foreman for me at the State of Illinois. [Ok.] And at the State of Illinois, well, that’s jumping ahead quite a few years but... When I became a journeyman, there was only a handful of guys that were certified welders in the local at that time. You had a card and everything. In 1964, I got a certified card and a lot of jobs you had to have a certified welder. And I hopped around when I left Builders Ornamental. I hopped around, thirteen, fourteen jobs a year. But they were all...you know, they all made me more money than if I stayed in one place because I would get overtime. I would get on there. I had papers. I would do the welding. And then other guys would move in and get their papers, but they knew if I went on a job, they wouldn’t have any question about having a certified welder. [Was that...those twelve or thirteen a year, were those different contractors?] Yes, they were all different companies. [And were they all in the Chicago area?] Yes. They were all in the Chicago area. I made a joke about I could work any place in the country, but I had to be home by 5 o’clock. [Laughter]  10:25 [So you were able to spend your whole career working in Chicago?] Right. [Some guys had to boom out.] I had to boom out of our local a few times and get permits in other locals. But the majority of my time I was able to make a good living right here in Chicago area. And sometimes I would be working on one job and I would get a call at night from the business agent and he would tell me, “We need a certified welder there in the morning at this job.” And I would say, “Ok, what about the job I’m leaving?” He’d say, “I have a person that’d fill in over there.” So sometimes I’d get a phone call from the other company, “How could you quit on me like that?” And I says, “The local asked me to.” So I went where I was given my bread and butter from. [So you were in high demand because you had the certified welder background.] Yeah. Back then, it was. Then as you became more knowledgeable about all the different phases and that, you became... People really wanted you, you’d build up a name for yourself. 11:51 [What kind of work were you doing inside, like when you were worked those twelve or thirteen jobs when you were welding? What kind of welding was it? Were they all high rises or ornamental stuff?] Yeah, no, that would be all high rises where you were welding beams together, welding columns together. You had to be able to weld over head and it was usually on large, large stuff where you had multiple passes. [So a lot of guys in the local were doing curtain wall and window stuff, but you were in the welding.] Right. [So did you have to go on the job sites when the structural, like when Local #1 guys were there?] Right. [That makes sense.] Like, you were talking about the curtain. Like Bill was talking about the curtain wall. What they would do is they would move it around to get the location, adjusted where it needed to be, and then it would get continuous weld all the way across the curtain wall. So you would sit outside on a plank and you would just keep burning rod. Because at that time, it was not wire fed or anything. It was... You would have to put a stick in the welding machine, an electrode each time. You’d burn it down to where it was an inch long. [You’d have to grab another one?] Grab another... [Oh, so now it’s on a reel thing?] Yeah, now its spooled and its wire fed and you can just... [Keep right on rolling.] The only thing you would get in trouble with is if you welded continuously, you’d get too much heat in one spot. You could start warping frameworks and different things. That’s a lot of knowledge that you learn in shop, how to straighten beams when they’re under stress and they’ve been welded on. 13:56 [Yeah. If you were doing...what your were doing like the welding, what was different about the welding you were doing to let’s say what the Local #1 guys were doing? Were they doing more of the rods in the concrete and you were doing some other stuff?] No. Local #1 has the same, needs the same qualified guys to weld beams, columns and everything. The only thing is, when it comes to jurisdictions, Local #1 is structural and we are ornamental. So if Local #1 were to be putting curtain wall up, the curtain wall could be massive curtain wall but it would be under our jurisdiction. And then we would have to be there welding. And, its up to the people in Washington or the District Council... [To decide...] ...to say who they are going to award it to. Even if Local #1 was doing it and they awarded it to us, we would come in and take over the job. [Yeah.] And there, there was hard feelings... GIGGLE ...between [The locals sometimes...] ...the locals. [Yeah.] And you could understand it because these ironworkers had to find another job. And you were going to take their job. And you’re all ironworkers but you’re in a different local and that. And those kinds of situations are horrible. You never want to  get into those situations. [I’ll take your word for it. Yeah, I know jurisdictional disputes can become very unpleasant.] Yes. [Especially if they build up over time which I’m sure they sometimes did, right?] Yes. Those were jobs that they got done but they were . . [Yeah] 16:22 [Well tell me... I know you worked on a lot of different buildings. Did you stay with welding in all of the work that you did over the years?] No. [You obviously moved into some other area.] Right. When I went from welding all the time, and moving around a lot and me not smoking cigarettes or anything, trying to be health conscious, knowing I was welding every day. When I got away from welding and I got into curtain wall, aluminum sash, stainless steel, I thought I was in heaven. I enjoyed it so much, so I stuck with that as long as I could. [When did you change from welding to doing curtain wall?] That was after the Hancock. I have... [So you welded on the Hancock Building?] I did weld on the Hancock building. The amount of weld I did on the Hancock Building was a limited amount. In some of the pictures that I’ll show you, my particular crew and job on Hancock was to take the cladding covers, all the horizontal ones. We had one crew doing vertical. I’m sorry. Mine was the vertical. We had one crew doing horizontal. My crew did the vertical and then we had others that worked on the diagonals. And each one was a specialist thing. Once you get all the kinks worked out of it, it went like clock work. [Fast, yeah.] And what we do, we would hoist them out, put them in place, and each one of them had a nose cone bracket that was welded to the structural beam. And then you would have to put vertical passes up the side of the clips that were on there. [So was that done after the main structural steel was done?] Yes. [Then you’d put this on?] Yes. We followed the . . . They were still putting structural steel on and we were following up with the clad on the outside. [And was there curtain wall construction on all the glass sections then? And that was later?] That would follow right up. It was like clock work. [Right behind each other.] Yeah. One crew worked above another crew, right on down to the last crew that were doing all the inside trim. And after the horizontal covers went on, then they could set glass in there. The panels with, with you know. [Yeah.] So, and after the Hancock job, then I started going on smaller projects naturally. And I went from one little office building to another. Then got into all the different phases of that. I don’t know how we would get over to the other ones but . . . 19:58 [How did you end up on the State of Illinois one?] That would be . . . The State of Illinois was . . . It was a tricky situation because an apprentice that worked for me at the Hancock had started his own company. He called me and he said, “I’d really like you to come and help me get off the ground.” I went out there and I told him, I was almost retired at the time. And I said, “Awe...I really don’t want to do it John but I’ll help you get off the ground.” So you’ll see pictures of some of the jobs he had. And I ran the jobs for him and then he, by running those different jobs, the company that had the manufacturing for the State of Illinois, hired us to erect their material. And I went there and I really wasn’t going to run the job but I saw what was going to go on and it was going to be... There was going to be a lot of, a lot of problems. [Because it was technically so complicated?] It was complicated. They . . . It was a unique job for the city because it was like working on a bridge. You were 200 feet above pavement. There was no water below you. There was nothing below you. We had to put in our own safety nets. There was a lot of guys in our local that had never put in safety nets. And you had to string safety nets. And they weren’t level. It was  on a diagonal, a 27-28 degree slope was what it was. And so anything that you would hang would want to fall to the bottom. So it was hang steel cables, get in the net, grab a handful of net, hook it up. You’re hooked on to the cable and then you’re hooking the net into the cable. Once you got one side all hooked, you could take the other side, hook ropes on it and pull it up. [Did you have to kind of invent this system yourself?] Yeah, it was a fly by the seat of your pants for the first couple and they were looking at me like, “How is this going to get done?” [Yeah, so you were almost like the general...foreman...] Yeah. [...for the whole job kind of?] Yeah. Well, I was a field superintendent but I was also over everybody there. They were like, “How is this going to work?” Once an ironworker sees that its safe and knows what he’s working with, he can do the job. And so I just said, “Give me a belt.” I put the belt on. I hopped in the nets and I hooked the cables up. They saw what I was doing. And I says, “Do that and we’ll pull the other side up.” Once you got the nets underneath you, your mind says you’re safe. 23:47 [You raise an interesting point. I’ve noticed this from talking to all of you guys and you can comment on this I’m sure. It seems like the ironworkers and you guys from #63 are called upon all the time to have to problem solve.] Yes. [And you guys have really good skills at that . I mean, if you’re not book learner types, it seems like you guys are all pretty intelligent. Is that...] Yes. [Do you feel that way?] I think so. We can work out puzzles very well. And I think I had such a background of blue print reading and all other facets that you don’t see immediately and an understanding how things go together. That’s the main problem. [And I’m guessing that the architects, like Mies van de Rohe, never knew for a minute some of the small problems, or the problems you guys had to figure out...] Right. [...and ditto for the State of Illinois Building, right? Because you guys have to take the big plan and make it happen. There’s got to be lots of details that they don’t even know what they’re doing, right?] Right. It’s like, ok. How do you get the glass up there? How do you get it all in place? How do you get the frameworks up there? You know, now I can’t take credit for a lot of it because there are engineers who figure out everything. But the part that I had to figure out and put in, went very smooth. Very smooth. In these pictures you will see...there is just a sea of clips because each panel had to have so many clips. You can’t fudge with glass one inch. And all of those clips have to line up. All of those panels had to hold on to those clips. So it was.... and it went like clock work. It went very good. I didn’t have one person get hurt on the job. I did have one person get a sliver when I was on vacation because he wore a pair of shorts! [Laughter] And when I got back from vacation, I couldn’t believe that he did that. But he was a terrific guy. I liked the guy. Any time I could hire the guy, I would hire him. A very nice guy. 26:34 [A lot of guys have commented about this and I’m sure you could too about the changes of safety over the years. Maybe you could say a little bit about that too.] When we worked on Hancock, half of the time you would jump out on a float which was just a wooden platform and you wouldn’t even think about tying off because you were just going to be out there for a minute or two. And then you’d jump back in and do whatever you’re going to do. You’d poke your head out over the side to take a look for something, you wouldn’t be tied off at all. Then when we did the State of Illinois, it was everybody better have a safety belt on. Wherever you can tie off, tie off. Ironworkers, when they’re going from point A to point B, they’re not tied off. But once they get there, then tie off.  Be safe. Now, when I worked on Soldier Field, you had to have a full body harness. If you were within six foot of the edge, or the perimeter, you had to be tied off to something. They would... You would have to put up your own safety cable, tie into it. The safety has gone, you know, completely in a good direction... [Yeah.] ...to save lives and cut down on insurance, everything. Even at this State of Illinois, once a week I would have people that were insuring us, come through, and inspect everything to make sure because the liability is just enormous. And that’s sometimes . . . the regular crew doesn’t understand. That we have to take and do things a certain way and if you don’t, the company is in trouble. If the company gets in trouble, you’re out of work. [Yeah, so it’s in your interest. And again, I’ve heard a lot of guys say this, to work with a company that makes sure you are safe.] Yeah. 29:00 [Did you have to go out on strike ever? Were you ever involved in any strikes?] I was involved in a few strikes and I would always look to my business agents for their wisdom and knowledge... And whatever they told me to do, that’s what I did. [Were those short strikes? There were a lot that were very short.] Yeah. [Or were they specific to one site?] Yes. There would be like a wildcat strike where it wasn’t authorized by the union. And those got to be very sticky situations. [Because you’re not living up to the terms of the contract.] Right. But I would always go with whatever the business agents told me that’s what I was going to do. 29:54 [When you first started on the job, was there a lot of practical jokes that guys did when you were starting? You had already been through all that.] Yeah, I had... I might have been one of the guys who played practical jokes [Laughter] because I was older and, you know, I had a lot of apprentices working for me. And...they’re going to be your future. They are the ones that will run the local and the ones that will run the job sites. I always treated them with the utmost respect, which I wish everybody would do. Because they’re in the learning phase and guys would send them for different things and there was no such thing. Kind of, you know, most of it was good ribbing. [Yeah.] And if it got harsh or anything, you had to put a stop to it right away because... You don’t know what you may do to them. You may depend on that guy to get you out of a jam so treat everybody like you would like to be treated. 31:15 [Yeah. Did you guys have any rituals associated with finishing buildings? There must have been something at the Hancock.] The thing is, everybody just, to my knowledge... Find that white beam and sign your name on it so you’re up there someplace. And I’ve signed plenty of white beams. Even the last job I was on, I signed it with my name, my son’s name and my grandson’s name, and that would be at Soldier Field. It’s just a good feeling. The only thing is ironworkers are one of the few guys that really work hard and put themselves out of a job. Because the minute the job is done, we’re looking for another place to build or another place to work. So... We work hard to accomplish it, but then we’re looking for another job. 32:25 [I know one question I wanted to ask. You mentioned this a couple of times the other day when I was out here. You used the term “headache”. Say a little bit about that just so people know what a headache is.] Well, if you holler out “headache”, everybody knows something’s coming down and it’s going to hit you in the head. So if  you have a protective area, get to the protective area. If you don’t, you know, try to get out of the way, if you know what’s coming and where it’s coming from. If not, don’t look up to see it because you have a hard hat on your head to protect you. If you’re . . . There’s been one occasion when I never heard the word “headache,” but I was knocked out and that was on Hancock. I fell onto a beam. And then the guy working on the crane and a couple other ironworkers grabbed me and pulled me back onto the floor. And I didn’t know it until I was in the man cage, going off to the hospital. To this day, I’m not positive what hit me in the head, but I think it was a piece of plywood form and it crushed my hard hat and knocked me out. I had a little bit of problems, but that was all okay. 33:58 [You mentioned, too, that you got shot at. You didn’t say a whole lot about that, but it sounds like it wasn’t a rare thing if you’re working on high rises for people to take pot shots.] Right, and its like . . Thank heaven it was a small caliber, you know, and, so, you know...it was just like... I was worried that I was going to get hit with something above because I was protruding outside of the building, welding on the outside of the building, facing the building 18 stories up in the air. When things hit you from behind, you’re curious as to what’s going on, and then when it hits you, underneath the plank your sitting on, you know it came from behind you, not from above you. So when I crawled in, sure enough, there was a guy over there with a pellet gun shooting at us. [Was that the State of Illinois?] No, that was on the First National [Refers to First National Bank building in the Loop]. When you go in certain areas, you have to be concerned if you have a family and you’re a provider. Those things they come and go, you know. 35:28 [Another thing you mentioned and Bill mentioned this too was that you used to make a lot of things yourself out of just parts that had been thrown out on job sites. What kind of stuff did you make?] Sometimes we would have large pieces of steel that were scrap and I would take them home and make wall plaques out of them. I sold all the wall plaques I made. I would go to different art fairs when I was younger. It was like a way of getting extra spending money. I would make motor cycles. I would make chess sets. I would make little figurine ironworkers. Now, some of the guys that make the stuff now, they go into much more detail and everything. Mine was like, well, I have a couple of hours here. I can whip up something quick and I have to go back to work tomorrow. So mine was more like for a hobby. But if anybody would come to my house and say, “I really like that.” I would pick it up and give it to him. I’d say, “Well here. As long as you appreciate it.” [Were there a lot of guys in your local that did little things like that? Because I see things all over here that look like they’ve been made by apprentices or journeymen or whatever.] Yeah, I think once you learn to weld or once you learn to gas weld or aluminum weld, you want to get creative. You want to see how far... What can you do? What’s the smallest thing you can weld? I haven’t made jewelry, but I’ve made stuff that’s very tiny and all the way up to big stuff. [Do you still do this at all?] No, I don’t but I made my kids little figurines that I knew they couldn’t break. [Laughter] To this day I still have them so I figure they’re hand-me-downs. Boy, I don’t know what else I could tell you. I was going to reiterate what Bill said though. Local #63 has been a great life for me. Really, you meet some of the nicest guys. Unfortunately, I have a hard time remembering names because I meet some days, you might work with some guy for two days and then you’re on a different job. Then later on in life, you find out you made a big impression on him  about something you did and he can remember your name like that. And you’re trying to rack your brain to think. I I can’t even remember that job. So its . . . [This was great. I really did appreciate it. I want you to know that. It’s been a pleasure talking to you about this stuff. Thanks so much.] It’s been super. END: 38:39  This kind of says when I started with Popovitch Ironworks. And I stayed with him until ’61. [So you were with...] From 1959 'til 1961. [Was that when you bought it from him?] Yeah. Well, I actually... [1961. Or whatever you did with the tools.] Yeah, right. And then I went with Builders Ornamental 'til ’66. [And were they a pretty big company, Builders Ornamental?] Yes, they still are and they’re huge. [That’s what I thought.] And they have all expansion joints in the O’Hare Airport, so they have a crew that works there all the time. You know. So if you get on that crew, you’ve kind of made it. [You don’t have to go to different work sites to work.] I got married in ’64 and I was working for them at the time. And I was putting up a blast fence for the jets to back up and start their engines against and everything. I guess it’s to keep the blast from turning over any vehicles that drive by also. [So it’s like a big iron plate or what is it?] Yeah, it’s a big curved fence. And they pour all this, all the little bolts into the concrete, and then if you don’t put a protective cover on the bolt, the threads get full of concrete and then, usually is what they do, is they’ll put grease on the threads and put tape around them and then you have no problems with the bolt going on. But this particular job, they didn’t do that and when we showed up, it was like, every thread you had to run a chaser nut, a thread chaser on. Just so time consuming, because there are no electric hammers, no anything. You did this by hand. Each one of those bolts. And then you could sit your frame up and bolt it down. [But why no electric, because where you worked, with the jets and everything?] Right. And I had another ironworker that kind of, “Hey kid, we don’t wear gloves.” And if you didn’t wear gloves and your wrench slipped off... [Your hands would be beat up all the time.] ...you had your knuckles are all skinned up. And after a few skinned up knuckles, I said, “Well, I have to wear gloves.” But anyway, that was there. 2:50 Then Alpha Metals, and that was...that was just, looks like 4-5 days, or was that an 8. Maybe it was a full week. [Yeah, it looks like seven days.] Yeah. And then Taft. That was the... [The school? No.] No. This was a company. These are all companies. [Oh, I see. So you put in a month, basically, at Taft.] Yeah. And then... 3:18 [Oh, this was when you were talking about...] Yeah... [...when you went to twelve or thirteen] Yeah. [American Bridges. That’s a big old company, isn’t it?] Yeah... And...Tri-State Iron. I can’t even make out some of the stuff, and it’s my own... [Is this a glass house?] Yeah, it’s my own... [Your own handwriting?] My own handwriting, but you know what, I brought in my sunglasses. I didn’t bring in my regular glasses. So... Anyway... It kind of... I would just jot down, not all the jobs, but you would have to jot down this stuff to know that your vacation money got paid in from this company. So even though you were an ironworker, you still had to be a pretty good bookkeeper and make sure that...any money that you had...that they were supposed to pay into the local, they paid into the local. So that’s kind of why you write down all the different companies. And it just keeps going... And when it gets toward the end here, this would be the Midwest Skylight. That was the State of Illinois up in here. And then... [That was the company that was doing that?] Yes, Midwest Skylight. And then, I took an early withdraw, which I am so sorry I did... [With the union...? Was that pulling out retirement stuff?] No. That was because I stopped working in 1987 and then I wasn’t doing ironworking, but I paid my dues until 1997. And then I said, “I don’t think I’ll ever do ironworking again. I’m going to take a withdrawal.” So I took a withdrawal from Local #63. I opened a restaurant in 1979 and I had that until March of this year. [And what was the name of the restaurant?] Mickey’s Drive In. [And where was that?] That’s in Villa Park on St. Charles Road. And we’ve had that 32 years. [That’s a long time for a restaurant to stay in business. Not many of them last that long.] Right, and that’s why I was hesitant about going back to work with that apprentice because at the time, I had just gotten the restaurant. I left my wife in the restaurant and I went into the ironworks and went back. I re-instated in 2003 and then I worked on the Soldier Field project. And then I retired completely. [So that was your last job, Soldier Field?] Yeah. [Well, that’s a pretty good one to go out on.] Oh yes. It was beautiful. It was a really nice way to end a career. [Yeah.] And now I’m completely retired. We sold the business. My wife is retired, and all together, she started with her mother in the hot dog business in ’59 and I was one of her first customers. Never left and married her and then in ’79 we got our own restaurant and she’s been doing it for 52 years. And now she’s completely retired. Now we’re going to try to tour the country. [Good for you.] END 07:14
Ironworkers;James Robert “Jimmy” Keane;1958;2011;Counter No./Time 00:01 BH: Just ah, tell me your name. JK: My name is Jimmy Keane, K-E-A-N-E. BH: Do you have a middle name? I never asked. JK: Well, actually, I’m ah, because my grandfather was Jimmy and my father was James, I’m James Robert Keane. BH: James Robert Keane, well actually, that would have been a good singer- songwriter’s name. JK: Yeah. BH: What’s his name, ah, there’s another Keane out there, Robert Earl Keane. JK: Robert Earl. Except I think that he spells his name slightly different. I am K-E-A- N-E. BH: What year were you born? JK: I was born in ’58 in London, England. BH: Oh, you were born in London? JK: Yeah, my parents moved there in the ‘50s to work from Ireland. My dad was from Connemara, Galway. My mom is from Kerry. And they moved up to Meath then the early ‘50s then they moved to London in the early, no late, they moved to Meath in the ‘40s then to London in the ‘50s. BH: And what was your dad doing in London for work at that time? JK: He was working with my uncle, ah, they had a construction firm. BH: Yeah. JK: Mostly ground work, ah, not ironwork at the time. But you know, well work and digging ditches and . . . BH: I would imagine that there were a lot of Irish doing that in England . . . JK: Oh yeah, I’d say at certain points there were probably more Irish in London than there were actually in Ireland over the course of the years, you know.   2 BH: Wow. JK: Ah, it was the easiest access point. BH: Yeah. Then your dad and mom moved over here at some point? JK: I was born in ’58, ah, then we moved back to Ireland for a number of years. I had a sister born there, Anne Marie, she was born in Dublin and then ah, my dad moved out to the states by himself. BH: Yeah. JK: To ah, get work . . . BH: Yeah. JK: And then we came out, I think in ’62, ah, myself and my sister and one of my father’s sisters and mother, obviously, came to Chicago. So we all met up here in ’62, I think. BH: So you were about four. JK: Four. BH: Four years old. So you went to school here in Chicago and everything? JK: Well, we stayed here for a year then we moved back. BH: Yeah. JK: And then, so the time 1965 rolled around we were, and then I, on the Southside, 79th Street, St. Sabina. BH: 79th, so you, didn’t Liz Carroll grow up pretty close to that place . . . JK: Liz Carroll grew up in, ah, Visitation. BH: Wow. JK: So she was like Garfield Blvd. and ah, wherever St. (?) is. BH: Yeah. It’s funny you mentioned 79th on there because my, I was talking to you about my grandfather working in the Stockyards . . . JK: Sure. 3  BH: He actually grew up on 79th Street, ah, as well. This would have been back in the ah, oh God, yeah the early part of the century . . . JK: Yeah. BH: So, my own family was right from that same neighborhood. That’s pretty interesting. JK: Yeah. BH: So you went to school then in that neighborhood? JK: Well, I went to St. Sabina for grade school. I gone for a year a, in primary school in Trim in Meath in Ireland, and then came out here and then, started grammar school again in the states. And then since, 79th Street, St. Sabina, then we moved over to St. Nick’s 63rd and Pulaski, where I stayed until I finished high school. 3:00 BH: Yeah. And, so, how did you get into ironworking then after high school? JK: Well, ah, I took the apprenticeship exam. BH: Oh, you did? JK: My dad had been an iron worker since, I think about 1963. BH: Okay. JK: And, there was a, ah, you know, every couple of years, they would open up the ah, apprenticeship program and I took the exam . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and got called in September of ‘79. BH: So, did your dad then, like he, when you came back from Ireland and sort of settled here permanently, did he find iron working right, . . . did he go through the apprenticeship program or did he . . . JK: No. BH: like work in through the construction industry and then get into the ironworking, how did that . . . JK: At that time, you can just, you just, you know, you joined up with the union, so it got 4  you a card . . . BH: A card? JK: It was before, I think, they even started the apprenticeship programs for the iron workers, anyway. I could be mistaken, but I’m almost sure that’s how it is, you got a card from, from Local 1 [IWU Local 1]. . . BH: Yeah. JK: here in Chicago. BH: So you went through the whole, the regular apprenticeship program? JK: I went through three years, yeah, three years of the apprenticeship program. BH: Yeah, well how did that work? I mean, you had to work too for support while you were doing it right? JK: Oh, you’d work, you’d work full-time and then you’d go to classes in the evening. So it was usually two, depending on the courses, two or three, at least two nights a week from 6-9 or something like that for three years. And summer as well. BH: Yeah, and did that have an apprentice training center in Local 1 at that point? JK: Yes, there was. Yes, when I started it was at um, off of ah, Lexington, right off of the, ah, Dan R, um, not the Dan Ryan, ah, the Eisenhower. BH: Oh, okay. JK: There’s actually ah, there ah, a, ah, drivers license facility right next door to it. BH: Oh, I know where that is. Yeah. JK: And then they, they later moved out to Wolf Road . . . BH: Yeah. JK: where the second, at least when I was there, the second union hall was and the apprenticeship program was in the back and they’re off of Roosevelt Road . . . BH: Yeah. I think I know where you’re talking about. JK: Yeah. BH: I’ve been out to the 136 headquarters and 63. They’re right next door to each other, 5  there. It’s not far off of Roosevelt Road either out there. JK: Well ah, Local 1 is in um, I forget where it is, it’s just off of Roosevelt Road. BH: Yeah, yeah, I was out there one time to interview the, actually one of the guys, ah what’s his name? Oh, Satalic. JK: Oh Babe Satalic. BH: Yeah, Babe Satalic, exactly yeah. JK: I knew his dad as well. BH: Yeah, I’ve heard about his dad, yeah, in fact I got some pictures he gave me of his dad doing the ironwork. JK: Great. BH: Yeah, he was a fun guy to interview. JK: Of course. BH: Yeah. No bullshit at all . . . JK: Is that right? BH: Really straightforward . . . JK: Exactly. BH: a lot of fun to talk to him. JK: The ah, term of endearment, because we were Southeastsiders, we were called “longhairs.” BH: Oh, is that right? JK: Yeah, there was ah, even they didn’t, you know most of them were ex-marine guys, you know short crew cuts, but they were called “longhairs”. Don’t ask me why, but that was . . . BH: How interesting. So you went into ironworking in ’79, did you say? JK: Yeah, I started September of ’79 as an apprentice. BH: Yeah. Do you remember your first job? 6  JK: I did, I actually worked for my dad. And, um, right behind a, Holy Name Cathedral. It was the first ah, at the time, it was the tallest, post tension ah, job . . . BH: Yeah. JK: itwaslike60stories... BH: Yeah. JK: Post tensioning is where they ah, instead of actually using reinforcing all the way through the ah, concrete, they run these steel um, they’re like huge steel encased a, ah, wire . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and they pour the concrete on it and then once the concrete cures, they actually tighten the ah, . . . BH: Yeah. JK: these long cables basically. BH: Yeah. JK: They’re run through all the ah, the floor and it’s almost like if you were, they’re set up like a mesh . . . BH: Yeah. JK: In a, in a trampoline. And, once they tighten it, it actually taunts the whole floor and then it gives the floor bounce. . . BH: Yeah. JK: It’s saved, it’s cost, it’s a cheaper way to do, or less expensive way to do things. BH: Yeah. JK: Because you don’t use as much steel, you know. BH: Yeah. So what kind of work were you doing? Putting in the cables? JK: Oh, cables and reinforcing . . . they were all intertwined. BH: Yeah. And then, after that, what kind of work did you do as an iron worker? 7  JK: I ended up staying, and I did a couple of small, ah, structural jobs, but again, if, if, a most of the Irish that were in Local 1, almost of them were ah, worked as reinforcing . . . BH: Yeah. JK: or rodbusters or rodmen . . . BH: Yeah. JK: as we were called. So we could basically work year round. Weather was less of a factor. BH: Yeah. JK: Even if you working on ah, like this building is a, is a reinforced building. [Halker lives on the 34th floor of a highrise on the lake.] BH: Yeah. JK: Ah, so you know, you could work here, unless it was really windy and the cranes wouldn’t work, you’d work year round. BH: Yeah. Was your dad doing same thing? JK: My dad was doing that as well. So either in reinforcing, or in high-rises ah, another, anything that involves steel and concrete mixed together. BH: Yeah. JK: So . . . BH: Pretty much the whole City of Chicago? JK: Exactly, BH: Yeah. JK: Even, even as much like the deep tunnel project. That was . . . BH: Yeah. JK: all the, all the ah, tunnels going in were reinforced, all the ah, the, the main shoots going down were all reinforced, so we work on all those. BH: Yeah, I’ve got . . . 8  JK: Sanitation areas, sanitary districts, we worked on sanitary districts. BH: Sure. Yeah, I talked to one guy from 63 who worked on deep tunnel and also worked on Tip, Top, putting the tower on the top of the Sears Tower, so he’s been at the highest and lowest here in the city. It seems like iron workers are all over town. JK: Same thing. 63 was more of an ornamental iron worker . . . BH: Yeah, yeah. JK: Whereas ah, Local 1 was structural, so, you know actually supporting the whole BH: Yeah, yeah. JK: the whole building. BH: Yeah, now I know there were sometimes jurisdictional battles. Probably not one in 63, but you must have had some in the Laborer’s Union in your day, or not? JK: You know ah, there weren’t, no everything was pretty clear cut. I think that one of the things that actually helped ah, Local 1 being the only structural iron worker for basically the whole greater Chicagoland area . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and I think when I started there were maybe 2,500 iron workers. And that was one local versus probably, you know, every other block there was a carpenter’s local, BH: Yeah. JK: every other block, there was, you know, electricians, well less the electricians, but or plumber’s and laborer’s, so they, they were all kind of split up, whereas there was only one iron worker’s local. BH: Sure. JK: And, you know, I think at the time, there was no one else doing that work. BH: Yeah. JK: And, I think when work years ago, when you brought up the laborer’s, when work was good, they gave away, the iron workers gave away the road work . . . BH: Yeah. JK: cause that involved reinforcing as well. So they gave that to the ah, ah, laborer’s 9  local. BH: Yeah. JK: But they couldn’t actually use the pliers, they had to use twist ties . . . BH: Oh, did they really? How interesting. JK: Yeah, so if they used the pliers, they couldn’t do it. BH: Yeah. JK: But they, they, so they reformulated twist ties, like that picture I showed you. Instead of actually using the pliers, they would have to use their hands. BH: Now, it seems like, I’ve talked to a lot of guys from 63, they had conflicts with the laborer’s. I can kind of see that because they did road work and some of the other stuff. JK: Yes. BH: You didn’t do curtain wall too? Because it seems like 63 guys did a lot of curtain wall, did you, did you do any . . . JK: Oh, you mean on the, on the ground? BH: No, on the big buildings where they put the big, you know how on the outside they would bring in the window frame and put windows in and stuff . . . JK: No. We didn’t . . . BH: You didn’t do any of that? JK: No, that’s more ornamental, that’s what they would do. BH: Yeah, exactly, yeah. JK: We would put up the basic structure. BH: Yeah. JK: Obviously, we got along with the other trades. BH: Right. So some, did you work on any famous buildings downtown or anything, or around the area? Any favorite projects you really liked? JK: You know ah, I ended up being an iron worker for a, I started in ’79 and my career 10  ended in 1989, so I just had ten years in. But ah, I worked on a, some of the newer high rises, One South Wacker ah, I worked on a couple of the Blue Cross Blue Shield buildings. I worked on the new extension for McCormick Place. BH: Yeah. JK: In fact, I ended up working on a, there’s a bridge, there’s an overpass at ah, on Lake Shore Drive if you’re heading North on Lake Shore Drive, before they re-routed it . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and ah, my father, Jimmy, of course, he also worked on it, he worked on the original McCormick Place. BH: Oh wow. JK: And, it turns out that, we found out that he was working on the ah, the original McCormick Place that the outside wall that was connecting to the ah, overpass, BH: Yeah. JK: above the, the Lake Shore Drive. He originally put that up. BH: Wow. JK: Crews working with him done that. And, then, years later, I actually worked putting the new . . . BH: same spot. JK: Well they had the adjoining walkway, and I worked on that one. So we actually worked on, you know . . . BH: Oh, that’s cool. JK: X amount of years later. You know probably 20 years or 25 years later. BH: In the period you were doing the ironwork, were you and your dad on the same sites a lot? JK: Ah, yeah, I started with my dad for the. The first year I worked with him ah, on that ah, I think it was, what was it called Huron, Huron Towers. BH: Ah huh. JK: Kitty corner from ah, from ah, ah Holy Name Cathedral. 11  BH: Oh, oh okay. JK: So I worked until maybe the second or third floor before the end. 12:00 BH: Yeah. So how did your iron career end? What, was it ah, the, the lure of music or, or something else? JK: I had an argument with a scaffold. BH: Yeah. JK: And ah, yeah, I screwed up my knee. BH: You did? JK: Yeah, so I had multiple surgeries and yeah, so that put an end to that. BH: Well, I know it’s always been a dangerous job. You kind of were at least into the tie on era, right? You had to tie off in your day, or were there, were you kind of in the transition period? Because a lot of those old guys, man, they were crazy running around up there. JK: The tie-in is, that’s all relatively new. BH: Yeah. JK: Before, there was no way. There wasn’t, you know, there was none. BH: Yeah. JK: I mean, you would, you would if you were working on a wall, you would hook into the wall, but now it’s all . . . let’s talk to my brother, it’s all changed over the last fifteen years. BH: Yeah, some of these guys don’t even like it anymore because they have to . . . everytime they move six feet, they gotta . . . JK: Yeah, there was no such thing as that. BH: Yeah. JK: You mean you had your wall hook. BH: Yeah. Did you fall? I mean were you up high when you, when you fell or were you 12  .. . JK: I ended up falling, I think I ended up falling seven foot . . . BH: Yeah. JK: but it’s . . . BH: Well seven feet can do a lot. JK: I ended up being in ah, I think it’s called a pipe position, so my left knee was up by my ear. BH: Oh. JK: So everything, it just, just popped out, you know. BH: Yeah. JK: So I got wedged between a couple of ah, ah, big concrete pipes. We were actually working, believe it or not, we were actually working below ground. BH: Oh. JK: At the time that, that a, one of the sanitary districts. BH: Oh, okay. And so, did you have to do some tine in the hospital and then . . . JK: Oh I did yeah. I had several surgeries. BH: Oh. JK: And so . . . BH: And obviously it still bothering you. And that’s the source of you’re, you’re gimp? JK: Laughs. Yes. BH: Have you had joints replaced anything yet or are you . . . JK: Ah, my knee was completely redone. BH: Oh, it was. JK: Oh yeah. 13  BH: So did you just like, once you got out of the hospital, you just said that’s the end of that, or were you . . . JK: Well there was no way I could work again, they said, doing that. BH: Yeah. Did you get any kind of payout on that from the iron workers or do you still get anything? JK: No. No, I mean there, there was, you know, like ah, there would have been a workman’s comp case that was settled many years ago. BH: Yeah. So you didn’t get any real, like longterm disability out of it. JK: No. BH: Hmmm. JK: You know I could, I ended up going back to school because you know, I had started college . . . BH: Yeah. JK: back in the ah, ’70, I started back in ‘77. BH: Where did, where did you go? JK: I originally went to DePaul University . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and then went to Loyola for a while. And then, I was on the 20-year plan and ended up getting a degree in ’93 at the University of Illinois. BH: Oh, you did. JK: Yeah. BH: Good for you. What’s your degree in? JK: In a Bachelor of Science and Marketing. BH: Oh, all right, interesting. Well it’s not bad for a musician to know how to do a little bit of marketing. Yeah, it’s probably a good idea, as bad as we are at that so. So okay, you quit ironworking, but your dad was still working in the trade, right? 15:00 14  JK: My dad worked until ah, actually, it was the year after I, I think I got injured in ’88, so it was ’89 when I finished ah, my dad was actually, unfortunately killed. BH: Yeah. JK: On Michigan Avenue. BH: He was. JK: Yeah. BH: Where was he working at the time? JK: I think it was 900 North Michigan. BH: Oh. JK: Yeah, it was one of those . . . BH: Yeah, right where the shop, the skyscraper shopping malls. JK: Yes. BH: Yeah, and I know there have been a lot of iron workers killed over the years. Did you fall off of the top or I mean what kind of a . . . JK: I think he fell ah, from the 13th story. BH: And ah, how old was your dad? JK: He had just turned 60 that Christmas. He was ah, he was born December 24, 1928. BH: Yeah. He’s about my parents’ age then. Wow. And, were your brothers already working in the trade by then? JK: Well, in fact, my youngest brother, who is still alive, two of the brothers that are iron workers, Dennis and Michael. BH: Are they in Local 1? JK: Local 1, yes. Dennis started actually the same time as I did back in 1979 and then my brother, I think started in the mid-80s. BH: Yeah. JK: and he was actually working with my dad the day he was killed. 15  BH: Oh wow. JK: Yeah. BH: That’s intense. JK: It is. BH: Yeah. That’s a dangerous occupation. JK: You know, it was ah, that day, I was actually . . . you know Michael Miles, BH: Yeah. JK: the banjo player? BH: Oh sure yeah. JK: working at the music program at the Old Town? BH: Yeah, I run into Michael pretty regularly over there. JK: Michael was doing his first solo album and I was up at a, I think it’s Studio Media . . BH: Yeah. I don’t know if it’s still there either, I remember the studio. JK: I think the engineer was Benjie? BH: Yeah. JK: And we were recording, ah, I was recording, Michael decided he wanted to do a couple of ah, I remember the two tracks I played with Michael ah, ah, an old timey tune “The Cherokee Shuffle” . . . BH: Oh yeah. JK: So Michael was doing the claw hammer banjo and I was doing the accordion, couple of accordion passes, and he wanted to do an Irish tune called ah, the ah “Kitty’s Rambles” . . .I forget the actual . . . was and it was a tune that I never cared for. BH: Yeah. JK: And ah, I said to Michael, I say hey you know, cause ah, jigs are usually in 6/8 time? BH: Yeah. 16  JK: I said, “you know, why don’t you do it in 7/8?” He said, “okay.” I thought nothing of it and he came back and said, “you know Jimmy, we’re going to do it in 7/8.” I said, “what.” BH: Yeah. JK: So we recorded those tunes that day and I was actually coming down Lake Shore Drive at about 3:00 and coming back from the studio, headin’, headin’ back home and ah, I felt a pain, you know, BH: Yeah. JK: I knew something was wrong. BH: Wow. JK: So I got down to ah, I was going to meet, it was a Friday afternoon, I was going to meet a, a few iron worker buddies and friends at the 6511 Club, um, was also known as Flannigan’s? BH: Uh huh. JK: It was a great music house on the Southside for years and I walked in the bar and everyone just looked around and there were guys crying and they said, “haven’t you gone home?” And I said, “no”. Because this was before cell phones or anything . . . BH: Yeah. JK: And ah, Jimmy McGowan told me that my dad was killed . . . BH: Oh geez. JK: that day. And I knew something happened when I was driving down Lake Shore Drive, didn’t know what it was, but I said, “hmmm, something’s wrong here. BH: Yeah. JK: And, it wasn’t anything visual or, you know. BH: Yeah. JK: So that was the day. BH: Wow. While you were ironworking . . . 17  JK: It doesn’t make for a humorous story . . . BH: Yeah. Yeah, um, while you were ironworking, were you still playing music? Obviously, you were . . . 18:28 JK: Ah yeah, I’ve been playing music since I was . . . BH: A teenager? JK: seven, basically. I started when I was seven, but I supposed 13 or 14 when I started um, playing out in public and started playing, you know, doing gigs. BH: Yeah. JK: and stuff. BH: Now, ah, I think Liz said, did, did you guys end up at the same school, or you both hang out at, was it McNamara’s that they used to do a radio show or something? I remember, she said there was a connection, she said you guys met each other. JK: Oh, when we were kids. I mean, we basically grew up playing. Yeah, ah, we used to live, when I mentioned before we lived on 79th Street, then we moved a few blocks down to 81st and Bishop . . . BH: Yeah. JK: which was basically two blocks, where ah, Hanley’s House of Happiness was. BH: That’s what it was. JK: and Tom McNamara used to the radio broadcast in there and then years later that radio program continued on then Martin Fahey took over the radio program after Tom decided to retire from it. But Hanley’s was the place. Every weekend I was in there with my parents, even as seven or eight years old, because it was a family, even though it was a pub, it was a family social place and it was music . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and then they did the live radio broadcast at night. BH: Yeah. JK: You know every once in a while, they’d get up and play a few tunes. BH: Did you get up? 18  JK: I did ya. BH: Oh cool. Now did your dad teach you the accordion or was there someone else, or did you take lessons? How did you get into that instrument? JK: I took ah, basic accordion lessons, because I play the piano accordion as opposed to the more traditional button accordion . . . BH: Yeah. JK: or malodgian . So I took basic lessons for a few years from a guy on 79th Street, C.F. Marsch. He was a German, German American . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and then after that, just by ear – associating with all the Irish musicians in Chicago and then you know, I was fortunate enough to ah, be the same age as Liz. So we basically grew up playing together. BH: Yeah. JK: And, you know then and Michael Flatley came in a bit later and then Marty Fahey on the piano. Michael Flatley, of course, the Lord of the Dance dancer. He was actually a very good flute player. BH: Oh, I didn’t know that. JK: and then you Marty Fahey, who plays, he started out on piano and now he plays the button accordion as well. BH: Yeah. JK: So we basically grew up. BH: Yeah. Was there, there was a still a pretty thriving scene then ah, from what you’re saying? JK: Oh, it was. BH: Chicago has always had a pretty vibrant Irish music scene. JK: I think what happened in the ah, so like early ‘70s was, it coincided with the revival of, the ah, folk revival . . . BH: Yeah. 19  JK: You know, in which, I know it started in the ’60s you know, with the, with the Clancy Brothers coming over here and then Dylan and the whole New York folk scene . . BH: Yeah. JK: and then people borrowing songs and, BH: Sure. JK: and, so I think the actual traditional aspect of that was a few years later, BH: Yeah. JK: So it was really, it was a thriving community. BH: Yeah. JK: Especially local. There were so many musicians here, ah, Kevin Henry, who was another iron worker. BH: Oh really. JK: Kevin, known as Kevin “Piper” Henry. BH: Yeah. JK: Played the flute and uilleann pipes. So he was always around 79th Street. So we learned from the likes of Kevin Henry, ah Johnny McGreevy, great fiddle player, Joe Shannon the Piper, ah, Eleanor Neary, a great pianist, Jimmy Neary, her husband, ah, I mean, you know, it goes on and on. BH: Yeah. JK: Burn Burnst [?], Tom Masterson . . . 21:35 BH: Now your dad was a singer, right? JK: He was a sean nos singer, yes. His first, his first language was ah, he grew up in a place called Tierney Connemara in Galway and he ah, was there until about seven. I think 1935, they, there was a government relocation program, so they took 12 families from one of the poorest parts of Connemara and they moved ‘em up closer to Dublin, about an hour away, a little Gaeltacht, a little Gaelic speaking community that they created in, a place they called Rath Cairn. 20  BH: Uh huh. JK: in Meath. And they gave them a, you know, concrete house and a couple of acres of land . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and the resettled then there. There were, that happened a lot in the ‘30s, there was a, there was the, um, there was twelve, twelve families from, from Connemara. In fact, my grandfather wasn’t even supposed to go, but someone decided last minute that they didn’t want to go, so they asked my grandfather, Jim, if he wanted to go, and he said “yes”, he brought the seven kids that were born in Connemara. Moved up to Meath and there was another six born in Meath. BH: Yeah. JK: And then there was a, ah, the next County over, there was a Donegal, Gaeltacht, where they took people from Gaelic speaking parts of Donegal and they moved them to Meath as well. And then there was a smaller Kerry, Gaeltacht. BH: So was the government trying to create these kind of model communities, ‘cause I know they did that here in the ‘30s too. There is one up by Milwaukee, there’s one in Maryland, I mean there’s, yeah, I’ve heard about these in the U.S., was that, was that what the government were doing? JK: I think, I think it might have been two part. You know, I, I never really, I should have looked into it a bit more. I think a lot of it was just for economic reasons . . . BH: Yeah. JK: Because you know, at least they could, they went from basically being . . . BH: The house . . . JK: Well, they went from fishermen . . . BH: Oh. JK: ‘cause back, it was all stone and rocks, so you were fishermen . . . BH: Yeah. JK: you know, so now they moved up there, they got a couple of head of cattle . . . BH: Yeah. 21  JK: couple of pigs, chickens, so they became farmers. BH: Yeah. JK: I mean, that’s the short version of it. And, I suppose there was something as well, they wanted to actually preserve the language . . . BH: Yeah. JK: So there was the language component, as well. ‘Cause they were all, again, native Irish speakers. BH: Yeah. JK: So when they moved up to Meath, I mean there were people that eventually learned English. My father learned English. My grandfather could speak good English, but my grandmother, she lived until she was about 95, in Meath and she didn’t speak English at all. BH: Yeah. JK: Even though all of her kids spoke, they were bilingual at that point . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and obviously all of her grandkids and great-grandkids. BH: Did your dad’s singing ability influence you as a musician? JK: Oh yeah, definitely yeah. BH: Did he teach you to sing when you were a kid? Did you start doing that while you were, even before the accordion or? JK: Yeah, I could sing a bit, but it was, it was horrible. BH: [Laughs] That’s not your best suit, is a, singing? JK: No, I was just a, they told that I wanted to actually play the accordion, and specifically, I wanted to play the piano accordion. So, I don’t know where that came from. BH: Interesting. JK: You know. I mean we grew up in the, even though we were, you know, on 79th Street, I mean, it was such a huge, at that time, it was such a huge Irish population as 22  well. BH: Yeah. JK: And so, you know we were always, you know people at our apartment were Irish and their kids were Irish Americans, so . . . BH: Yeah. JK: you know, just, it was part of the, we didn’t know any different, you know. I suppose the only thing that I regret from that time was, you know when I moved over here first I was an Irish speaker. But then my parents thought it might have been detrimental if I, you know, still spoke Irish in school. BH: Oh, I suppose you’re right. JK: And so, later people that came out in the’70s and ‘80s and if their kids were bilingual, they kept them bilingual. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, so it got to the point where my mom and dad, my mom’s a native speaker as well, she is Kerry Irish, so they would, the only time they would start speaking Irish was when they didn’t want us to know what was going on. BH: [Laugh] You’re probably right though about the dating of that, because it seems like most immigrants tried not to speak their native language, or encourage their kids to learn English quickly, but then at some point . . . JK: It was the opposite. BH: Yeah, it’s like the bilingualism became like okay. You know, I think it’s good, I mean it’s great, you know. JK: Oh, I think that’s, that’s . . . [interrupted] BH: Yeah, you know ‘cause my family, there were Germans on my mom’s side and they just, they didn’t want to have anything to do with it once they got here. Like my great- grandfather forbid them from speaking German, you know . . . JK: Yeah. BH: just was, that was just a different world, you know, but it’s changed now and I think that is probably for the better that we keep two languages. JK: But they did actually, I mean, the best part they did encourage music, so there’s always music at the house. 23  BH: That’s good. JK: And of course, you know, all the, all the, every place we ever went out to, there was music there. There was either, you know, people playing on stage, Irish traditional music or there were sessions. BH: Yeah. JK: So you know, it was the environment that I grew up in. 26:22 BH: Um, most of those musicians probably had day jobs, even the most well-known of them, right? JK: Oh, I would say almost all of them at that time. BH: It wasn’t really a professional category at that point for that, I mean, you couldn’t, it would have been hard to earn your living the way . . . JK: Yeah, I think that started, that started more so in the ‘70s BH: Yeah. JK: You know there were more that started doing it . . . BH: Yeah. JK: And then more so if you were more on the singing side of it then actually on the instrumental side. BH: Yeah. JK: But then again at the same time, that’s when groups started, ah, they weren’t really, ah, I mean aside, from ah, within, there weren’t really groups . . . BH: Yeah. JK: in Irish music until about the ‘70s. Aside from Ceili bands, that were used to play for dancing. BH: Yeah. JK: But then folk groups came out, and off shoots from folk groups, like ah, oh, like the Chieftains, where there was music, dance and song . . . 24  BH: Yeah. JK: ah, and then there was, you know, the Bothay Band, De Dannan, ah, BH: Sure. JK: you know, and a ton of groups like that. BH: So, when you, after you got injured and you’re, you were playing music, when did you start to think that maybe that could be your career? JK: Well even at that time, I had always been playing even while I was an iron worker, I was always playing music. BH: Yeah. So it was a pretty natural transition for you? JK: Yeah, it was yeah, I mean because, we had, you know, it was just something we did, you know, I mean at that point, it was just something we’d do whether we were getting paid or not. BH: Yeah. JK: So, you know, it was the next transition was to do that, and then you know, rely on that for income. BH: Yeah. Do you think, you know, having been a ah, an iron worker, did it effect your aesthetics of playing music at all? Have you ever thought about that or . . . JK: Well you know I . . . BH: having worked in a blue-collar job that you know is really physical? JK: as if you couldn’t get anymore blue collar than music . . . laughing. BH: Well that’s true [Laughter] . . . JK: I mean, you know, I mean, you know, if you think about it, I mean, if you had a trade in Chicago, when I started, what was it I said, in ’79, I mean, for, you know, for being a high school graduate, with some, you know a couple of years of college and ah, who were making $25-$30 an hour, so that was, you know, you work all the overtime as an iron worker, that was double . . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know, my first job, we were working seven 12’s. 25  BH: Yeah. JK: You know, I mean it kind of became ridiculous, because after awhile, after so many hours, you were just paying it all in taxes anyway. BH: Yeah. JK: I mean, you know so, so it would be hard to match that, as a musician. BH: Yeah, unless you were world famous. JK: Of course. 29:00 BH: Yeah. So, did you move into a full time career as a musician like shortly after that, or did you still like, have to do other jobs to pick up money? JK: Well for the most part, yeah, it was. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, like in the ‘90s and 2000, I was involved in real estate . . . BH: Yeah, I remember you talking about that. JK: as well, so, it was primarily ah, I mean I supposed the avocation is as a musician and always will be. BH: Yeah, yeah. And, and, ah, I mean it sounds like your career is a little bit like mine, and since you’ve kind of come in and out of being a full time musician, is that accurate? Has your musical fortune improved or whatever? I mean, for me, sometimes it’s been good as a musician, sometimes it hasn’t been good, you know. I mean, I was a teacher . . . JK: Of course, yeah. BH: I quit teaching because I was getting so busy playing music, but then after five years of doing that suddenly, like oh my God, I’m in the hole again, I got do something, so has your career been kind of like that too? JK: Yeah, exactly, yeah, up and down. BH: Yeah. Does that frustrate you sometimes, I mean, as much as it frustrates me or, JK: Well, it, it is, you know, I think, now even more so now. Because, you know people don’t go out, I mean, there’s less people. I just heard on the radio the other day, I mean, 26  you know there’s less live music venues in Chicago . . . And you know Chicago was, at one time, there was, every, even a local bar would have live music on a Friday or Saturday night . . . BH: Yeah. JK: now that’s . . . BH: Well, it’s funny you should say that, because I’ve always thought there was a book in that, I keep thinking in my head about the, the decline of live music in America, ‘cause you know where I grew up, way up in Ashland, Wisconsin, which a real blue collar town near Duluth, I mean if you went out on any Friday night to a tavern, it might not be the music I wanted to hear, but there was always an accordion player and like, or somebody at the Wurlitzer or whatever playing live music. There were polka bands at all the weddings. It just was live music was pretty much part of the, the scenery. And then, you know, we transitioned it into the rock era and all the bars had rock bands. Local guys playing cover songs . . . JK: Sure. BH: Beatles, Stones, Animals, that kind of crap. Um, but you go up there now, and you, there’s no live music around. You might be one club in the whole area that’s got on Friday night might have a live band, so and I noticed, just like you were saying, in Chicago, in 25 years that I’ve lived here, it just seems to be less live music. I don’t know, do you agree, right? JK: That, that’s, it’s true, yeah, yeah. I mean a lot of that has transitioned to ah, ah, karaoke, I mean, you know, I’ll . . . BH: Yeah. JK: which is not really . . . BH: And do you feel too, like, I mean, I don’t want to name names of club owners, I could, but it seems to me, that a lot of the club owners don’t want to pay a guarantee anymore and they don’t support the artists as much as they used to. JK: Yeah, there’s very few that do. BH: Yeah. JK: I mean what’s the longest running place now with music? The Green Mill? BH: Probably. JK: That’s probably . . . 27  BH: FitzGerald’s would be another one. JK: FitzGerald’s of course, yeah, but I think The Green Mill has been around a bit longer, hasn’t it? BH: Yeah, I think so too. Yeah. JK: You know especially anything that might have any resemblance to folk or ethnic music, would be FitzGerald’s . . . BH: Yeah. JK: on a regular basis. And then obviously, you know, there’s the performing centers like the Old Town School, ya know, they’ve been, that’s part of their mission from, since day one. . . BH: Yeah. JK: to present music. Then there’s also new places like Space up in Evanston and ah, so there’s always performance venues, but more for established acts than for someone just starting out. BH: Yeah. Yeah, I find that too and I’m not just starting out and neither are you, but there’s so many national acts that can work FitzGerald’s or Space, it’s hard to slot, I don’t know if you feel that way, it’s harder to slot yourself into those gigs than it was 20 years ago. JK: Oh exactly, yeah, yeah. BH: Yeah, I find it more difficult. JK: And, it’s always been hard if you live here, playing here, its . . . BH: Yeah. JK: I mean, you have to go some place else. BH: Yeah, I feel that way. I noticed you’re getting ready to hit the road. JK: Yes. 32:50 BH: Yeah, so in fact, that’s a segue there. Do you do all of the bookings for, for you and Pat? 28  JK: Well, you know this, yes. I mean, we had, you know, we had, we’ve agents over the years, BH: Yeah. JK: but we’ve been kind of on a hiatus for the last couple of years so. This is, you know, we’ll just go out when we can. BH: Yeah. And, are you trying to think of ah, I mean, besides playing the live gigs, have you been involved in other ways to try and to figure out how to get your music out there, I mean? I’m always trying, you know, not just internet stuff, but I’m always trying to hustle different ways of thinking about the music industry, I don’t know if you’re that way. Does your marketing background help you try to think of new ways to market yourself and get your music out there? JK: You know, yeah, there are ways and there’s a lot of things happening now that ah, ah, you know, instead of, you know we were talking about live music, the ah, there’s a few services now where you can actually do concerts from your home? BH: Yeah. JK: You know, and I forget the name. I didn’t think we were going this way with this conversation . . . BH: Yeah, I didn’t either. JK: But there’s a, there’s a couple services where you can actually, you know, you can set, you can do a 15 minute show . . . BH: Yeah. JK: at 9:00 on Friday, and then it, a little streaming show, you can do it from your, from your office, from your . . . BH: Yeah. JK: you know . . . BH: Yeah. JK: but then again, you are relying on video, so bringing the show to them, instead of . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know. 29  BH: Are you still actively recording new material? JK: Yeah, actually, I’m working on, I’m working on um, in fact, it was Liz, that prompted me to do, she said, “You know, Jimmy, you should do, you know, do, do an album or book of, of the tunes you’ve written over the years.” So, so I’m in the process of ah, writing some more tunes and putting that all together. BH: Yeah. And, you and Pat have been playing together, how many years now? JK: Oh, ah, as the whole, probably on and off since about 1999. BH: Yeah. JK: But I’ve known Pat Broder, since ah, since he came here in ’91 or ’92. BH: Yeah. JK: Pat’s over 20 years here, from Dublin. BH: Yeah. You, you were a trio for a while, right? JK: Oh we were a trio and then we were a quartet. BH: Oh you were? JK: Yeah. BH: So was that a financial decision to keep it now at a duo level or? JK: Yeah, you know, well it made more sense and more so, even musically. For some reason, when Pat and I started playing together we just hit it off right away. BH: Yeah. JK: So we didn’t have to think about, I could try a new tune and he’d get it right away. BH: Yeah. JK: instead of actually having to learn, to teach someone else the tune or let them figure it out. It became very freeing, even though you are limited then ah, musically, even it there’s, it’s always nice to play off of another melody instrument. BH: Yeah. JK: But you know, Pat started playing more tunes and so you kind of interchange. And, I always liked playing chordal stuff off of tunes. 30  BH: Yeah. JK: So it seems to work so far. BH: Yeah. JK: You know and Pat sang, so that actually makes it more ah, accessible to ah, the general audience. BH: Yeah. JK: And that’s not saying that people wouldn’t ah, like just instrumental music, but it’s definitely a harder sell. BH: Yeah. Yeah, I agree with you. Do you guys go over to Europe? JK: We have yeah. BH: You go to Ireland. JK: Mostly Ireland, yeah. BH: Yeah. JK: And we did ah, Canada, Australia. BH: So, so right now um, besides doing the music thing, what are you doing to try to ah . .. JK: Wellnowit’sathemusic... BH: You’re back to doing it full time? JK: Yeah. BH: So how’s that working so far? JK: Oh, lovely. 36:15 BH: Yeah. Was that, I know the real estate market kind of ah, tanked and you were involved with that right? JK: Oh I was, yeah, I was a developer. 31  BH: Oh you were? Okay. JK: Yeah. BH: And then suddenly bank loans became more difficult or just everything got more difficult? JK: Well the banks called in their loans basically and . . . BH: It made things difficult. JK: Oh, yeah. BH: Yeah. And, ah, so, did you, your decision to jump back into music full time was that prompted by the decline of the real estate part of it or, just like you just made a decision anyway, it was just time to put more . . . JK: Well, I never really stopped playing it was just a matter of you know what . . . BH: the levels of . . . JK: Yeah. BH: Yeah. Well that’s kind of like mine. Some years it might be 30% of it and some years it might be 90%, it just depends on, who knows what makes it go that way. JK: Yes. BH: Yeah. So, just to get back to the iron workers, now your brothers are all still, how many brothers are still in the trade? JK: I have two brothers that are still in the trade. BH: Are they both Local 1. JK: Both Local 1, correct. BH: And you mentioned once that one was a contractor too? Had one of them gone into contracting end of it? JK: Yeah, he’s a superintendent for ah, ah, M A Steel Erectors. BH: Okay. JK: They’re based out of, I think Palos. 32  BH: Okay and does he um, can you, ah, I’ve always wondered about this of the guys that kind of move outside of the labor part of it. Does he keep, can he keep his union membership going then? JK: Oh of course, yes. Oh yeah, cuz, I mean, he’s, he’s basically the superintendent for the company. So he’s like the working superintendent. BH: Does he, like for a whole job site, or just for the iron portion of it? JK: Oh, for the, for the iron, iron workers ah, and the same thing like with plumbers and electricians, they’re all subcontractors, subcontractors to whom whoever the general contractor would be. BH: Yeah. JK: So then you know, if ah, John Smith Construction is putting up a new 50 story high rise . . . BH: Yeah. JK: They’ll, you know they have the plans out there, and then they’ll send out bids to the subcontractors. BH: Yeah. JK: So you know A, A sewer or A plumbing will compete against B plumbing for they’ll bid on that job . . . BH: That job? JK: and the same thing with the iron workers. And the same, with you know carpenters. Well usually the carpenters are hired by the general contractor. BH: Yeah. JK: But all the other trades, they’ll all bid on that job. BH: So then you’re . . . I’m, I’m just trying to understand how that all gets done, it’s always been kind of curious to me, so if your brother’s a superintendent, does he determine then how many workers he is going to need on a particular job or . . . JK: Yes. BH: and he calls Local 1 and says “Hey, I need, you know, these guys, or we need this many for this long”? 33  JK: Yeah, well, he’ll know, because he usually you know, bid out the guys that are working with him for several years, so he tries to keep them busy . . . BH: Yeah. JK: even though they are all Local 1 members . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and you know, when he needs more there’s other people. It, it’s, you know, ‘cause it’s a small knit community . . . BH: Yeah. JK: again, because now there’s, I don’t think there’s, you know maybe 1500 iron workers. I know there’s only 15 or 1600 current in Local 1 iron workers, but I think only 400 are working. BH: Yeah, I agree, it’s pretty, yeah. JK: You know. BH: Yeah, talking to 63. It’s the same thing. JK: And you know, a couple of years ago, when work was really good, I think my brother had, you know, a hundred. BH: Yeah. JK: Hundred, plus, guys working for him. BH: Yeah. JK: You know. Now he’s down to, he’s probably down to ten. BH: And does he, your other brother work with your brother . . . JK: He does on occasion, yeah. BH: Yeah. JK: Yeah. BH: Yeah. JK: Because the thing is you, you work for, you work out of the hall basically . . . 34  BH: Yeah. JK: but very, you know, for years very few people worked out of the hall. BH: Yeah. JK: I mean you’re still, does that make sense? If you were working for one of the big iron contractors for years was Gateway, and you know so they would have the regular crew and they’d always have new work in, and if they needed more guys they would either call up the people who worked for them before, you know, or get someone out of the hall. BH: Yeah. JK: But then, since everyone knows each other knows all of the contractors, you know . . BH: Yeah. JK: so certain guys won’t work for company A and you know . . . BH: Yeah. JK: unless they’re, that’s the only job. BH: Yeah. JK: And other guys will only work for company A, they won’t go anywhere else. If they’re going to be slow for two weeks, they’ll take the two weeks off. BH: Oh, that’s interesting. JK: You know. BH: Yeah. JK: So you’re not it’s, I’m not sure how other unions work. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, from my experience, seniority didn’t really play into it. 40:45 BH: Yeah. When you were, when you were on the job um, and maybe your brothers talk about this, um, were there any ethnic tensions at all or racial tensions? 35  JK: No. BH: No? JK: Not, I mean . . . BH: You were kind of the post-racial, you know that if I talked to some of the guys from the ‘60s . . . JK: Oh, I can imagine, yeah. BH: Yeah, and they didn’t even like long hairs, there was that hippy versus the old guy thing too. But you probably came in a little past the worst part of that, right? JK: Yeah, in fact, there, uh, when, when I think of my youngest brother was working as an iron worker, ah, I think when he started the apprenticeship, they were one of the first classes where uh, women were part of it . . . BH: Yeah. JK: were part the class. BH: Yeah. JK: Or maybe a couple of years after that. BH: So, it’s much different than it was a long time ago. JK: It is, yes, I mean, regardless. BH: How did your ah, I mean I don’t know if it’s from the ironworking um, you seem, how did that experience being Irish and your dad’s in the union, how did that effect your own politics? JK: Oh well, I mean, Irish Catholic Democrat, I mean, there were certain things (laughs) BH: Yeah, and pro-union. I mean there are . . . JK: and pro-union, oh yeah. Of course yes. I mean I always grew in, you know, and as soon as it became possible to join, ah, the Musician’s Union, I did. BH: Yeah, yeah. JK: I mean and Local 1000, the traveling musicians, started by, ah, another fellow Wisconsinite, ah, John McCutcheon. 36  BH: Yeah. JK: You know John? BH: Yeah, I do. JK: You know, and once he started that, it was perfect, so I’ve been a Local 1000 member since, since they initiated. BH: Yeah. JK: So, it’s I suppose the only thing we knew, because I mean if you, if you working, you know, even if most trades got paid better than someone else working a blue collar job, because I mean, it is, there is a lot of skill involved . . . BH: Yeah, I agree . . . JK: you can’t walk off the street and do it. I mean certain, you know, I suppose someone could teach you, you know, to use a shovel overnight, BH: Yeah. JK: you know, someone’s not going to be able to teach you to operate a crane . . . BH: Yeah. JK: in two hours, or they’re not going to how to, how to wire an electrical, electrical for, you know, a 50 story building, put plumbing in. So they’re all, you know, they’re honest trades and it does take a bit of . . . BH: Oh, I agree, completely. JK: intelligence and gumption, you know? BH: Yeah. Well that was one of the things, um, and I’ll get back union thing, but one of the things I’ve notice with the iron workers is that there were, all of them that I’ve talked to, were all good problem solvers on some level, figuring stuff out when it doesn’t quite fit right. Do you . . . JK: Oh [laughs] BH: You know, I mean some of the older guys only went to like the sixth grade, but they still, I mean, if you talk to them about a technical thing or how to do, you know, stainless steel welding or something with no seams in it, this is Local 63, they how to do that . . . JK: Oh, they know how to do that, yeah. 37  BH: Yeah, you know, I’m really surprised at how skilled they really are, even if we, maybe the general public doesn’t know that, you know. I don’t know. JK: My, my dad, Jimmy, he was only saying this as a joke, but at one point he said, “You know, if donkey’s had fingers, we’d all be out of work.” [Laughter] Because it was a lot of brut force . . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know. BH: Yeah. JK: Because you know sometimes something that something that the ah, you know, or the engineer, the architect draws out and then you know, they ah, back in terms of like reinforcing, sometimes you actually have to ah, create that piece on the job . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and bars . . . and all of the sudden, you know, you’re not going to fit that stuff in there, so, you know, if you’re limited with the, if you have X amount of steel that has to go into this smaller space . . . BH: Yeah. JK: you, you figure it out, because if it’s not in there, then they can’t . . . BH: Yeah. JK: they can’t pour it and so it’s not going to be approved. So, you learn quickly . . . BH: Yeah. JK: the way to do things. 44:30 BH: Does your brother ever complain about architects, like, build, or coming up with plans that aren’t very realistic when it, he has to put them together? JK: You know, it was again, in my limited experience there, I mean there were, they had to make switches on . . . BH: like on the fly . . . JK: on the fly, because what works on paper doesn’t always work all of the sudden when 38  there’s a, you know, BH: Yeah. JK: you know main pipe coming thru or the electricals in there being . . . BH: Yeah. JK: you can’t really see until you lay it out and you’re working on that, that spot. BH: Yeah. JK: So there’s always, there’s always been modifications of some, some nature. Nothing major, but they have to go re-do the plans, then get it approved. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, you, because what works on paper when you’re moving a little pencil around and all the sudden when you’re moving, you know, when you’re moving a piece of steel that weighs, you know, that weighs several hundred pounds, and there’s twenty of them. BH: Yeah. JK: You know. BH: Different story. JK: Yeah, it might not, it might not work. BH: Yeah. So then you do, you have to know how to problem solve in that regard. BH: Yeah. And now, I’m switching back to the union question here, and I’ve asked everyone of the iron workers this, there, I mean obviously they are all pro-union, what do you think maybe, what do you think of the current situation with American labor, not necessarily iron workers, but just in general and, and does, I mean there is a huge public outcry against unions as you probably know . . . JK: Of course, yeah. BH: I mean, and maybe you just want to comment on that or give me ah, you know, your spiel on that, I’m just curious what you think. JK: Well, you know, I, I, ah, historically, I think, you know, people were opposed to unions and it was usually people that were controlling things that didn’t necessarily want the unions because, you know, why, you know, why deal with a group instead of actually 39  being able to deal with individuals and I think that was the whole part of the, you know, work . . . It’s funny when I get all of these things, you know, and you figure if it wasn’t for unions there’d be no forty hour work week, there wouldn’t be any pensions, there wouldn’t be any workman’s comp, there wouldn’t be all these things that we take for granted and all the other occupations, even aside from the trades or, unions in general, they all came from the union movement. BH: Yeah. JK: It’s part of our, I think it’s part of our American culture, to have it. BH: Yeah. JK: And then of course, the same thing anytime someone has something, someone wants to take it away from you and vise versa. So I think, you know, it’s a, it’s really a travesty what’s happening, and you know, and I mean, the most evident thing, locally, has been next door Wisconsin, when he wants to get rid of, the current governor wanted to get rid of all the state unions. You know, and you know, which means then firemen, policemen, I mean all those teachers, you know the sanitation workers, the, the janitors that clean up the state buildings . . . BH: Yeah. JK: it’s BH: Yeah, do you think a lot of the public outcry against the union, is just, I mean, some of it is coming from people who are also blue collar workers themselves, do you think they’ve just been misinformed, do you think maybe the unions haven’t done a good job of making their case for the past thirty years, since Reagan was elected? JK: Yeah, I mean once, once when he, when he de-certified the ah, air traffic controllers, I was working as an iron worker at that time. I remember there was, there was holy hell about that thing, because he said he could do that. I mean obviously, you know, there was safety concern and all of that stuff, but still, you think, wait a second, these are, you know, that’s happening to them, is it going to happen to us next? BH: Yeah. JK: You know and I think that even happens even, I know recently there was a um, I think just across the border in Indiana, where maybe just in Lansing, ah, they wanted to bring in um, a ironworking firm from Arizona, I can’t remember their name, but they were non-union, and they wanted them to work because they got the bid and I figured they came up to some agreement so they’d have to get higher wages than they were being paid by their employer to work in Chicago. But then, you know, a lot of it, I would imagine, they would be skirting rules here or there because I mean, paramount the whole thing is to be safe. 40  BH: Yeah. JK: You know, and that’s, you know, so that’s why you train for this stuff, you know, you try to be as safe as possible because no one wants to see anyone hurt, no one wants to see anyone killed, but unfortunately it happens all the time. And it’s more likely to happen someone that’s inexperienced. You know, I mean, so you’d imagine that you know, that, if you were an employer, you’d want the best person for your job to the best equipped and best trained. You know if that means, you know part of a, you know someone gone through a union apprenticeship, and is there with safety in mind. He’d be the choice person than some guy coming off of the street, here grab this blowtorch and start going at it. I mean I know it’s a simplistic way of looking at it, but makes the same difference, you know, no teacher’s union. Can you can teach? Yeah, I can teach . . . BH: Yeah, go to it. JK: [Laughs] Where’d you go? I graduated from sixth grade . . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know? So, I mean, I, I think it’s terrible and, and maybe because the shifting of the economy as well, because we’re, you know, we’re making less things. I mean obviously because we’re still building things, but as you mentioned, you know, I mean, it’s probably safer now to be on a building site than it ever was ever. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, with the rules and safety men all over the place and you can’t do this and can’t and that’s good, you know. I mean it makes it, takes the work longer . . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know, so. BH: Yeah. JK: I’m not sure if that answered your question. BH: Well yeah, I mean . . . JK: I don’t like it, I don’t like it anyway. 50:14 BH: Yeah. I mean you and I are both pro-union and I’m always, like, thinking in my head, like you know, I expect the ruling elite, whoever that might be in any country, is going to be anti union because it’s not in their interest, to have groups of, you know 41  groups of people banding . . . JK: Collective bargaining. BH: Collective bargaining, you know, because the people at the top want to take as much as possible. It just seems the way they want to go, but it just seems like it’s so bad the last, you know, say 20 years in the United States and worse than it is in Europe, so, you know, I just wanted to get your kind of feelings on that. You know, how you felt about it and you know, Chicago’s also a union town and even here you can see it. JK: Of course. BH: You know, we’ve got a mayor now, I mean, as you know, who doesn’t seem as interested in supporting unions as Mayor Daley may have been or his father. JK: Of course, or those before him. BH: Yeah, or those before him. JK: Mmm. I’ve always wondered now, you know, as we’ve becoming more of a knowledge based economy, or in theory we’re supposed to be, so what happens with the software engineer, is he, I mean, is he just an individual and that’s it, and he’s, you know, you know . . . I am surprised, I, mean I know that every once in awhile, they try to, because Illinois’s not a, I don’t think it’s a right-to-work state, right? BH: No. JK: But there are certain, there’s a push for it, you know. It’s . . . and maybe, I don’t know, it’s . . . It doesn’t make sense to me. But then, of course, I’m a product of that so, it’s hard for me to accept. I mean, I could understand why people would want to, not have unions, but I mean as a union member, I mean, I couldn’t have seen doing it, without being in the union . . . BH: Yeah. JK: at all. And it’s all, I never thought of it as a bad thing, because here are all these people looking after my interest, you know and obviously they’re own as well, but I mean they are all part, I mean all of the union officials I know, were always workers, who had just got elected. A democratic process, you’d run for ah, you know, financial secretary/treasurer, you’d run for business agent, you’d run for president of, you know, the local and there’s term limits. Matter of, matter of fact, my, my dad, Jimmy, was ah, he was sergeant of, sergeant of arms for the Local 1, for, oh God, for 15 or 20 years. You know, in addition to being the job steward for most jobs that he was on. You know working steward. BH: Yeah. 42  JK: There were certain times when, you know, there was over 50 iron workers on the site, then you became a walking steward, because you couldn’t you know, you had to watch out for everyone’s safety and make sure there were no violations, but ah, that was in addition to whatever the contractor might, or the superintendent for the company that was hiring you to do the work. You know. So, I wouldn’t know things without a union. 52:55 BH: Yeah. Do you think the musician’s union, ummmm, do you have any comments on that? I have my own, but I’ll let you comment first though. JK: Yeah, you know, I, I, I mean aside from the fact, you know, I’m proud to be Local 1000 within the AFM, I think musicians have always been, unless it comes to certain things, you know, unless you’re doing TV or radio, there are certain things where, where people accept the rules, at least for the most part . . . BH: Yeah. JK: on the ground they don’t. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, it’s not, you k now. It’s better to be part of the AFM, it doesn’t really cost that much more than not being in the union. BH: Yeah, well that’s how I look at it. JK: You know and there are certain things it can help. I think that you know, just the way, there, any, all the sudden you pick up the guitar and you’re a musician. And if, John Doe wants to pay you $5 to play for an hour, why should I pay, you know $135 hour musician rates, for the same thing. I mean that’s there attitude. Whereas, we say “Hey, well this guy is much better. He’s been doing it all his life.” You know. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, I suppose, you know, the rock and roll stuff kind of really broke that open. BH: Yeah, I think that’s . . . JK: And then part of the same thing back in the ‘60s and ‘70s. You know. But all the main, um, you know the top musicians, you know or the popular musicians, they’re all local members some place, but I think maybe just in, just on paper. But of course if you’re pulling in, you know, if you’re pulling, you know, in several million dollars a year for singing “baby, baby, baby” . . . 43  BH: Right, you got to pay 1% in work dues, what’s the big deal? You know, it probably doesn’t affect them very much. JK: No it doesn’t. BH: Yeah, I’m kind of like you, I mean, I keep my dues up and I’m in the union, but it’s hard for me . . . JK: Are you in the 1000? BH: Yeah, I’m still in 1000, yeah and ah, I’ve been in, oh God, 30 some years and ah, but it’s hard to see the real positive benefits, you know. It used to be and maybe you got a few of those, now and then, when they had the trust fund stuff and you’d get a gig to play in a park now and then or something? I only had, did you ever get any of those where they’d pay your fee? It wasn’t as high as some places, but at least you got something out of it. JK: No, because ah, because ah, when, when I was doing that stuff earlier, there wasn’t any, there wasn’t, it was pre-Local 1000 and you know the locals here in Chicago, you do, what, you play what, you mean you don’t play the horn? [Laughs] BH: Yeah. JK: or jazz standards. What? BH: That’s true. JK: So they looked what? Yeah, we’ll take your money, but I mean, I don’t know, we have nothing for you. BH: Yeah, that’s a good point. Well it strikes me that that is one of the big failings of the musician’s union, unlike the iron workers. The iron workers is constantly adapting to whatever new technology comes along in order to keep the union relevant. But the musician’s union still operates, other than Local 1000, they still operate like it’s the 1950 or something. JK: Yeah. BH: You know. It never came to grips with rock and roll or the fact that we don’t play, you know, three weeks on Rush Street anymore. Or, you do one nighters. That’s the way it is. You know. It’s just the way the entertainment industry is structured now, it’s completely different from my vantage than it was in 1935 or 1950, and people would go down to the union hall then, too, and “oh so and so, needs a sax player”. You never even hear of anything like that anymore. JK: Yeah, it’s true. 44  BH: It just doesn’t, you know, you don’t go through the union hall to get a gig anymore with somebody. So I think it’s a much different situation. 56:20 Well, I’ve kind of asked you the key questions. I mean, do you, if you want to, if there’s something I missed, that you’re thinking about with the iron workers, or your dad or your brothers, just feel free to fire away. I don’t know if there’s some stuff that I didn’t cover in the equation. JK: I, I think we covered, you know, I mean, it’s, I think, it’s, it can be a great way to make a living. You know, I suppose the one difference, just for iron workers, I mean, if you were, I’m not saying they’re any less or anything like that, but if you were an electrician, you know you work your 40 hours on the new construction and then you actually wire homes on the weekends and if you were a plumber, carpenter, you could, you know, your trade can travel outside of your, your day job, but if you’re an iron worker, that’s all you did. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, do you ah, need a five story concrete structure in your backyard? No, that’s not going to happen [Laughter]. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, so I suppose that’s why, you know, ah, and more power to the ah, you know, to ah, the local in general, they always kept because they knew, you know, we need enough guys to keep this working and we need to stay the one, the one local. So they were always smart in that regard. You know, I mean very seldom, if the iron workers went on strike, there was no work then, because you know, BH: They would shut down everything. JK: they would shut down everything. And not that they would want to . . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know. BH: Were you involved in any strikes when you were in the union? JK: Yeah, actually, in ah, when Reagan was in office, yeah. I think we went on strike and it was like, you know, two days or three days. They’d be over quickly. BH: Yeah. 45  JK: Whereas I know it would take longer like if the carpenters or laborers were on strike because there were so many locals involved to get them all to agree. Where it was only one local. You know. BH: Yeah. JK: So it was either yay or nay. There was splitting, you know. BH: Yeah. JK: Conquer or divide. The iron workers would say “we ain’t going to do that . . .” BH: Yeah. It seems that, that, you know, having that kind of power is one reason the contractors finally made their peace, way back when with the iron workers because they have to, I mean they seem so dependent, and you can’t replace them like with other workers, the way you can on some jobs in United States. It’s not like you can, you know what I mean? JK: Yeah. You know it was funny, aside from big huge jobs, I remember the first job I worked on with my dad, and um, it was myself, my dad, ah four other Irish guys, ah, and an African American, Oscar Johnson, and so ah, there was seven of us, that did the whole building. And all the other trades had you know, 20, 30, you know, so you could do a lot, with just two people, you know. BH: Wow. JK: We were working for ah, McHugh. At the time of the big ah, contractor, general contractor. And he always believed that, in fact, when you mentioned Bourbonnais, or one of your relatives were down there, the, the superintendent for the iron workers, his nickname was Cat, I forget his last name, but he said, “you know if we can, if we can get the job done with ah, seven people, why do you need eight?” BH: Yeah. JK: You know, he said “I’d rather pay you guys more, more hours”. BH: Sure. JK: You know, so it’d be like, you know, as if you were, you know, a seven man rotation on a basketball team or you know, that was it. Everyone you worked together you knew, you didn’t have to think about it, you did it. BH: Yeah. JK: You know. 46  BH: Well, I know one question I haven’t asked you, was ah, . . . JK: I don’t know if that made sense. 1:00:00 BH: No, no, that made a lot of sense. The iron workers have a reputation, even today, for being heavy drinkers, did you, was that still a, a component, I mean so of the, some of the, some of the guys now in the, at least the official, officials in the union now like to down play it and say it’s more limited, and it probably is, but was it still integrated into the, the . . . JK: Oh, yes. Oh ah, after work, yes. Of course. I mean, you know, you’d ah, you know if you’re working twelve hours, you know, especially in the summer, you know, you’d want a couple of beers after work. You know, and maybe two or three. One of the ah, and actually you may know him, um, ah, Tommy Collie, he just died a couple of years ago, I think he was from ah, Tommy was from Ireland. I want to say Cavan. I may be wrong on that. BH: No. JK: But ah, Tommy was an iron worker. In fact, he used to work with my dad. And Tommy then got into the bar business at one point and ah, years ago he had, I think it was one of the first places he had, now has the classic sign “Stop and Drink”. BH: Uhmmm. JK: It’s on Chicago Avenue and Clark, just South there . . . BH: Yeah. JK: in fact, now the place has changed hands, but they kept the, the sign, because I think it’s now landmarked, the sign itself. But, but Tommy ended up, he ended up getting into the bar business, and real estate, in fact he had The Emerald Isle . . . BH: Yeah. JK: which is a great place for live music, right down in ah, was it, there was a couple of iterations, one was on Rush Street and then ah, I think the longest one was on, I think, Pearson and State? BH: Uh huh. JK: Right next to Loyola and across from Quigley North? BH: Yep. 47  JK: You know the lovely church there? BH: Yep. JK: So Tom, Tommy was a, Tommy was there and had that place for years. But then he had gotten into real estate so he was, you know, buying units, apartment units and stuff like that. Then he started doing high rises and then he passed away. But ah, so he had this place the Stop and Drink and ah, when we were working on that ah, that first job we worked on, after work we’d stop in there and it had changed hands for awhile, but ah, the back door was to a, probably shouldn’t be saying this, there used to be a police station on ah Chicago Avenue, right across from the Moody Bible Institute? BH: Yeah, I know right were . . . JK: Well the back door of it entered into the back door of Stop and Drink. BH: Laughter. JK: So we’d stop in there and you know, we’d park over by the Moody Bible Institute because it was you know, it was free parking. There wasn’t any meters. You know, if you were driving downtown, you know, you always want to look for cheap or free parking. BH: Yeah, I always . . . JK: Because if you’re there for twelve hours, you don’t want to pay $30 a day, or $40. So, I remember one time [laughs] stopping in, myself and Jimmy the Horse, we stopped in there and a few other guys from work, and I think it was one of the first times they had gone in there, and they had Jack Brickhouse . . . they had two TVs, it was a long oval bar, there were two TVs and one, one side of the, the, the bar was Jack Brickhouse announcing the Cubs game on that afternoon. On the other TV, there was you know, the back was facing the door going in, was porn with the sound off . . . [laughter] So you had Jack Brickhouse calling the game with porn on this side. BH: Laughter. JK: And you’d look at the ceiling and there bullet holes every place cause you know, the cops would get off work and they would want to, you know, BH: Yeah. JK: They’d want to raise a bit of hell. So it was one of the most surreal places ever. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, this is me, you know, it was a couple of years out of high school, I said 48  “Wow.” BH: Wow. JK: You know but after twelve hours a day, a couple of hours in the bar, it’s, you know. 1:02:00 BH: I see. Yeah. Were there a lot of Irish iron workers in, from what you’re saying . . . JK: Oh, there were, yeah. Oh, when I was, I’d say there was probably, I’m guessing now when I started there was probably say 24 or 2500 iron workers and I’d say easily there were 700 that were Irish. BH: Yeah. JK: I mean direct Irish. Never mind then, you know I’d be considered an Irish American, my brother . . . and all the sons of the iron workers that had been working since the ‘60s, a lot of their kids, either worked the summer or they became iron workers themselves. Yeah. But there were a lot, there was a huge, and again, most of them, I’d say 90% of them worked reinforcing all of the time. BH: Wow. And, so did they come in as, just because there was, ah, so many of the Irish in construction business . . . JK: I think so that was the easiest entrance in. Because you know if you didn’t, you know, if you, a lot of them came in from Canada in the ‘60s and, you know, if you, no one, I mean my dad went to basically 6th grade. BH: Yeah. JK: And so, what are you going to do? Even then, you know, I mean you’d make good money. BH: Yeah. JK: And a lot of them, they started out as iron workers, a lot of them got into the gas company or maybe moved into different trades. A lot of them went from iron worker to the gas company. BH: Yeah. Well that’s interesting. JK: ‘Cause I had an uncle who worked for years as an iron worker then he got the opportunity to go into the People’s Gas, so he went with People’s Gas, you know. BH: Yeah. In what kind of job? 49  JK: He ended up being the retiring superintendent for People’s Gas. You know, so he started out digging ditches. You know, so you either work on rebar or shovels, one of the two. BH: Laughs. Yeah. JK: In fact, there’s still, there’s still a lot of the, most of them are retired. I’d say there’s probably, I must ask my brother, I should ask my brother, Dennis. There’s still a handful of Irish guys that came out in the, you know as far as the, a lot, there was a resurgence in the ’80s, when a lot of Irish immigrants came out. So a lot of those younger guys are still working iron now. But all the ones, most of the ones my dad worked with, they’re either retired or they’ve passed on. BH: Yeah. Do you think that the economic vitality of Ireland, I mean not right now, but for several years, it seemed to be doing really well, do you think that that diminished the immigrants coming into Chicago and keeping that Irish, maybe the Irish music scene, but also Irish in the construction business, did that go down then do you think? JK: Well, actually, you oddly, I think it’s, I’ve always heard it was, you know, it went back to, you know, the early ‘60s with Kennedy, when he was worried about the brain drain of Ireland. BH: Yeah. JK: So it made immigration, I mean basically immigration cut-off at ’64 or ’65. BH: Really? JK: Yeah. So it became much harder to get here. BH: Oh, interesting. JK: To the states, you know. BH: Interesting. JK: You could double check that, but it’s . . . BH: Yeah. So that’s got to have, I mean, a detrimental impact in some ways or do you think there’s still a big back and forth here in Chicago? JK: Oh, within the trades specifically or just in general? BH: Just in general. JK: Well, yeah, there’s actually, again like the late ‘90s when they initiated the J1 Visa. 50  There a lot of, you know, young Irish that came out, BH: Yeah. JK: and you know, they’ve eventually got their green cards and then a lot of them became citizens, but then they weren’t in the trades then, because they were far better educated. You know there were a handful that came out and that became homebuilders, you know, that were carpenters. BH: Yeah. JK: You know, that were carpenters. BH: Yeah. JK: and ah, lesser probably coming into the trades. I know a bunch of young guys that came out, now they’re ah, they’re, they’re for software companies. They’re working for Google, they’re working for Groupon, they’re working for you know, the new, the new economy. BH: Yeah. They don’t have to come in as construction workers . . . JK: No. BH: They’re well educated now, yeah. JK: Yeah. I’m not saying that they weren’t well educated, I mean you know, put it this way, they had degrees . . . BH: Yeah. JK: and I’d say that, you know, most of the iron workers I knew, I mean, you know, they were as intelligent as anyone else, with common sense and you know as you mentioned problem solving and all that stuff. Just because they didn’t have a pig skin . . . BH: Yeah, didn’t mean anything. JK: Didn’t mean anything, you know. Some of them were the most, some of the most ferocious readers . . . BH: Yeah. JK: You know. All did different, they were half of them musicians. You know, as I mentioned Kevin Henry, you know. There were others because they were different trades, but a lot them, a lot of the other Irish musicians became stationary engineers here. 51  BH: Oh. JK: Castle Island, they became, at the time they were know as Castle Island engineers because there was the, I think it was the Reidy’s. One of the earlier presidents of the local {Local 399 of the International Operating Engineers]. So there was a bunch of Irish guys from Kerry, primarily. Castle Island . . . remember Costainn [?], the concertina player? TerryCostain? BH: No. JK: He’s a great composer here. He’s from Castle Island, but, so there were a lot of, so they were called the Castle Island engineers. BH: Oh interesting. JK: ‘Cause they were from Kerry, but they were stationary engineers. BH: Yeah. JK: There’s are a couple that are still working now, I think, couple are still working as stationary engineers for the city. You know and they’re about ready to retire. BH: Yeah. Well hey, I, I’m ah, I got what I needed here. This was great. I want to thank you for coming over. JK: I went all over the place. BH: Well, that’s what it was supposed to be. That’s what I wanted it to be. JK: All right. BH: So it was really a pleasure. Always good to talk to you Jimmy. JK: My pleasure as well. BH: Thanks. END: 1:08:45
Ironworkers;Michael M. Taqee;1960;2011;Counter No./Time Topic 00:01 BH: Tell me your name. MT: My name is Michael M. Taqee. BH: Tell me about that name as long as we’re on it. It’s T-A MT: Q double E. MT: I was born Michael Taylor and in 1992 I changed my surname from Taylor to Taqee. Um, not for any religious reasons or anything, but I wanted a name that reflected my culture and my heritage. As I begin to travel around the earth, especially when I went to Africa, I realized that black people from America that still held on to their previous slave owner names, were treated differently, and they didn’t respect us as being free and independent. MT: And they would typically laugh at black people when they asked what your name was and you gave them a European name, they would laugh and say “No, what’s your real name?” Well, of course, we didn’t know. And, in my research, I started realizing this was one of the systemic problems that black people have in America, having no identity after 14 generations of slavery, we don’t know who we are. And, this causes problems in society, problems in the communities and I wanted to have a, a sense of self. And, I have two young boys and I didn’t want them to grow up as brain dead, for lack of a better phrase, as I was. I wanted them, to a, it’s difficult to respect and honor other people’s names and cultures, if you don’t have one of your own. So, I wanted a name that reflected that, so that they would have a sense of pride of who they were, and would be more inclined to respect other people. [The song in the background is by Styx, a famous Chicago band from the 1970s and early ‘80s] MT: Much in the same way, if I said “Juan Hernandez” you don’t have to guess that I am talking about a Latino. If were to say Lee Mu Ming, you knew I was talking about a Chinese. I wanted my name to have that type of distinction, so that when you see or hear me, you knew that I was a black man. 02:11 BH: What year were you born? MT: 1960. BH: 1960. Were you born here in Chicago?     2 MT: Yes, I was born here in Cook County at 39th and King. I spent my first 22 years over there before I branched out and got a couple of apartments and finally bought my first house in Miller Beach, Indiana. BH: Oh, Miller Beach, that’s a great little town. Yeah, I’ve got friends over there, that’s an interesting little spot. MT: Yeah, grandma moved there in ’73. 73-74, and as she started to get older, ah, we knew we needed to go out there, so we were here and we didn’t know how to get out there. I got into the iron workers in ’85, and when I decided to buy my first piece of property. I wanted to buy a two unit or something here in the city, and my grandma decided, and it was ingenious, she said, “listen, I have this inheritance for you, I’ll give you part of it now, if you move out here with me.” Well, it was a no brainer, because I kind of wanted to be there for her anyway, so when she ah, ah, put the down payment down on my first home, vis a vie and inheritance, she was gonna give me anyway, and her logic is, if I see what you’re doing with it now, I won’t have to worry about you screwing it up. BH: Ah, well, she’s smart. MT: Yeah, she was really. She was 100 when she died, so she really carried the family. And ah, so that’s how I ended up in Miller Beach. I stayed there 12 years and then ah, real estate started skyrocketing in the city. Grandma passed away in ’95 and I decided I ’97 to come back to the city. Started buying property and ah . . . BH: So, did you sell the place in Miller Beach, then? MT: Yes, I did. It pretty much tripled in value. It was a small home, a starter home, but I loved it a lot and ah, it, it would have been paid for in 2001, the year that 911 struck and then the economy started to go downhill a little bit. Most people didn’t see, I saw the writing on the wall. It took to ’08 before it collapsed, but ah, started to see the changes and America was changing after 911 had changed this country forever. And nothing quite stayed the same. 04:27 BH: Well, how did you get from, you went to high school in Chicago then? MT: Ah, BH: High school here or? MT: Yeah, I went to Dunbar Vocational High School, 30th and King Drive. Ironically, the firehouse I’m at, is four blocks away on 34th and King Drive. I used to walk past 3  there all the time coming home from school and I even used to swim. They used to have swimming pool over there at that firehouse 40 years ago. BH: Wow. MT: I used to swim there, so I went to Dunbar at 30th and King Drive and we grew up on 39th and King Drive. BH: Yeah. MT: I majored in architecture there, ah, I knew at the age of 13 exactly what I wanted to do with my life. It’s ironic that I was able to ah, to, God blessed me to be able to do most that which I wanted to do. Ah, I-I knew, I wanted, I thought I wanted to be a carpenter until I understood a little more about architecture and then I knew that I wanted to be an architect. So, I majored in architecture. BH: Wow. MT: I only had two loves in my life, and that was architecture and the fire department. Those were the only two things I ever wanted to be. BH: Yeah. MT: And I had fantasies about, about astronauts, but that went away quickly. BH: Yeah. MT: Ah, I really wanted to be an architect. I thought I could pull it off and I wanted to be a fireman, and I thought I could pull that off. BH: Yeah. Well how did you get from Dunbar then to being an Ironworker? That took a few years, right? MT: Yeah. I graduated in ’78 out of Dunbar. I started going to school, at that time, you could get government money to go school if you didn’t have anything. So, it was difficult to go to Circle Campus [University of Illinois Chicago], if you couldn’t afford it and, at that time they had the best architecture program in the state. So, I decided to take some of my minor courses at a junior college, so I was going to Kennedy King [Community College] majoring in ah, architecture, and then I started working at a company called Maurey Manufacturing that next month. I graduated in June, went to work for Maurey Manufacturing in July and in August, I started night school at Kennedy King College. So, I done that for, until 1980. May of 1980, my first son was born and it became difficult to ah, stay in school. I needed to really start thinking about my finances because I wasn’t working for me anymore. I had a son now, so that pushed me out of school, I couldn’t, I couldn’t maintain going to school. I decided to work full time. So that’s what I did in 1980, ah, I just continued to work. Tried to raise my son, and ah, had 4  visions of going back to school, but it always came second to raising my son. I never got back. BH: Yeah. 07:07 MT: Um, in 1984, Leonard Japczyk, he was the ah, apprentice coordinator at Local 63. He called my old high school teacher, Robert Heersema at Dunbar Vocational, and they were looking for potential iron workers. What they were looking for was ah, quote, unquote, “minorities” to take the ironworker test and they were hopefully looking for individuals with an architecture background. So, my high school teacher called me up along with a couple of ah, ah my ah, a couple of my other classmates and ah, we met Leonard Japczyk at the ah Swift Mansion on 45th and Michigan and he pretty much gave us an overview of ah, being an ironworker and he wanted to know if we would be interested. At that time, I had just got laid off from Spiegel’s and I wasn’t working. But just the word architecture, I was in. And, once I understood it, I realized this is the flip side of the coin. Instead of being an actual architect, I get to actually build the buildings. BH: Right. MT: I was hooked-hook, line and sinker. So, I took the test, done well on it, and I started in a Local 63 in October of 1985. And ah, stayed there until December of 2011. Ah, I totally enjoyed it. I absolutely loved it. I still think and act like an ironworker. BH: Sure. MT: Ah, for, I walk into buildings, I look at the construction automatically. I don’t even, I can’t even think about it. It just comes out but ah . . . [Waiter arrives and knocks dishes on the table. Pause in recording.] BH: Check one, two. It’s working again. Um, well, when we left off here you were just talking about getting into the trade. Do you remember some of your, the early jobs you had buildings, or places, what that was like starting in the trade? MT: Yeah, I knew ah, I remember my first job-the first day, like it was yesterday. My first job was 123 Wacker, ah, it was run by a company called PPG. They’re not in business anymore. Tommy Roberts was my first superintendent and I was excited as all get out to ah, be there. It was a great job, a great career and I-I just remember that I couldn’t sit still, I couldn’t be more excited to be there. I’d come in with my brand new overalls, brand new tools and so forth, looking every bit the green rookie that I was. And, ah, that job started as the catalyst for lack of, ah how should I put this, my lifestyle changed the day I started that job. My entire life, I should say, changed ah, they way I thought, the way I gauged people, the way I approached life in general. I started meeting people and ah, because I was in the field of architecture, now, my ah, I’m actually back to studying again. So now I’m ah, I’ve turned into a student of the game again. So, it’s all about architecture. It started sending me back to when I was a, I believe I was eight years 5  old when I ah, I knew I’d be in the field of architecture some place. I just thought I was going to be a carpenter at eight, but I remember the firefighters . . . [Interrupted by waiter]. I remember, I was, I was eight and ah, the Bailey house was on fire at the end of the block. I don’t know if you remember Bill Bailey, used to be a radio personality for WLS? BH: Yeah, I remember the name, yeah. 11:15 MT: Okay, well, his parents lived on our block. They were the last white people left on our block. Their, their house caught on fire, a beautiful red brick at the end of the street and it caught on fire, and I remember, almost coming in tears because the building was burning down. I just it was the best-looking building on the block. And, I was upset. The building was ah, burning down, because I knew what they were doing at that time, the building would burn, the bulldozer would come right behind-it’s still smoking and they would tear it down. They weren’t allowing us to rebuild. I didn’t understand what gentrification was at that time. But that’s what was going on. So when the Bailey’s house was on fire, burning, ah, Mr. Bailey was still in the building. We didn’t know, the firefighters went in and came out with Mr. Bailey, saved his life and saved the building! I thought that was the coolest thing in the world. These guys looked like Batman to me, man, and the firefighters were like Superman. That, that day, I knew then, ah, ah, that I was in love with architecture beyond my dreams. I didn’t know that I was ready to cry over this building that’s not mine. But the firefighters looked like Superman to me and that’s who I wanted to be. So, I knew at that time, those were the things that I loved and I never got away from it. The bulldozer ended up tearing the Bailey’s house down a few days later away. But they were trying to save it, because it was still Bailey’s parents, they had plans for that area at Wacker anyway so. I’m sorry that I went all the way back until I was eight years old but ah, BH: No, that’s all right, that’s good. Interesting perspective. Yeah, so 123 Wacker was that on east or . . . MT: It was on the east side of the street. 123 East Wacker, it was across the street from ah, Morton Salt. BH: Oh, OK. MT: Which is a, I’ll always remember Morton Salt because, not Morton Salt, just Morton, but they made salt, ah, mostly. That’s what I remember them from, but what they became ah, and famous for was they were responsible for putting that O ring in the shuttle that exploded. And ah, I never forgot it. I remember standing on the, on the 26th floor looking down, I wish I had had that picture, I couldn’t find a lot of them. And I remember looking down at that building going “Wow”, you know people around the whole country are talking about this company, that I’m looking down on, that’s right across the street from me. I’ll never forget that. That was probably one of the things that 6  I remember most about working at 123 Wacker. BH: What kind of work were you doing there? 13:53 MT: We started off, we had ah, he turned out to be a good friend of mine, John Salcetti. We were in the mechanical room and we were insulating the mechanical room. At that time, iron workers had insulation and we would put these insulation panels with metal clips and we basically ah, insulate the mechanical room. BH: Yeah. MT: We done that for basically five months before they let us start doing other things. We didn’t know anything so that was our way to start to get our feet wet. And in that five months watching the other trades and watching the other iron workers, I started to get a good idea of what construction was all about and what ah, ah building was all about and ah, I-I just took to it like a fish to water. I totally loved it ah, I went to work happy every day. You know, back then it wasn’t work, it was, it was fun. You know, I was getting paid to do what I liked to do. I thought that not that many people get to ah live like that. To not only know what they want to do, but to get paid to do it. So, I couldn’t be happier. I’m able to take care of my son, bought my first house a year later, so things were looking good. BH: Yeah. Did you work on any famous downtown buildings or other projects around the city, after that? MT: Yeah, man, ah let’s see ah. My claim to fame, this was a job with Rich Rowe [See interview with Richard “Rich” Rowe]. But I worked on a lot of 300, 300 South Wacker. Beau Heidi ran that job. At that time, that was the tallest brick building in the world. At that time, that’s the one they call the “birthday cake” building. BH: Oh yeah, I know. I just was over there taking photographs last weekend. MT: Okay. Ah, I worked there, let’s see ah, ah, Harold Washington Library. BH: Oh, you did. Did you work on the owls and stuff? I know 63 did some of the work on some of that stuff. MT: No. I didn’t get to work on that. We worked on the, the curtain wall. BH: Oh, okay. MT: Basically, everything that’s green and vertical, we done it. We got to the roof, they kind a, farmed it out all over the place. BH: Yeah. Now did you do a lot of curtain wall in your day too with the iron workers, 7  or were you . . . 15:58 MT: My first twelve years. I did ah curtain wall and window wall, ah, 175 Harbor Drive is a big punchout building. I did work there ah, I can’t think of another one. Ah, AT&T. The top of AT&T, that’s probably, I call that my claim to fame building because that’s the building, I met Rich Rowe on that building. And, I stayed at that building, it was like 60-70 guys there, and I stayed all the way to the end-till there was like eight guys left. We were there almost two years. I started from the second floor. By the time I got to taking that picture there was nothing about that building I didn’t know about. You know, so I went from being a cocky little kid to having confidence. That was, at that job they started saying, you know, this Taylor guy, is foreman material. Ah, Rich Rowe, went to the superintendent. I think it was around the 44th floor, it was the third mechanical room, and he said “look, the guy is doing foreman’s work” and I didn’t, I didn’t care that I was doing somebody’s else’s job, I didn’t see it like that. You know, I didn’t, I wasn’t one of those that well “this is what I’m suppose to do, I’m not going to do his work.” I was willing to do anything and everything. I saw it as experience and also understood that sometime my foreman was grooming me to see how well I can handle the next task. So, I never complained about additional work. I done anything and everything. If the foreman wasn’t there to say what the next step was, I would go grab the blueprints, figure it out and go do it. And, Rich Rowe had had enough. He said “damn” and went to Mike Japczyk and said “look the guy is doing foreman work. We need to take care of him.” So they gave me journeyman’s pay as a second year apprentice and then Rich Rowe became best friends after that. He started giving me projects and he was absolutely, I tell him this all the time, he was absolutely instrumental in the development of my career. Because he would ah, put me in the fire. And say okay, “here’s the blueprints, there’s the steel, take those two guys and go do it.” BH: Yeah. MT: And then he’d say okay, first off, this is what I want you to do. Take the blueprints, go over there in the corner for two hours, understand those blueprints, so these guys aren’t standing around watching you, understand what you’ve go to do, then come back get these two guys after break and then you go build it. Then he’d walk away and leave me alone. That took an awful lot of courage and confidence to give me that kind of responsibility. And, ah, I-I was scared to death that I was going to let him down, but I never did, you know. It always worked out. You know, and he saw something in me, I had not yet seen in myself. That ah, I was going to be good at this trade. I just liked it. I didn’t know I was going to be good at it. You know ah, and understand it ah, the way that I did. I wanted to, but he knew I had it before I knew I had it. And ah, ah, I’ve always thanked him for it and he’s always given me opportunities that way. 19:04 MT: Ah, when I first, when I took my journeyman test. I was working for a company, I was still doing punchout work, hated it, and then ah, because I wanted to do more curtain wall and eventually get into miscellaneous, but I had had enough of punchout windows. 8  It was ah, there was no challenge there. You know after 175 Harbor Drive, there was like a 1,000 windows and I worked with two or three other companies that put in punchout windows, and, and storefront windows. You know, that, that’s good work, but it, at that time I was growing, it was baby work to me. I wanted a challenge. I wanted something more challenging. BH: So once you, I mean that’s a pretty simple skill once you master it right and then you’re just repeating it endlessly and so you were getting bored out of your mind at some point, probably, right? MT: Yep. My only challenge was ah, speed, to see how fast I could get it done and that ended up raising my stock a little bit too because ah, ah, people would, if I get on a job that was mundane, then I would see how quickly I could get it done and the foreman would say, “man, this guy is really cranking it out” and I wasn’t trying to crank it out. This is the way I could stay motivated. So I was turning it out, I was turning the work out awfully fast. My stock was rising. I should say. BH: Did you, did you feel, I’m you were on the front end of the integration of that union because it was pretty much all white at least probably into the ‘70s at some point . . . MT: Yeah, ah BH: But still you got in at the ‘80s was there still, I mean you were young too and there might have been some hostility . . . but was race also a factor still with, with some of the older white workers or were they, were they comfortable and they just recognized that you were good at your job and let you do it? MT: Both. BH: Both? MT: There was some ah animosity, you could see it on people’s faces. It don’t take a rocket scientist to tell what somebody’s thinking, but I never felt it personally. I got along with everybody. I was always smiling and laughing and I always, ah, I never got in the old timer’s way. I knew how to ah, I knew how to befriend them and I wasn’t trying to be manipulative. I was always under their butt asking them questions. If this guy’s been on the job 20 years, I’m like a six year old. “What’s this? How do you do that?” I’d stop what I’m doing and go over there and say: “how do you make that do that.” You know, and these guys would love that you know, this kid is taking an interest in this trade and trying to learn this craft. So they all liked me. I never, I never felt it. They ah, ah, felt that this guy is going to be good for the industry. He respects me enough to ask me my opinion and he is genuinely trying to learn our craft. He’s here everyday. He’s helpful. I see an old timer moving something, or, or, trying to, I, I would jump in and help people all the time. Ah, all the old timers loved me ‘cause I was always carrying their damn tools and stuff all the time. And, I was always up under them, asking them questions, so they always looked at me like I was, I was everybody’s pet little student. 9  BH: Yeah. 22:16 MT: Because I would come around and I wouldn’t stand there looking stupid. I could almost always see what they were doing so I would jump in and help and I would always ask questions. So, I never had the racism thing. BH: Yeah. MT: Then after people like Rich Rowe, Heidi, Mike Japczyk, and a few other guys. When these guys are mentioning your name, even though people that don’t like you have a tendency to say “well damn, if his name is being mentioned by the superstars, we better leave him alone.” And then, they started to see, even when I didn’t know some things, ah, I outworked everybody. It was difficult not to like me. BH: Yeah. MT: You know, so those that didn’t like me, I made them like me anyway. I, I never had those problems. I, I really didn’t. I felt it with some of the other guys, but nobody really wanted to bother me, because my stock was rising and everybody liked me so, it was the kind thing, where, if somebody had a problem with me, I’m like “damn, this guy, you got a problem with Mike Taqee?” Well it was Taylor then. “You got a problem with Mike Taylor?” “You know, like man, this guy is the most helpful guy on the job.” Always here, so, you couldn’t say a bad thing about me. I, I didn’t make any mistakes in those days. You know ah, ah, other than my ignorance of the job, but I was really everybody’s best friend. So, if you said you didn’t like me, more than likely, you were the problem. BH: Yeah. So you, and I’m just, I’m not trying to interrupt you, I’m just trying to follow your chronology a little bit, so you’ve worked a few years in the trade, ah, did you become a foreman then pretty quickly? I mean, you were, they were talking about that, did go to that step and did you stay as a foreman on a lot of jobs after that? What? MT: Actually, I was a foreman on this job, but they couldn’t technically make me a foreman because I was still an apprentice. So, I worked for this company . . . BH: And, that’s the AT&T building . . . MT: AT&T. BH: OK. MT: So, I ah, ah, when I got my, I got my journeyman’s card in ’89 and I quit the company I was going to work for. Work was great at that time. I didn’t even have a job, but I quit and went and took a cruise. Me and my wife, she is also a 73 [Local 73] sheet metal worker. We come in at the same time, so . . . We got our books at the same time, 10  so we decided to take a cruise. I came back and there were three messages on my phone, saying “I heard you quit where you were working, do you want to come work for me?” One of them was Rich Rowe. That was my first job as actual foreman. I went to work for Rich Rowe at 225 West, was it Lake Street? West Wacker, 225 West Wacker. Another great building, that’s the one with the big bowl that’s sitting there. It’s all gray at the top . . . BH: Right. MT: and four spires in a big bowl sitting there in the middle. And that was my first “official” foreman job. Even though I technically was doing foreman work ever since AT&T. It was the second year, but I was officially the foreman on that job when I got back from vacation. I went to work for Rich Rowe and Harmon Minneapolis, and ah, it was one of those buildings that they got to the top and then it was a completely different building. Like, like, like 311 Wacker the concrete building? BH: Yeah. MT: They got to 77 stories in brick and then all that birthday cake stuff up there is an entirely different building. It’s all curtain wall and panels. It’s just completely different, and ah, ah, a radiuses and circles and stuff. Two absolutely completely different buildings. Ah, not to jump around too much, but that building, when we got to 77, the people that were running the job, got confused about what to do up there . . . BH: Is this the birthday cake building? MT: Yeah, so they brung in Rich Rowe’s apprentice, the great Beau Heidi, who was also trained under Rich Rowe, to take it over from 77 to top and close this thing out. This, I don’t want to mention the company’s name, they’re gone anyway, but they couldn’t handle it from 77 up. So they brung in the superstar, Beau Heidi. Beau Heidi brung his crew in. He called me up, Salcetti, a few other guys, and we went in there and we kicked ass and we, and we, and we brought that job in. The same thing happened with Rich Rowe. When I first became a foreman, it was the one company that built the building, I think that it was to 26-27 and then it was a completely different building up there again. Everything was all panels and, and, it was really cool, that’s why I’m getting kind of excited about it . . . And ah, each four corners had, I remember 177 different pieces on each corner. So, it was a completely different building once you got to 26. He brought me in to run that job up there. MT: Again, I was petrified. People are mad, some of the guys were mad. One guy, I remember somebody telling me to my face, “I’ve been on this job for six damn months, and here you come in, you’re going to be a foreman of this here top, who in the hell do you think you are?” So, I had a hard time on that job for about three weeks. That was the most heat that I have ever felt coming into a job as foreman and there’s already a crew in place that’s been here and these guys think “look we can handle this, we’ve done it so far”, Rich Rowe said “No, Mike’s my man and he’s going to run those spires up 11  there.” And, then he done the same thing, he said look “take the blueprints, go over there on that top spire and you sit down for a couple of hours, and you get an understanding on how this thing’s going.” And, I’m saying to myself, I’m looking at the drawing, and there had to be 50 sheets right . . . BH: Oh my God. MT: “How am I going to understand this in 2-3 hours, right?” And he say, “then you come down and you pick the guys you want.” I’m like oh man, damn Rich, you know how am I going to pull this off right? Once again, he saw something in me, I didn’t know I had. So, I sat up there for a few hours and it clicked. I knew how all the pieces had to go together, so I went down into the yard and started looking at the pieces, looking up in the corner and I got it. I knew, how, I knew how to attack it. I still didn’t know how it was going to close out, but I knew how to start this thing and how to attack it. Besides, Rich is here. I’m not going to, if I get screwed up, I just go get him. But, I don’t want to go get him. He’s got all this confidence in me, right. He want to see me pull it off. He already know what my career is going to. And ah, from that point on, I was a foreman on every job I had ever been on. Even when I tried not to be a foreman, I got tired of it . . . Because you can’t always choose your guys, so I would, you know, to hell with this. I’m just going to be a regular guy. I don’t want to be a foreman. Nah, no companies go no, you’re going to be a foreman anyway. I’ll tell you what “if you don’t what the foreman’s pay, you’re going to do this detail anyway. If you don’t want to, then go work for some place else.” BH: Wow. MT: So I had no choice, so they pretty much . . . This was and that became my reputation around the trade. That ah, I was a foreman. And whatever job I went on that’s what I did. 29:01 BH: I have a question for you because you said that you were interesting in architecture, when you were a kid. When you’re building a building like ah, the birthday cake, you know the architect obviously designs that and it’s really kind of an abstraction. I mean they think it through it in their head and they know from experience how it’s supposed to come together, but once that whole thing starts, you guys seem to be the guys that kind of put it together. Does the architect really come out much, because, I know that sometimes parts don’t fit together right, even though the architect thinks that they are supposed to so, um, how does that work? I mean you guys just kind of plow ahead with the blueprints yourself, um? MT: Great question, great question. What usually happens, and I always tell people, and ah, ah, I didn’t get this complete understanding until later, ah, especially after, right before I became owner, I, I completely understood everybody’s position . . . The architect don’t give a flying fig about how the building is built. He’s scared about his design. He don’t care about the bolts, the nuts, none of that. A good architect will get 12  into some of the engineering . . . You know, like a Helmut Kahn and guys like that. They’ll get into the engineering of the building. Most architects won’t. They just draw it up as a design and that’s all they’ll see. They don’t care what’s behind that pretty façade. The engineer, on the other hand, he don’t care, he don’t give a flying fig what the building look like, he just don’t want it to fall down. MT: So, excuse me, you end up with these two cultures clashing a lot. And, just like you said, and that happened on that building, you just get to the point and realize hey, nobody accounted for how you’re going to marry the last corner, if it’s behind a wall already. So now, you going to close off this box, how do you close it off. You don’t go to the architect with that, he really don’t care. And he don’t, most of the time, he don’t know. You have to go to the engineer and get a change order. Back then, you just went to the general contractor and say, “look, this is not going to fit, we’re going to add an angle here, move this bar around here and this is how we’re going to close it off. That’s that. Sign off on it.” Now you got to go through a whole bunch of logistics and red tape. You the engineers, have a meeting and the architect engineer sits down and then a guy like me comes in and say “this is not going to work.” They look at me like I’m stupid, that this guy is this big time architect with all these letters behind his name, and this guy is this superstar engineer, who went to IIT and I’m just this dumb ironworker. But I’ve been doing it for 26 years. So in the end, they end up listening to me anyway. But to go back to what you were saying, that’s usually what happens on a, on a, a structure. Is that the architect and engineer, they don’t interface and they got different perspectives on a, on a, how the job is going end up being, end up being completed. And most of the time, it is on us to come up with designs and ah, ah, a fixes, if you will. And most of the time, we, we, over manufacture it. If it calls for a 3/8 angle here that’s 1x2, we’ll put a half inch angle there 2x4. Anything to make a engineer shut up. You know so if you have to alter something and, and if it fails, now we’re liable. So, we alter something the engine, that’s down on paper, that’s been approved, then we always go up in grade that way we can say “we gave you more than what your specs called for and now we’re not liable.” So we go through that a lot. 32:39 BH: Oh. So now this raises another question, because I have interviewed a lot of guys and especially, the older iron workers, a lot of them quit school in 7th or 8th grade and had a lot of problems in school and were, now they would say they had a learning disability or something, but it strikes me that when I’m talking to most of them, regardless of how much education they’ve had, they’re pretty smart. MT: Yeah. BH: You know, and they’re good problem solvers. I mean that’s, would you say that’s the case, certainly when you’re getting to where like you and Rich, at that level. You guys gotta be able to problem solve, right? MT: That is the most important thing. It’s, it’s ironic that you should bring that phrase 13  up, because when I understood the duties of a foreman, the thing that I understood most, is, is that you got to not only get along with people, you’re not, you’re only as good as your crew, so you got be able to be diplomatic and get along with people, but the most important thing, the best attribute a foreman can have is the ability to solve problems. You can’t solve problems, you’re in trouble, then you just as, you might as well just be another man on the line. But that is absolutely the key to construction period. To solve the problems, that’s what foreman’s do. Any monkey can build it, it’s when you run into a problem then they’re cornered, now what happens. And, and, as Beau Heidi will say, three men will do the same job, three different ways. So, you got to not only fix it, in a, in a way that the client is going to like it, cause you’re, cause you’re going to charge him for all that extra work, but you also got to fix it in a way that the architect doesn’t fuss and the engineer doesn’t squawk. So you can to please all these people at the time. So to be a good problem solver, you end up with the engineer liking you, the architect liking you and the client likes you. And that’s the essence of being a good foreman. Once you got that, ah, the next step is general foreman and that’s what happened to me. Once I understood it, I started putting people in place and let them do the work. When you got a problem, then call me. Other than that, don’t call me. I’m going to go to that corner and start ordering that material and looking over here. I’m looking for problems now. And I leave my crew to do the work. 34:50 BH: When you move from foreman, to general foreman, what’s the increased responsibility that you take on? I mean, when you’re a foreman, you’re working on a section or something . . . MT: Yeah, we kind of have a detail, it could be two guys, could be five guys. When you’re general foreman, you could have this entire floor. It could be two or three different crews. General foreman, I may have this wall, that wall, this stair, over here, I could have three or four . . . BH: different tasks, guys who are doing the stairs, the curtain wall, or whatever, . . . MT: Yeah. BH: and you’re watching all of them at once . . . MT: Yeah. The general foreman’s basically the superintendent’s eyes and ears. He kinda is everywhere. If the job is really big, it could be several general foremens on the job. And, ah, one general foreman can have from one thru fifteen to the first (?) going, another one takes over from there, depends on the construction, the nature of the job and what the superintendent wants to do. BH: Yeah. Now when you’re working on a building and you’re supervising like the stairs or the windows or multiple things as a general foreman, what about when you’ve got guys in there from the glazers or the laborers union, how does, do they have to have their own foreman, or do you have, do you have the right to supervise guys from other 14  unions or do jurisdictional disputes come into play? MT: All the time. Um, we do a thing called “working composite.” A lot of times, if there are louvers, you’ve heard about the louvers . . . BH: Yeah. MT: We end up working with sheet metal workers a lot. BH: Okay. MT: And it depends on, now days, it depends on who has the contract. If the sheet metal workers have the contract, then they’ll hire an ironworker or two just to shut us up. If ah, we have the contract, we’ll hire a sheet metal worker or two just to shut them up. And who, whosever the superintendent on the job then that’s who the foreman is, whether it’s sheet metal workers or iron workers. So if sheet metal workers are working under me then . . . BH: Does the, does the general contractor decide who, whether it’s going to be iron workers or . . . MT: No. It’s already decided in the contract. BH: The original contract? MT: Yeah, the original contract. So ah, yeah, but that still will come up as a dispute. Let’s say all these mechanical louvers have been awarded to the iron workers, it’s in the contract, the general contractor will say, that’s ironworker’s work. The sheet metal workers can walk up and challenge that and say “look, you iron workers have stationary louvers, mechanical louvers are ours. So now, the general will throw his hands up and say look it’s what the contract . . . you guys fight it out. So we end up going to arbitration, but to keep from doing that because the job is going on, we just hire two of their guys and walk away. BH: Just to keep it simple . . . MT: Yep. BH: To get the job done? MT: Yeah, and that way we ah, and those type of disputes come up all of the time, and we and if you fight and litigate over every little thing . . . yeah, cause they’ll end up, ah, and they’re not dumb, by the time you get through litigation and even if you win, it’s too late. The job’s built now. So, and all they, what they really want, I’ll tell you what they already got, to put two of them, that’s what they really want. 15  BH: Yeah. Just a couple of more guys on the job? MT: Yeah. Because if they really want to really try to fight that take it to court and all that stuff, the building will be, the building will be done by the time you get through with all that so what’s the point in fighting? BH: Yeah. Do you ah, were you pretty happy with overall Local 63 as a union? Do you think it’s a good union? MT: Yep. Yeah, I was ecstatic. That’s well, ah, I come in in the class of ’85 and it was great people in that class, Paul Thompson, John Salcetti, Larry McNiff, these were heavy, these guys, these guys are business agents now. These guys were heavyweights. So, I come in a great class of guys that wanted to master the trade so we challenged each other. There was a healthy competition in my, in my class. We got along well, most of the time, you know, I mean we’d argue and stuff, but ah, everybody was always out to be, out to be the best, ah, ah, and we just challenged each other at every turn . . . And most of us were genuinely, just wanted to be there. Just to be a part of Local 63. We were really ecstatic about that, but it was a great class that came in. And, ah, it shows, in the a hierarchy of Local 63 now. Half my classmates are officers . . .You know, so I came in at ah, ah a really good time. And all the heavyweights were still around at the time, ah, ah, Roy Williams[See interview with Roy Williams] , Rich Rowe was still out in the field. Beau Heidi still doing his thing ah, ah, Eric Dean was still in the field. You know all these guys that are in the International now, I worked with those guys, you know, and ah, it was a great time and the work was booming. You could pretty much go wherever you wanted to go. So if you had good stock, you could move around. And I did, I moved around a lot. I worked on the jobs, I wanted to work on and I thought that was the coolest thing in the world. How many places you can go to and “say, you know what I don’t like it here. I want to go work over here?” BH: Yeah. MT: Man that’s some cool shit. How many people get to do that. Yeah, those, those were great times. It wasn’t work. I swear it was fun. It, it was fun. I couldn’t wait to get to work. You’d go to Sears to buy tools or you’d do a job, and you’d get in there, man I don’t have the right tools to go do this and you’d think of something, I know what I need. You’d get off that day, run to Sears and go buy that tool. That’s how we approached the trade back then. And if you, if you couldn’t buy the tool, you’d get some steel and take a tool and modify it or make tools and now that was in your tool case forever. And, that was ah, that type of skill, I think is lost. You know, we would invent ways to get the job done. You know you would get kudos for that if you can, if you’re doing curtain wall and it’s just one screw behind that nobody can ever get, if you invent the tool that everybody’s gonna use for the next sixty floors, hey . . . you the man on this job. 40:58 BH: I can imagine, yeah. So how did you move from ah being you know ironworker foreman on ironworker jobs, to becoming a contractor of your own? What made you 16  make that jump? I mean that’s a big jump and, I know the ironworker trade, it seems like a lot of guys end up doing that, not everyone, obviously wants to but you did it, what, what made you do that? What prompted you to move to that level and how long did you do that? MT: Okay. I was foreman for a long time. Then I got tired of curtain wall, cuz I’d done it for 12 years with Beau Heidi and I loved Beau, but I wanted to do something different. I felt I’d mastered curtain wall. You know every job is different. I wanted to be a well rounded ironworker. I wanted to walk some steel. I wanted to do some miscellaneous. So I went to work for a company called Benzel Industries, Bob Darnell was my last ah, the last boss I worked for. Great guy, and ah, we done nothing but miscellaneous. A lot of stainless, a lot of CTA stations, all the stainless railings you see the CTA stations, stainless kiosks, stainless benches, the little, ah, all that kind of stuff, ah, we did, ah. One of the best jobs, I done with Bob Darnell, we done all of the railings and all the glass work around the U-505 sub. [U-505 was a German submarine at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.] They took it out of the yard and put it in a hole. All the stairs and everything all around it, is my job. Our, our work, I should say. I was the foreman on that job. So we’re doing a lot of specialty stuff. Ah, we had a lot of ah, I call them front stairs, out in the suburbs. You know ah, the stairs you see downtown, you walk in the lobby and there’s two big giant curved stairs. Yeah we got a lot those and we got a lot of the back stairs, that you know the garage stairs and stuff. But it was something different all the time. You were always working with torches and ah, welding a lot instead of lightweight aluminum. So I wanted to master that, so I got into miscellaneous, I stayed in that for ten years. And ah, then I realized that after ten years that ah, how should I put this, without sounding egotistical, um, I was the authority and it just seemed that it, it had reached a point that there was nothing else for me to do. I was working for Bob and he wouldn’t even come out on the job. He, when he sent out payroll checks, he’d send out the next set of drawings, this big, tell me the address of the job, you’re still to be delivered when, pick whoever you want, get somebody from the hall [union hall] so I realized then, that I was actually a superintendent. MT: You know, but we were a small outfit. We had four or five trucks on the on the road, but I ran all my own work. So I was functioning as a superintendent and I realized when I looked around the room that I was the authority in the room, the ah, I started winning those arguments with architects and engineers. And it got to the point where, I never lost. After they get initial thing, what is this dumb black guy going to come in here and start telling me what to do. But after I explain what the problem is, and how we can solve it, now engineers are calling me, Mr. Taqee. Well, how do you guys normally do it, Mr. Taqee? I won. You know, so I started to realize I became the authority in the room and the only thing left for me to do is have my name on the front of the check. That was the only thing I wasn’t doing. I didn’t function any differently when I started my company than I did when I worked for Bob. He pretty much gave me free reign, gave me the credit card, order what you want, ah, ah, my own truck. Do whatever you want to do, just run the job. So, basically I functioned that way, but I didn’t try to, I didn’t try to be that, it just, it was a natural progression. If, if anything, Rich Rowe pushed me into that. He made me my first foreman, he gave foreman’s pay on this job, made me my first 17  foreman at 225 and ah, what else, actually, I left Benzel Industries. I was going to go into business. There is a story in between there. I was working on this last job here, at 56th and Maryland, I think it is here, and was doing the stairs. We were out at O’Hare and saw Rich and I said, “Rich, I’m going into business next year.” He said, “I’ll back you. I think you’re ready for it.” I’ll build this one last stair, because it was over in Hyde Park, it’s in my neighborhood. “I’m going to go build this last stair for Bob and then I’m gone.” He said, “Okay. I’ll get behind you. I’ll, I’ll going to guide you. I’ll, I’ll help you out.” Well, ah, I’m working on this stair here. I couldn’t get along with the superintendent, because it’s a open set of stairs. And, I love stairs. You can build stairs, now again, you become God. Everybody can’t build stairs. Stairs are a building all within itself. You’re building it three dimensions, so it’s challenging. This guy wanted me to wear a safety line, two. One going up and one going down the stairs. It was the most dangerous thing in the world, you know. Carrying this tail behind you . . . Working up an eight foot stair, you know, I mean, I understand, you can fall into the hole, there’s no rails, I can understand it, but if I got tools and two or three landings, and walking around doing things, man I was tripping all over the place with that thing. So, routinely I was sneak and take it off. So I could run up the stairs, and go get tools, and run up here and drop them off. Go back down and hook it back up. He got tired of catching me and he run me off the job. BH: Ha, ha. MT: He said, “I’ve had enough of you. Get off, you’re off this job.” So, ah, ah, ah, Beau was, had come, by that time he is working for Benzel now. But, he had enough of the curtain wall thing, now, he’s working there. So Beau, I called up Beau and said “Beau, I just got run off.” He said, “Well, you can come on out here with us at the airport.” I said, “oh”. I really didn’t want to work at the airport anymore. I kind of gave that job to another foreman. I just got tired of hearing it. We were out there for four years. I just had enough, so that, that’s how, they would just to keep me happy, they gave me this job over here in Hyde Park. But when I got run off and they wanted me to come back, I said, “Beau, I think I’m gonna go into business.” I don’t think he believed me when I first told him that. But he do know, that I was talking about it and planning it and I had already spoke to Rich about it a year before I was working at the airport. So, I just saw it as the opportunity to do it. It, it just happened that way. I got run off that job, I don’t want to go to O’Hare, now’s as good a time as any, so that’s how I went into business. The year was 2008. And, look what happened. I come out of the door, it was September of 2008, gung ho, I’m legal and I got everything. I even got contracts waiting for me. I got people lining up to work for me, and October of 2008, the economy collapsed. So, what, hey, I’m out of the door now, I can’t go back. It’s like moving out of your parent’s home. You can’t go back now. I got insurance, I got a bond, I got a truck, you know what I mean? I these got contracts, I can’t go back. I wanted to, but it was too late. So, ah, I made the best of it. And, we did, we did pretty well. I didn’t lose my ass. I didn’t make a lot of money. But, I didn’t lose. For those four years, I done good work. My stock was rising. People are still calling me today, even though I told them, December 2011 was my last day. I’ve been retired from the academy for a year. I’m done. 18  MT: You know. So, ah, ah, my stock was rising. I did good work. I done a lot of CTA work and, and, ah, Metra, I worked with ah, IHC Construction a lot, and, Bridgeport Steel was probably my benefactor. I’d say they pretty much kept me in business. And, we got a, maybe 20-30 public schools. That was the lion share of the work. Because when the economy collapsed, the jobs like this, curtain wall jobs, window wall jobs, they kinda’ stuck. It was hard for me to get. I was competing with the big boys all the time. Now, they want this little stuff. So, ah, ah, banks, and, and, new police stations, fire stations, actually, we’re the one that ah, ah, I’m going to be working there shortly. Engine 16’s house on 39th and Pershing. Ah, and, I just couldn’t get that kind of work. The big boys were scarfing it up. The CPS [Chicago Public Schools] had to have, they had to have minority participation. They were pretty much handing me the jobs whenever I wanted. So that was, that’s mostly how we stayed in business. Ah, Metra Rail, and ah, Chicago Public Schools. BH: Yeah. 49:40 MT: I done that for four years until the fire department called and I ah, they put thirteen years on the table, back pay. That lawsuit went through and it was like this, you got to give me (?). Because I was, I was fighting at that time. I was staying in business, but I was working 14-15 hours a day ah, I was making decent money, but I was struggling to pay the bills. I had a 100 grand sitting out here, but I owed 30, so now I got to sit here, twittle my thumbs. I didn’t have a lot of money. [Lots of background noise, hard to hear] So then, a guy called, I want you to do this job, I can’t take that job because, I mean, I need this money for this guy to give me so, it was, it was always one or the other. And then, when I got the money, they paid my bills, now . . . . [noise, something fell in the bar] . . . paying insurance waiting for a job to come up. There was always a gap there. You know what I mean, ah, I was just always a gap . . . BH: Oh yeah. MT: I never quite had enough to go to the next level. And I was, I was ready to graduate to the next level. So, I went to my bank and I said, “Look, my problem is cash flow. I can do the job, I got clients lining up to work with me. They want me to take these half million to million dollar jobs, the thing is I can’t, I can’t meet payroll. I’m gonna run out of money in a month or two, unless people start paying me in a timely manner.” But the bank rejected my loan. They said, “You haven’t been in business long enough. We’ll give you a personal loan against your property, but when you’re Taqee architecture, we ain’t givin’ you nothin’.” I don’t want to leverage my house. So I just kept staying small potatoes and I struggled as just a small contractor ah, trying to get, ah, companies to front me. Like IHC Construction said, “We want you to take this job, this work, $800,000.” “Okay, fine, you give me $200,000 up front, I’ll take that job.” You know, but those, those never panned out. So they’d cut me little pieces of the pie and, and stuff like that. BH: So they . . . 19  MT: They wanted me to get bigger. I fought it tooth and nail. They wanted me to take, they said if we do that, then we’re going to bond you at, at BH: Yeah, really pushed you . . . MT: And really put you on, at no, no, no. What’s the purpose of going into business, if they’re going to own you. I might as well be on your pay roll, I don’t want to, I don’t want you to own me. BH: Yeah, exactly. So, how did you decide to do the fire department? Did you go to the academy? MT: Yeah, in ‘09. BH: Did you have to take an exam then and did you still have your contracting business? MT: Yeah. As a matter of fact, we took, how did that go . . . I got the letter in the mail, I think it was like August or June, I’m like, fire department, wow. And then I read the logistics of the lawsuit and I’m like, are you kidding me, thirteen years, they’re going to give back that many. That means I’m only going to have to give them seven and I can walk. I’m like, why not? I’ll bite. Construction is tight. Firefighters don’t work that much and I could probably do both. This is my mindset at the time, right? And, it ain’t like I had a lot of work, I had enough work, my bills are being paid and so forth. So hey, I can double dip. And I had firefighters work for me before too, so I know they can double dip all of the time. I say, “What the hell. What have I got to lose? I’m the owner, I can stop down anytime I want to.” BH: Right. MT: I’m not going to, I’m not losing anything. And so, I sent the card back in and, ah, I went down to the appointment that first day. And, then they had us jump into a series of hoops all the way through ah, ah, urine tests, hair tests, I mean, you name it. And then they, drawing blood, they done, I mean they done everything before they finally made that final selection. That we were actually going to be in. So, I jumped through all those hoops and ah, actually, ah, ah, I almost did not make it. I, ah, sent the card in, and in October, me and my wife took a cruise to Bermuda. And when we came back, we were still working on Metra Rail on 87th and Lyons. When I came there was the card in the mail from the fire department and they said, “Okay, you passed the first wave. You go on to the second wave now. You got to come in here with a doctor’s appointment Tuesday morning.” And, I said, “how am I going to pull this off?” I just got back into town, ah, Sunday, from a trip. You know now we been on a cruise trip, on an island of, of ah, Bermuda, so I get back on Sunday. I got one day to go get a doctor’s statement to say I’m fit to be a firefighter. Then show up down at the [?] Tuesday morning. I said, “How in the hell . . .” It’s, it’s Sunday at about 5:00 and I’m realizing I got tomorrow. 20  Had that date been for Monday morning, I wouldn’t be a firefighter today, I’d still be in an iron worker. BH: Wow. MT: I had all of one day and I, I called all around. I managed to find a clinic that would give me a physical and ah, ah, clean bill of health the same day that I walked in. So, and that’s how, I walked into Quinn [Quinn Academy of the Chicago Fire Academy] that Tuesday, with that physical and I kept going down that process. BH: Wow. MT: But I just, I made it by one day. I mean, had I been in town, no problem. But, I come back being out of town. This card had been there a week. I didn’t know it. Cause I’m out of town. I said God must have wanted me to do this, cause, had this been Monday morning, that’s it. There is no way I could have pulled it off. But it was Tuesday morning, and it gave me one day and I managed to get in there and get that done. And, I kept going through each step and each step and each step until eventually they said, you’re selected, you’re going to be one of the 111 that’s going to be coming in. At that time, by that time, I worked by last job, I mean my last day was December 17th with Metra Rail. We pretty much shut down for the winter. And, ah, another job or two came up, but I didn’t want to take them, because I realized that I think this thing is going to happen for me. Around February, and another job through from IHC, I turned it down. And, I had another one, one the books that was going to start in April, and I asked them can back out of it. And, I had another one, another one with Cab Works out at the airport, that was going to be the start of something huge. That was a good relationship that I had going with them and they ton of work and my stock was growing. So once I got out at the airport and got under that wing, I was going to spread like wildfire. So, I was going to start looking good. But I walked away because I wanted this. 56:09 MT: So, Um, after jumping through all the hoops, getting in, I called my insurance company. Cancelled my insurance and just shut my company down. I came into the academy March 16th and ah, made it all the way through. I hung in there with the 38 year olds. And, ah, they didn’t rough me up too much. It was difficult. One of the hardest things I’ve ever done, but I wanted it bad, made it happen. Ah, ironically, one of the things that happened, at the Quinn, is there was a set of stairs there, that they make us run up to the roof and down all of the time. This is one of the ways of punishing us. Making us do, what we call “up and over”. So, if don’t act right or we ain’t got our stuff together, up and over. And, we go do ten of them or whatever . . . ironically, I bid those stairs through IHC Construction. So, every time I run up them, I would laugh like look at me . . . I didn’t get that contract though. I go, wouldn’t it have been ironic if I had put those stairs up, then I got to run up and down the damn things all the time. BH: [Laughter] Yeah, that’s funny. 21  MT: So I always thought that, that used to keep me going when I was ready to get really ah, ah, lose it or ah, physically I just couldn’t go on anymore. I used to think about that story about, these are actually your stairs. Like you own these stairs . . . right, and I would get the motivation and ah, and, and keep on going. BH: So how long is that training in the academy? Because you just started right working on the force? Right? MT: Yeah. It’s normally about six months, six to seven months. It all depends on how well the candidates understand the curriculum and everybody come up. They truly try to get everybody out at the same time. We were about 20 of us, that just couldn’t get out of there. So they had to re-take the test. We do some training, stuff like that. And in the end, they end up decided that, “Hey look, you guys are just going to stay back, we gotta let these guys graduate.” So we graduated November 1st. Twenty of my classmates are coming out in January and I think we’re going to lose three. So, on the EMS side, we lost one, and when we got over to the fireside, we lost three more. That’s not bad out of 111. And where we were basically the geriatric, where everybody in there was in their late 30’s. Six of us were in our 50’s, me included. So ah, that was, that was pretty cool that we all made it. That was a hell of training. We done, oh I don’t know, several hundred pushups a day, thousands of jumping jacks. We would run five miles then got to sit in a classroom, wait for two hours, then they just wore out butts out. That was really, really tough. If, if I hadn’t been an iron worker for 26 years, I couldn’t have pulled it off. No, no, I would have been one of those guys that was, would have been dragging behind a lot. But I was right up there in front with the kids, you know what I mean, we all struggled, we were all . . . but for a 52 year old, I hung right in there with skinniest, sharpest, youngest guys in the class. I was right in there. BH: Yeah, that’s great. 59:10 MT: And, when we came, when we graduated in November, the phone started ringing, okay, when you coming out, this is Bridgeport Steel. Okay, we ready for you. We got a ton of contracts over here and I realized, I was just going to be beating myself up. I can do it, but I don’t think that I want to. I gave iron work 26 years of my life. There’s no, there’s no, I can’t go any higher. The only thing I can do is make a lot of money. There’s nothing I can learn and I didn’t think that I would give it my all, because I was never motivated by money. I was never rich or nothing, but I always had everything that I needed. They handed me everything I wanted. So, if, if my only motivation was to make a lot of money, that’s not a good enough excuse to go back. And, I don’t want to do both for the simple reason, is that I really want to master the fire department. I’m not looking to be a lieutenant, but I really want to learn the lieutenant’s job. I want master it, I don’t want to, I got an engine and a truck at my house and I want to know everything each one of those apparatuses do. What the engineer do. What the lieutenants do. I want to know everything about it and I can’t do both. So, I want to stick with this until I master it. So I called union hall, “say listen, I don’t think I want to come back. How many credits 22  to I have? What do I have to do? How long do I have to go before I can qualify for a pension?” Mickey said, this was like ah, the 8th of November, or whatever, I had just started my first day. You know it was the day after my first shift. And she said, “Mike, you know you’re going to be 52 in a few weeks.” I said, “Yeah.” She said, “you know you actually qualify for your birthday on the 1st of December?” I said, “Get the hell out of here. I graduate on the 1st of November and you’re telling me I can actually get my pension on the 1st of December or January? Does it start in January?” She said, “I’ll tell you what, if have that paperwork back to me before the 15th, I’ll have a check in your house, on your birthday.” And that brings us up to pretty much where we are now. 1:01:15 BH: Yeah. Well let me: I’ve got one more question that I want to ask you and then we can over and do something with the photos. Um, the labor movements been taking a real beating lately, um, public workers, private sector unions, Chicago has always been a pretty good union town. I mean, I didn’t grow up here, but my family was from here and they’re all in different unions, boiler makers, bricklayers, city workers. . . What do you, what do you think the current state of the unions is in, I mean, is it dying or is it just got to reinvent itself? Why is there so much hostility? I mean, what are your, just, tell me your thoughts on that. MT: Good question . . . BH: I mean obviously, you’re not anti-union. You were in the iron workers, you’re going to be in the fireman’s union. Um . . . MT: Yeah, definitely both union. Ah, I don’t think the unions are a dying. I think somebody’s ah, sticking a knife in them. I think they are going to die or go away, and I think that a current plan [Paying the bill and Taqee insists on paying for lunch. Laughter.] I think the union’s are in a bad way because the political climate is painting, it seems like, and this is across the country, not just Chicago, that they’re painting all public workers as moochers. And, and, they are trying to figure out a way to balance their budgets. I think America’s in this, they got this fiscal cliff thing and they’re going through this budget where they are trying to balance their books on the backs of ah, they’re trying to balance their books and ah, they got a lot of pensions, pensioners, ah, how should I put this. In the ‘50s, the pensions didn’t have any problems because there wasn’t that many people collecting pensions. Everybody was working, we’re booming and so forth, but now people are living longer, the people are living longer, so you got a lot of people on pensions and they don’t know how to continue to ah, to fund the pensions. Especially after they raped most of them. And, they won’t give them back. They don’t tell you that, they just say the pensions are under funded. Yes, but they were over funded a decade ago. You borrowed from them and never gave the money back. And they’re not saying that. But to ah, to ah, bring us up to where we are now, I think that ah, ah, the only way that ah, a city, county, state and federal government, to balance their books, they’re going to have to figure out how to get all these retirees off the books. I mean it’s a lot of people and the baby boomers are continuing to retire, how do you continue to give these people, 23  keep these people on a fixed income, when you don’t have any money yourself? So, I think they are scapegoating the unions, because that’s a lot of money they got to kick in. But these people ah, you know ah, ah, paid union dues and they put into their pensions over the years, this money is owed them, just like social security. Then they don’t to pay that either. They don’t have a way from the city on up to balance their books. So, I think this is reason why they are going after the unions is because ah, that’s ah, that’s a hefty, that’s a hefty amount you’re going to have to pay for the rest of these people’s lives. And, and, that notion of building casinos in order to balance your books, that’s just not going to work. Ain’t nobody go no money now, so that casino revenue, it’s dried up. So do you balance the books now? You got to go out after civil workers, teachers, firemen, policemen, because these people are collecting a pension and you need to find a way to separate that pension from these people. Or, get people, if you can’t do that, then what we have to do going forward, I think this is their philosophy, is start hiring people we don’t have to give a pension to. So that’s the “right to work” thing coming into play now. They don’t want to pay these pensions. Forty years ago, Ford Motor Company had no problem paying this obligation to its retirees, but now that’s got to be what 15 or 20% of their ah, revenue, annual revenue, is to ah, go into pensions? And they’re trying to figure out how to get out of it. So, I think that’s the problem pensions are having is that the, ah, big boys at the top don’t want to pay that anymore. And, that’s only gonna get worse. A lot of people are retiring, all the baby boomers, so that’s a, that’s a problem the pensions going to have, not of their own fault, but that’s just a systemic problem that’s going to, ah, ah, happen in this society for decades to come. It’s just going to be a hard way back for pensions, I mean for a union workers, America period. She’s not getting those manufacturing jobs back from China, I don’t care how much they talk. You’re just not going to get that back. And you’re not going to compete with China. They have a billion people. You can get someone to work for a quarter an hour. We’re going to have to figure out how to make some other things that nobody else is making, like we did in, you know, at the turn of the last century, the previous century, I mean. And just, make things, or do things nobody else is doing. And do it better than anybody else, but in this global economy, you can’t compete with the ah, China and India. So ah, ah, I think America’s going to have to go through her version of austerity. They don’t want to use that word, but that’s what this fiscal cliff stuff is all about. There is nothing more than austerity and they going to continue to go after unions as much as they can. I believe, and ah, I don’t know what’s going to come with that, you know, but ah, this, this is not going to be pretty. This is not going to be pretty. 1:07:30 BH: Well, is there anything else you want to comment on and the history of your career? Or anything you want to mention, otherwise, I’ve asked my, we can go over and do those photos. MT: Actually, one other thing. BH: Yeah. MT: Navy Pier, probably the last great union job we had. This is one of my favorite 24  pictures. Paul Thompson, he is now a business agent, and we took that picture with Mayor Daley and every time I go by Navy Pier, I think of that. And as far as big union job goes, that’s got to be the last really big one we ever been on. I don’t know if we’re going to get big jobs like that again, I don’t know if the city is even trying to move in that direction. Rahm Emmanuel is trying to turn us into a right to work city. He is going to have a hard time doing it, but he’s got a lot of clout. And, unions are under the gun. Nobody wants to pay us what we’re worth, so it’s going to be really tough to see Chicago do things like that again. They ah, I think it’s going to be awhile. Had we got the Olympics, things would have changed . . . BH: Okay, yeah. Well, I’ll ask you this question then, it’s a big question, you know I study a lot of history, and during the depression, and, we built a lot of big buildings and big dams and even before that and you look around the city of Chicago there’s beautiful buildings, post offices, city buildings, and you can go to small towns and you see the coolest big buildings. I mean you know, and you like architecture, the coolest piece of architecture in most towns with less than 5,000 or10,000 people is the post office or maybe the gym. You know these are like big public works projects. I sometimes, I’m wondering if we’re at a point where the country has a failure of will to think big anymore. I mean it’s like they are so busy fighting, it can’t, the country can’t even think big about anything, as big even as the Navy Pier job. Do you think that there’s a little of that going on in the US? MT: Hell yeah. There’s a lot of that going on and a lot of that has to do with um, the big corporations. If they don’t, if they don’t see mass profit in it, then it’s going to be hard to get the government to get up those dollars. The democrats are always big on stuff like infrastructure, which we need a lot of now. We’re talking hundreds of billions of dollars, you can’t get a bill like that passed through this Republican house. Because infra- structure’s going to take everybody to chip in some money . . . some of the big wigs, the government. You know, but everybody uses the infrastructure. The rich people can’t get rich without the post office and the roads and the fire department and so forth . . . BH: I’m right there with ya. MT: You know at some point, you Wall Street guys who got all your money back, should kick in some money for a change and help America much the way they did in ah, during the Great Depression. They invested a lot of money in this country and ah, ah, built the road system. Everybody went back to work and I think they need to do that again. But in order to do that, you’re, the debt ceiling’s going to skyrocket, so it’s six of one, half a dozen of the other. But, I don’t think you can get out of it by penny pinching, you know if we don’t invest in infrastructure, then it, the bridges are just going to continue to deteriorate. And, the Eastern seaboard has the oldest piping system in the country, they got, every time you look up a main burst somewhere in Maryland and ah, ah New York, it causes all kinds of problems. That’s going to happen to the Midwest soon enough. You know, it’s just that, if you don’t do it, you’re going to end up spending the money anyway. So, I, I don’t understand what holding the money back is going to 25  do. You owe, what is it, 16 trillion, what’s a few more trillion? I mean, I don’t get it. America has always been in debt. I don’t see why the amount makes a difference today, than it did a few years ago. I, I, don’t think she’s in no position to pay back 16 trillion dollars, it just isn’t going to happen. She’ll go to war with China before she gives China 16 trillion. So if you build an infrastructure again, you can get people back to work and now you got tax revenue. See to me, you, it’s like, you ah, it’s like you’re cutting off your left hand in spite of your right hand. We don’t want to spend for infrastructure, but we need to raise revenue, on who? A lot of people don’t have jobs, so if you don’t have the jobs, you can’t raise the revenue, the government can’t spend the money. I mean it goes back and forth. And, ah, you can’t get the economy together because people don’t have money to spend. I mean exactly, what are you going to do, so, you gave the banks all our money, and you gave Wall Street back their money, and now we’re sitting here with depressed homes, some of us don’t have any jobs, and you’re saying pull yourself up by the bootstraps. Oh, and by the way, we’re going to cut your pension and we’re thinking about not giving you social security. That can’t possibly be healthy for middle class people. And without the middle class, I think this country’s going to go into another recession. You know but ah, they’re not going to have the middle class again. If you look at what’s on the table, I think Barack Obama walked this position back twice as, as it relates to ah, ah entitlements. He has lowered the amount he wants to raise in a way of revenue. Boehner hasn’t moved an inch yet, you know, and we still do not know the logistics of that bill. There were those discretionary cuts, we never actually know what’s in them, until we look up in April and go, hey they say you were going to this. So, I think that ah, austerity is coming. I know I sound pessimistic, but I really think America’s going to take a hit. I think our cost of living is going down a little bit. What Europe is going through, we’re going to go through a mild version of that. It’s just that America’s bigger, stronger, more, she has more money, more wherewithal. She can, she can weather some of that. So instead of taking a 20% hit like Greece, we’re going to take 3% here, 4% there. But, but we’re going to get hit. There’s no way that we can continue to live like we did before 2008, the day of ample credit and ah, ah, everybody had everything, buy all the toys you want in the world. Those days are over, you know, for the foreseeable future. BH: Well hey, it’s really been a pleasure Michael. MT: The pleasure is mine. BH: I really enjoyed it. MT: I hope I didn’t talk too much. BH: No, no, this is great stuff. I really enjoyed talking to you and I appreciate your time. END: 1:14:00 26 
Ironworkers;Gerald “Jerry” Truty;1942;2011;Counter No./Time Topic 00:01 Audio Interview Contents    [It’s great to be here. Please give me your name first.] Jerry Truty. [How do you spell your last name, Jerry?] T-r-u-t-y. [And tell me the date of your birth.] I was born September 21st, 1942. [And in Chicago?] In Chicago. [What neighborhood did you grow up in?] That neighborhood was...a...ahh...a Division and Western area. St. Mary of Nazareth Hospital. [Did you go to school there?] I did. I lived in that area that Zone was called...Zone 22. And I went to St. Helen’s grammar school. That was on Augusta and Oakley. [And was that an Italian? Your name’s Italian, right?] It was Polish. Polish. I’m Polish. [You’re Polish? See, I thought you were Italian.] Definitely. 100% Polish. [I’m glad that you told me that. That’s a Polish neighborhood.] That neighborhood was Polish at the time. Very Polish. As a matter of fact, the language I had to take in 1st through 4th grade was Polish. I had to take Polish in those days... in grade school. From that neighborhood, we moved on to Milwaukee, Ogdan, and Chicago we had a tavern there. My Grandfather died. My Father took the tavern over for a few years. And I went to St. John Cantius which is now the River North neighborhood. Also I had Polish at that school. It was a Polish neighborhood as well. [Yeah. And did you go to high school at...?] No. Then we moved northwest to the Belmont-Austin area. And I went to St. Ferdinand Grammar School and from there I went to St. Patrick’s High School, which is on Belmont and Austin. And...then...after a year at St. Pat’s, I went to Steinmetz High School, and graduated from Steinmetz. [And did you...ahh.. Did you join the service, did you do other work...? How did you end up being an ironworker once you left the path from high school?] After high school, I went to join... My Father was a post man, mailman and he worked at the Post Office in the Dunning Station, at the Dunning Station on Irving and Narragansett And after high school, I also became a post man. My uncle worked at the main Post Office and I got in through him and...got transferred out to the Dunning Station so I worked at the same Post Office with my Father. And from there, I was a mailman about a year and I joined the service. I joined the Air Force, the United States Air Force. And I had an aptitude for mechanics and I became a jet engine mechanic. I...jet air craft mechanic, I should say. I went to San Antonio for basic training and then Amarillo, Texas for air craft mechanics’ training. After that, we got shipped out to France. So I was in France for...four months. De Gaulle, of course, kicked us out of France then. We worked on F84 jet fighters and we had 4 bases in France. And all four of those combined into...were combined in the 366 tech fighter wing. We were shipped to New Mexico. While we were in New Mexico, the second or third year, we had the oldest jet fighter in the air craft inventory and we got the newest jet fighter in the air craft inventory, which was the F4C phantom jet. And I was the crew chief on the phantom jet and we got combat ready in one year’s time, which was phenomenal in those days. We shipped out to Vietnam. So all four of our squadrons went to Vietnam. And I was at DaNang and I served my time until I got out there in 1966. Came back to Chicago and went right back into my job at the Post Office. I was married on military leave. 4:16 [How long were you...in the military? Was that two or four years...] Four years I was in the service, yeah. And my uncle called up one day and says, “Hey, they’re giving a test for apprentices. Would you like to be an ironworker?” And I says, “Well, I don’t know.” He says, “You know what I do, an ironworker.” And I said, “Yeah, I’ll take the test.” I took the test. I did very well. And... I was still at the Post Office when Ray Robertson called up and says, “You’re going to start next week at I90 North Michigan.” I says, “Ok.” He says, “You’ll be working curtain wall over there.” I called up my Mom and says, “Mom. I quit the Post Office.” She says, “What are you doing?” I says, “I got a job with the ironworkers.” I says, “It pays a little more and, I don’t know, I guess I’ll be hanging curtains.” She says, “What?!?” I says, “I don’t know. They told me curtain wall. I assume it’s some kind of show or something. I don’t know.” So I quit the Post Office and I went to the job. Came on there and... It’s the John Hancock Center. [Wow. I was going to ask...] I didn’t even know. And it’s only six stories out of the ground. And of course it was a big wide base because the Hancock is shaped that way. I  get up there and I’m on the second floor, that’s where we had our shanties and everything. That’s where they were starting the wall, on the second floor. And I got into it and...ahh...Mike Bentley, who was my boss at the time. He says, “Yeah, you’ll be working with Jerry Rolakowski over there. You just hand him whatever he needs, you know? All the tools you needed in those days was a stick rule, a ball peen hammer, and a pencil. That was your tool issue. 6:05 So I started working with Jerry and he’s explaining to me, oh, what this is all about. And I’m just mesmerized. And I says, “How tall is this going to be?” He goes, “Haven’t you heard?” I says, “I don’t know nothing. You know... I’m a mailman.” And he says, “It’s going to be 100 stories tall. The tallest building in the world.” I says, “You’re kidding me.” And we’re only two floors off the ground. I didn’t think nothing of it. I’m working on the edge with him. As it turns out, I worked at the Hancock for two years, on every facet of that building. I worked on the outside skin...on the interior...the...oh, the trim work on the inside. I even worked on the escalators and the revolving doors at the end. I was on that job for two years. So as my apprenticeship went along, I learned quite a bit of our trade because I worked on so many different facets. I caulked on the outside, on the stages. But my main... The pride of my job was working with this gang. Tommy Roback’s crew. We were on top. We worked on the scale. We did all the crane jumping. We had two cranes there. And we had a Chicago boom, which was on the south side of the building. [What’s a Chicago boom?] A Chicago boom is...a...ahh...a derrick boom that, I have a picture of it here. This one. This is the one we’re using. But anyway, it would be anchored at its base on the side of the building. And it had guide cables, allowing you to boom down and up and swing left and right. Here it is. This is a Chicago boom. As you’re looking down, it’s all the way down right now and it’s picking a load. And when you bring the load into the building, when you pull it up, this boom will go up and the load will come in... And then you’ll have two guys. One guy on one line and one guy on the other line to pull the boom into the building. So the load comes into the building and unloads your...material. [Now is that... Is it called a Chicago boom because they kind of came up with the original idea?] I think so. I believe that’s what they told me. [Now, when you’re doing the curtain wall... Do you use a boom for that? You keep a wall away from the building and bring it in closer or is it a different kind of... How you bring the curtain up to like the tenth floor?] All the material is boxed for the, all the aluminum skin... 8:35 I don’t even know if I... Oh yeah, here. All these... All these panels would come in a box. All these moyens would come in a box. All these...ahh...ahh...these little frames and all the frames for the glass would all come in boxes. So you had a gang called the raising gang. That is all they would do all day long. Bring materials. Bring supplies up. All day long. It never stops. The trucks come in, one truck after another, after another. All the time. And it’s always bringing materials in there so the guys that would be putting the wall up would be breaking open this stuff. And you’d have another crew that would be breaking open boxes and stacking it. So they’d be getting rid of the wood, you know? [Yeah.] And then the other crew would start installing it. [Did they do more than one shift a day on that building? Did they get it done while working a couple of shifts...or...?] Well, sometimes they would work some overtime. We had as many as 110 guys at one time. Now you gotta understand that this is 1968. This was one of  the first times that our local ever went out on strike. While we were... We had a strike, this job was keeping a lot of guys working. They were bringing in guys just to keep them working. So the strike would keep going on. And one time... I think at the very peak, and Roy Williams would know that exactly. I think there was 110-115 guys on the job, working for our company, which was called HH Robertson. It started out as Couples and then...midstream somewhere, HH Robertson bought them out. So... It was a lot of guys working...110 guys. 10:23 [Did it take you a while to get used to the...I mean... You started on the second floor and you obviously went up to the very top. Did the heights bother you at all when you first started?] No. At that time I loved it then. And some of the guys I worked with, you know, which were seasoned guys. Some of these Al Simcox and Frenchie and Stan Hamm and Tommy Robeck. These guys... We were all young and we just wanted to work. We... I always wanted to work on like the structural guys on the structural steel. That’s what we pride ourselves. We can do anything they can do. And, of course, with the jumping on the boom, we did. We were always on a structure. And...ah... No... I got used to it all the time and then I would always work with these guys who were experienced and it passed on to me and we were always going... We had a great camaraderie with this crew. We just... We just enjoyed it. We loved it. [So were you glad, pretty soon, after you got the job, were you glad you left the Post Office?] Yeah, because then I know where my life was headed and what I was going to do. 11:35 [So you were apprenticing on the job. Was it like an indentured apprenticeship you had...or... ?] Well, not indentured but because... The fortunate thing... There was one particular time, my partner and I... They couldn’t get enough guys to go on the outside of the building to do the caulking because...ah...the caulking was done on stages. This is the how stages, again...the Cadillac. They had these stages and you’d jump out there and you’d caulk with Biocal [?]. This Biocal would come to the job frozen. They were dry iced frozen, solid as a rock. And you’d take it out on to the stage, a box of it was frozen, Biocal. And you put it into this heat box that you have there to warm it up. Then you’d put it into an electric caulk gun, I mean an air pressured caulk gun, and you’d have to caulk the building tight, you know? So to do this... They couldn’t get enough guys to go out and none of the guys wanted to work on the outside of the building. One reason was that the structural guys were still working up above and a lot of stuff was being dropped. It was being dropped so much that we had... I don’t have a picture of it but we had put up what was called a protective scaffolding. And this scaffolding would have a, on the side of the building, what we called a knee brace. It was a beam that went out like that. A little 4 inch beam and a beam that came down like this and a beam that came down like this. And made a frame out of it and it had a pipe welded to it. Ahh... Not a pipe but a plate, a square plate with a hole in it. And on the column, there would be another plate and we’d stick a pipe through the plate with a hole all the way across the column to support... And then this would be in the middle and it would sit up against, say, this is the column here. Now... You’d have this thing and then we’d put...on every column, which was 20 feet. Then we’d put a bar joist. One bar joyce in the back, one bar joyce in the front. And then deck it. And that would keep, you know, all the bolts and nuts and whatever welding rods, whatever that they were dropping from the top. This thing would...our guys that are working in the crux in the baskets and other stages caulking, they would be protected. So our gang, we did that. And that  was...on the...21st floor we put this in. And we had to jump it every ten floors. What we had there was another beam sticking out of the building with a ceiling jack that you would keep the back end secured and then you’d have a little platform that you’d put a wench with cable going out to the end. There was a shiv at the end of the beam and we’d hook it up to this here. There would be a little eye here and then we’d hook up the cables. We’d put a shackle in there and we’d put the... And we’d raise that whole thing with all the decking and... Everybody... We’d have... That would be a Saturday job. You would want to do it with the least amount of guys on the job. Or...well not at night but on Saturdays. And we’d get how many columns there was...14 columns...whatever it was, on whatever side of the building because it went all the way around. And we’d have all the guys together. Everybody would sit there. And we’d have one guy, sitting on... In the wench, there was a drill... We’d have a 3⁄4 inch drill and it would turn that wench... And you’d have another guy standing in front, making sure that that cable would wind perfect because if you had the cable jumping and stuff, it would get tangled up and you would go nowhere. So all nine guys or ten guys or how many guys we had there, we all had to be in synch. When Tommy would say, “Go up.” Everybody would hit the drill and Tommy would watch to make sure that one drill didn’t go faster than another. And the other guy would be there with a 2 by 4, making sure that that cable wound up exactly up next to the next turn. You know, all tight. Because when it came to the end, it couldn’t jump. Because if it jumped, the whole thing would jump. So you didn’t want that. So we would raise that thing and that’s our gang. We’d get guys from downstairs to help us on that because we didn’t have enough guys. And ahh... 16:17 [What else did you do like the safety back in those days?] You know, in those days... I’ll tell you what, Bucky. In those days... I’ve got a cute story for you. In those days, we weren’t wearing belts and stuff. We were working on the edge without belts. And...it came to the city’s attention. And they had this guy. We called him “Shut ‘em down Schultz.” A tough old guy. Charlie Schultz. [Somebody else...] You heard about him? [Yeah.] Shut ‘em Down Schultz. He was a son-of-a-b... He’d come on the job and he’d demand and saw that we were being...you know... Belts were not unheard of but very rare. And he came in there and he was ready to shut that job down. And everybody had couples...would say, “Oh God, we can’t do that.” So they went out and were buying belts like crazy. I mean, we had a shipment of belts coming in. And everybody’s looking... “I ain’t wearing this shit! This is going to... I’ll trip over it...” And everybody was just not receiving it well. But then they finally got in...realized that this job was going to shut down if they didn’t comply. They started wearing them. And I started wearing one...giggle...and in those days, they didn’t have the lanyards with the clips on and all that. We used to tie bowlines. Tie off where you’d have your belt and you tie off like that. So... One day, we’re up... I’m up there with this guy, Al Simcox, and this here boom... This is our horizontal boom. We brought that up there with the Chicago boom. The first jump was up to the 20...ahh... We jumped to the 21st floor. The first jump we made, we went from 21 to 31...ahh...37...and ahh... Oh, the last... That’s what it was. The last jump we made was to the 80-something story. So I’m there with Al Simcox and he’s going to weld on the column the connecting plate for this boom. How you connect... You put a big huge pin in there, a big five inch pin. And we’re welding it and... It was up in the structure and the structural guys had their deck decked off with planks. They called it a planked off deck, while they’re hanging iron two stories up. So...ahh...and they would double deck it. Two stories would be a deck and two  stories below would be a deck. So that way they can always jump and always have a deck that would never be open all the way down. And we got up there on the second deck and we had to go to the 81st story. That was decked off on the 80th. So we put a plank up to the parameter beam, to the outside beam there. Put a plank up there. We would shimmy up that plank, walk the iron out to the column and another guy would go up on top and lower the materials on on a hand line. We’d get our, me and Al Simcox, would clamp it down. And then he’d start welding it in solid. Well, I was his punk. I had to hand him rods. “Tie off,” he says. “Awe, f*ck. We gotta tie off?” “Yeah, tie off.” So I’m tied off and I was sitting there and he’s welding. He’s using up the rod and I’m getting bored. He’s welding and welding... And finally he says, “Get me some more rod!” I jump up right away. “You know you’re a punk. You gotta snap to all the time.” I jump up, walking down the iron, forgetting I’m tied off, get on the plank that goes down. I start running down the plank. The belt cinches up, you know, and catches me. I’m swinging out. All I can see is plank. I’m about this far off the deck. I’m hanging off the parameter beam on my...and all I can see is deck and Michigan Avenue, 80 floors down. I’m like a pendulum. Ahhhhhh! I’m hanging there...and I swung in and out so many times now, I’m hanging there. I can’t get my feet on there because I’m just not far enough down. Now I’m screaming to my other partner. “”Untie me – untie me!” He says, “I can’t. You’ve got the weight on there.” “Well cut the f*ckin’ thing!” So he cuts it and I fall down. A bunch of structural guys are standing there watching me. “Look at this tinkerbell mother f*cker for Christ sake.” LAUGHTER They stood there and they were laughing their asses off. So my name was Tinkerbell there for a little while. 20:50 And ahh...and then...we jumped that boom. That was the night... We put this on the top of the building. As you can see, we built this here thing...put this...ahh...guide tower to keep all the guide cables because that boom had all the guide cables holding it. It was a horizontal boom with a trolley on it. We put that one on. That day, we worked 36 hours straight, raising that boom because we brought it from the west side of the building, on the 81st floor, to the top – the 100th floor – on the south side of the building. And we used American Bridges crane to bring this whole thing over on that side, one thing. But we had to get everything prepared. [36 hours...] 36 hours straight we worked. Yeah. [So how did they pay you on that? How do you passed your 8 hours – you’re obviously going to get over time. ] We got double time. [Was it the same, all the way through?] Oh...we got double time all the way through it till the next starting time at 8 o’clock. And worked straight time through that day and then into double time again. [Wow.] No. As a matter of fact, I take that back. I think that we got double the whole 36 hours. It was a Saturday. We worked on Saturday through Sunday. But...ahh... We had one guy... 22:14 Roy Williams had to go somewhere. He was a steward or assistant steward at the time. He couldn’t make it, he had to do something. I forgot what. And so he calls Leo Quinn, one of our characters of our local...that you are going to be the steward on this thing for that night. Leo said that...ah...he was the only guy in the local to get three checks. There was pay day for him, a Friday. I guess it was pay day and he got paid that double time. And then they laid him off. So he got three checks that day. But anyway. 22:52 We got that thing in there and that was quite an exciting thing, to be on top of the building. I was getting coffee, I was an apprentice at the time so I had to get the coffee. And here’s what it looked like. That’s the Lake Point Tower sticking up there. Now, as you can see,  we were all up there in our bare shirts, I mean, bare skin. [So it was warm and cold.] It was warm up there. I go down stairs to get coffee. It was snowing. It was snowing under there. Flurries. And I froze my ass off and brought the coffee back up. And it was amazing. But ahh...yeah. Below it was snowing. It was unbelievable. 23:44 [So after that, what year did that get done?] ’68. Then ’69 it was finished. [It was kind of a building to start on. I mean, after that, did everything did everything seem like a letdown for a while or was that. I mean, that’s a pretty historic building.] By then, I had been into it so much and I just... I wanna be an ironworker and I just love to work and I knew this was for me. After this job was over, like I said, after this and this whole crew disbanded, and a lot of them went into... Some guys left but most of them went into the crews below that were still putting up skin, you know. Still putting up the curtain wall. And so that’s what I did. I got into the caulking gang because that paid scale. Me and Tully said “Shit, that’s great. I want to get scale.” So my partner and I, Jimmy Tully, were working on the sage for this Bobby Alverez, his name is. And he was the caulking foreman. So he shows us the ropes on how to start doing this caulking like I told you. So we’re on the stage. We’re caulking all the joints that we’re supposed to. And our stage is on the last bay of the building so one side is like this. The other side we’re hooked in with our stage into the beam that’s on the outside of the columns. We got these sky climbers on cables were run up and that was guiding us up. But the other side, because the building goes like this, you’re coming up. The stage wasn’t long enough so we got a big 2 by 4 to lay on on that stage. So we’re not digging into the building with the stage going into the building. The other end, we tied off with wire on the bottom of the stage with a huge 20 foot 2 by 4. It would rest on that end column that goes like this. As you’re going up and going up, of course the stage is getting closer to that end... And all that 2 by 4 is hanging out there. We’re caulking, me and Jim are caulking. It’s a beautiful day. But it’s windy. And as we’re going up, the winds... The winds that are up there are all different ways. Winds are constantly blowing on the top, different directions. You may be on the, let’s say, the 40th floor and the winds going south. When you get up to the 50th floor, they might be going north. You know? And the wind is just blowing all over the place. So as we’re going up, the wind comes up and blows our stage nearly perpendicular to the building, you know? We’re caulking and all of a sudden....Whoa...there’s a big deal, you know... I was looking at Jim, “The building’s going over!” We thought the building was falling...because we’re sitting on the stage and oh my God... And he came back in. Wham... Slams into the building and he says, “Oh shit.” Now...as we’re going down, we’re not paying attention... We’re worried about this and not paying attention. The cable used to wind up on the stage ran up...wind up and we had a little 55 gallon drum cut off to about six inches so the cable would roll in real nice. And now...it gets jammed into the sky climber itself. We can’t go up. We can’t go down. It’s jammed tight. The building is all glazed. It would be an open floor every three floors. Or every four floors. Anyway, we’re in between. We don’t know what to do. “Jim, what do we do?” “I don’t know. We’re going to have to break a window to get in.” “F*ck you. I’m not breaking a window! We’re on scale! You wanna loose scale for breaking a window?” I says, “Oh, man...what do we do?” He says, “Look. The next open window is up one floor, but down two floors...is another open window.” “Yeah.” He says, “We’ll slide down...” And we used to have ropes, 3⁄4 inch rope that was our safety line, independent of every... We just hang there. “Slide down the safety line and go into the building.” [Just with your bare hands...] Yeah, that makes sense. Ok. “But wait a minute, Jim. What if I slip?” He says, ”Your belt. Give me your belt.” He says, “We’ll tie you off.” Ok. We tie it off... And at that time, we...as we got farther into the  job, they got lanyards now. He clips off the lanyards and I start sliding down the rope. I get down one floor. I’m out... I’m tight. I says, “Jim...” I’m hanging there on the rope. I got my hands and my feet around the rope. “Jim, what do I do now? The lanyards stretched out!” “Awe, Jesus Christ. If I let it go, I’ll drop it and it might hit you in the hand or the head or something. I tell you what, I’m taking my lanyards and put it in there and tie it off. You can go.” Ok. He puts his lanyards in there and I slide down another floor. Still not close enough to the building. I said, “No luck yet.” He says, “Oh shit. I can’t throw out the noose now.” He says, “You’ve got all the Langiors. I’ll tie you up and you’ll go...” “Oh Christ,” I says. “I’ll tell ya what. The belt is up here on me. Everything is all stretched out. I’m hanging there. I says, “I’ll undo my belt and I’ll slide down...” I undo my belt...you know... let it go, slide down another half a floor. Go in... We’re home safe. Now Jim jumps on. And he just says, “F*ck that.” And he slides down and he pulls in. So we go in and tell Bobby what we did, the whole story. We tell him... “You carzy f*ckers... Why didn’t you break a window? You could have came in no problem. You goofy idiots. You could have hurt...” You know? 29:35 But it turns out that the two years that I was there, it was an extremely safe job. One guy was lost on the job. One guy died on that job... Compared to the First National Bank, which was going up at the same time, where they lost over 15 guys the whole time. We lost one guy and that was way down when it was even 10th floors up. One ironworker fell off the iron. But ever since... That was a fabulous safety record. So it was quite a unique job. It was my pride and joy. [Yeah, I can imagine. That was quite a work...] And it was just great. And like I said, I got to work on every aspect of it. Even the revolving doors. I helped put in the escalator siding and all the trim down there. It was unique. It was a great job. 30:28 And after this job, like I said, were you used to it? Yeah, I was used to it. I was anxious to get everything, you know, in the trades. I went to work for Lenny over at the Time/Life Building. And that was also a great job, a lot of fun. A lot of good work and we made a bundle of money there with a lot of overtime. And from there on, I went on to several other jobs. And I was working with Lenny...at...ahh . . . Chicago Mercantile Exchange on Jackson and Canal. The X building that looks like a little Hancock. [Right.] That was the Mercantile Exchange, when it came from the old digs to that one. [Yeah.] And...ahh... I was a steward over there. Lenny drug up and he went somewhere. Oh he did... ahh...I think he went out to O’Hare Field. So...I wound up taking over that job. And as things went on and progressed, I went on to be the superintendent of Tyler-Happach Glass Company there. It was a good gig to me. I rose up through the ranks there. And luck was with me and I wound up being a superintendent. And then...ahh...I...ahh... From there...ahh...I went to...ahh...another job after that was over. Oh God. I can’t remember that one. 32:07 Anyway, I got involved with union politics a little bit and...ahh... I ran for a trustee. I think it was ‘69 or ‘70, I believe it was. I didn’t get voted in, but I wound up running for a delegate to a convention in ‘67. And I did win that. I...wound up running for the executive board and I...ahh... [Checks phone] I was on the executive board and this was in 1978 I believe or...79. And ahh... I wound up having some changes in my life and my family life. And my wife and I decided that we wanted to leave Chicago and we moved to New Mexico. And then in 1980, we moved down to New Mexico and I started my own business down there doing rolling doors. It was successful for about three years. I had it for five years and it went under. Then I went back to work. Oh, I got a job at a sewage treatment plant as a mechanical supervisor,  mechanical foreman there. And I worked on that job for 2 years also. And ahh...wound up being the startup engineer over there and put in all the mechanical equipment down at the Albuquerque Sewage Treatment Plant. After that, I went to work for the ironworkers. I had taken a withdraw from Local 63 at that time because I was working on this job and I was destitute at the time. I was near bankruptcy through the business and I hmm...had to work. So I took a non-union job which I was a strong union guy at the time. You know... And I felt a little... Oh boy, I hate to do this, but I had to to support my family. So I took this job and worked as a non-union fitter or whatever you want to call it. A super...foreman for the mechanical end. And they had union ironworkers working at the job. And in New Mexico, union and non-union work on the same job. And I was embarrassed that I was carrying a union card and these guys are on the same job and I’m working non-union. So I felt really horrible about that so I took a withdrawal so I wouldn’t, what I would think was dishonoring the card. And ahh... I worked that job and when I was done, I pulled my withdrawal and went back to work with Local 495 in New Mexico. I kept my 63 card but I worked on permit with the 495 guys. I worked on the tallest building in New Mexico. 22 stories. So I did that...and hmm... Then my kids, we raised our kids down there and they wanted to go to college. And my older guy went to Aurora University. So...ahh... I couldn’t afford... By that time, all the union jobs were washed up and I was out and I found out at the time, that these guys all carried union cards but they worked non-union whenever they can. It was a matter of survival. They had to make money and it didn’t matter if they were union or not. They had them get a job wherever they could. So I was kind of saying...why did I ever take a withdrawal when it didn’t make any difference to any of these guys, you know? 36:00 So anyway, I’m on a the tallest building in New Mexico and...I’m working with these guys... It’s a whole different thing. It’s not like the Chicago unionism. Down there, I guess the bosses, the companies, everything. One day I’m saying, “Who’s the steward on the job?” “Well, I don’t know...” “I don’t know...” Nobody knew. I’m like, “What?” I called the hall and says, I knew the BA [business agent] or whatever. And I says, “Who is the steward on this job?” “Oh yeah, yeah. Tell Martinez to be the steward.” Ok. I go back. “Hey, Tony. You gotta be the steward on...” “I’m not going to be no f*ckin’ steward. I’m...no way. You can tell Ray to go f*ck himself.” Ray Ruiz was his name. I go back, “Ray, Martinez won’t...” “Ok. Well, tell what’s his name...the other guy...Lavato or whatever, he’s the steward.” “Louie, you’re... Ray says you’re the steward.” “Tell Ray I ain’t no f*ckin’ steward. F*ck you. I ain’t bein’ the steward.” I says, “Ok. “ I go...and I says, “Ray, these guys aren’t... None of them want to be the steward.” “Jerry, do me a favor. You be the steward.” I says, “I’m on paper. I’m a permit guy. How can you...” He says, “Do me a favor and do it. Don’t worry about it.” Ok. I’m a steward. So I go along on the job and one day, we had a night shift and a day shift. One day, the night shift smashes all these guys helmets and they break everything into the gang box and they broke this guy’s helmet. And the guy had an expensive helmet. He says... It has a welding shield. And he says, “Oh, wow... What am I going to do? I just paid so much for the last one.” I says, “What are you talking about. You give it to the boss and tell them to get you a new one.” “Oh, yeah? Good luck with that.” I said, “What’s with you guys. None of you guys want to be a steward. Why is that?” “Well, the steward is the first one to get laid off.” I says, “What?!?” He said, “Yeah, oh yeah.” “And what about all your shit?” “Yeah, we buy all our own stuff.” I says, “What?” I says, “Wait. Give me that hood.” So I go to the boss and I say, “Hey, you gotta buy a new hood for this guy.” “F*ck I do.” F*c k you don’t. You gotta buy ‘em a new hood.” “Who the f*ck are you?” he says, “I ain’t buying shit.” I says, “Listen, you guys signed a  contract...” and I had the bylaws with me. I said, “It says right here that you supply all safety equipment and our guys aren’t welding without a hood. You better buy one or else we’ll just do something about it.” He’s like, ok. So he buys the hood. And I says, “And by the way, get them gloves too. All these guys have holes in their gloves.” So he buys them gloves and he brings in... The guys almost fell to their knees. They couldn’t believe it. “How the f*ck did you do that?” I says, “Don’t you guys know the rules? Don’t you know to follow the...” “Nobody ever did that before.” I was a big hero then. A big hero in the union. I said, “What do you do, buy your own rods too?” hahahahaha . . . So I used to go to the union meetings and I’d get up on the floor and make suggestions. And they accepted me, even though I carried a local 63 book. And...ahh...it was amazing. So anyway, as my kids go to college, I realize that I can’t... Now the union jobs are all folded up and now I’m working for my old boss in the sewage treatment plant. He had some other things going and I was pulling up old gas station tanks. You know? They were gas station pumps, putting in fiber glass tanks now. We’re taking out the old steel ones so I was doing that all over the state. And now I realize that I’m...and I’m getting paid really poor wages, you know? $10/hour at the time. And I says, “Oh, man, what am I gonna do.” My kid wants to go to Aurora. Well, that’ s good. They can stay with grandma and grandpa. And they said, “Wait a minute.” I come back and I started working in the summers over here because I have one more kid still in high school. So I did that for about three years. [So you went back and forth between here and there, it was like seasonal work?] Right, exactly. I would come back for the winters because...ahh... I wanted to spend time with my kids. My other kid was playing soccer like crazy. And he would stay with my... And then... Oh, he would stay with my grandparents...my parents, his grandparents. So then I told Alice, “We’re going to have to move back.” I says, “We can’t make it down here. It’s just not...” With two kids in college, I gotta make some money and work was boomin’. So she says, “Yeah,” she agreed. We were tight as a family down there as compared to up here because we all had each other. My kids were into soccer big time. And then my wife... I started being a referee. My wife started playing. I started playing. On weekends, it was just soccer mania all weekend. We’d go to the kids games and they’d come to our games. They’d play year round and we’d play all we could and it was just a soccer family. Unbelievable. No vacations. We’d only go on tournaments. We’d been all over the west, Colorado, California, Arizona. Every Thanksgiving, we’d meet in Pheonix, all over the place. So we decided to make the move back. We come back. My younger kid goes to Southern Illinois University. 41:36 And I started working for MTH, my buddy Joe Harris runs MTH. And...I called him up and he put me on. I worked there for 15 years where I finished up my career there. And...ahh...I did several nice jobs with MTH. The last one of which I am proud of is the Beam. That was quite a job. [Yeah, tell me a little about that job.] The Bean, you know, you’ve been there. You’ve seen it. Beautiful. But...underneath the Bean...ahh...are two huge beams. Bucky, I would say they were...I think they were 3 foot, 4 foot 6 or something like that high and maybe 2 feet wide. I forget how many thousands of pounds these beams are that go 35 feet long. And they’re underneath that to support that beam. And that’s when... Joe was telling us one day... We were in the bar, drinking. He says, “Yeah.” Louis Sernie [spelling]who was one of the vice presidents. He says he’s got this job...and it’s a structure piece...of art. And he says, “It looks like a bean.” He saw pictures. He went out to California where they’re fabricating it. And he says, “We gonna do it.” Wow, that’s really unusual. He says, “Yeah, it’s really a neat job. So when I get out there...” I say, “Well, what’s this big...” I thought it was one piece that we’re going to just drop in, weld it up, hot air. He says, “No.” And he showed me. We’re  putting in these huge beams. I says, “What is this thing?” He says, “It’s... You won’t believe it,” he says. 200 and some odd plates of stainless steel. I says, “What? How are we going to put that together?” He says, “We’re going to weld it.” I says... [So you worked on the super structure of it...and on the...] We put in that and then... Once them beams were in, we got the base structure. They come out with the beginning pieces, you know? And we had a guy come from California that was a fabricator and he was also an artist by the way. A real nice guy. I forgot his name already, oh boy...and we were pretty close too. But anyway... We started putting this thing together and I was just amazed at this...this big... And of course they’re all covered with paper because its stainless steel, all highly polished. You know? So we put it all together...and we started. I got pictures. I got a big picture on my wall to start that thing. We had a little crane that picked up each piece and we started it. Then for some reason, Joe wanted me to run another job. So I left there for a while. Ran another job. But then I would come back on occasion. You know, when it got slow someplace else and I would work there. It was all these plates and I couldn’t imagine. We put the thing together... I left when it was half way done with all these plates. And inside, they got all these wires holding it all together. The important thing in putting that thing together is that everything is equally stressed. So what it was, there was going to be no waves or anything. So we put that thing together and there was just a tack on the inside we would put, just to hold it together. And then...ahh...after I left, I found out they were going to have to weld this whole thing. [Wow.] It turns out they welded, but they just put a little button tack every six inches or eight inches. And, ahh, we put the whole thing together and it’s all just tacked in. [Just on the inside?] No, it was on the outside. It was actually on the outside. Inside and outside. You had to do it on both sides. [Ok.] And...ahh... The mayor was hot and heavy to have that thing done for INAUDIBLE. [I remember that.] We remember that, yeah. [I do...] In fact, here’s a picture. Whew. So he says, “I don’t care, we want this thing...“ So we couldn’t weld it solid. They just left it all tacked up the first year it was on display. If you knew it would have little dots all over it. And of course next year we had to cover it up with year round welding. My brother worked on it, I worked on it, and my cousin Larry worked on it. Our names are on that list. 46:00 [How many people in your family now are in iron?] There’s Larry... As a matter of fact, for our 100th anniversary, we had that pin party at Navy Pier at the auditorium on the end? [Yeah.] My uncle got his 40th year pin that year. [I know his name.] Johnny, you just met him. I got my 35th. My brother got his 30th and my cousin Larry got his 25th. So there are four of us now. [Now you’ve got a nephew coming on...] He may be coming in... I don’t know. We’ll see what happens with that. But, yeah... It’s been a great career and a great bunch of guys and...ahh...I enjoyed it. It has been the pride of my life. Like I said, in the service I was a jet aircraft mechanic and I thought I was going to be one for the rest of my life when I got into that. And...ahh...of course when I got into this, I knew this is where I was going to stay. I’ve very proud of being part of building Chicago. 47:04 [What do you like about being an ironworker?] The best part, and I’ve said that since I was this old, until I say it at my last job... At the end day, when you walk away from whatever you did, you look at your sense of accomplishment. And you see what you’ve done. When I look at that Hancock, I am extremely proud of it. Anything we’ve done, we both... My wife just rolls her eyes every time we come downtown. We go out to Navy Pier. I was in charge of the...crystal garden was mine. That was my job. I had 60 guys working there at one time. 63 guys at the height. And that was my baby. And ahh... Every time you look at something like  that, you got a sense of pride that you’ve put something into the city. And in reality, you are part... Chicago is part of your blood, you know? Your blood is part of Chicago. It’s give and take. Made a very good living at it and...and ahh...I’m very proud of what we put into it. And...ahh...my boss, Joe Harris, he just texted me. He said, “I’m waiting.” He’s at the York Tavern now. [Ok.] We’ve done some jobs in this city, our company MTH...and did some fantastic work throughout the city. We’re very proud of what we did. I always admired Joe because he wasn’t afraid to tackle anything, no matter how absurd the job seemed or how far out of a reach it is. We would do it. And we worked at the tallest point to the lowest point, doing anything, anything at all. From the Bean to the Hancock. I mean... We... I don’t know if you ever noticed the...hmm...Spiegel Building that was on 335, or it is on 335 and 88. It’s now Sara Lee’s headquarters. We did that job. It was an amazing, amazing job. It was the most complicated job. We got five different types of curtain wall there. It was just... It was a gazillion parts and it was very difficult. And we’re proud of that. We’re proud of a lot of things. 49:36 Here’s another thing. We did a... years later, after the Hancock. We were doing... See, we’re taking out this piece of this mulliion. They had leaks in the Hancock so... We’re taking out the section of...of a...of a... mullions and behind there, we found out that there wasn’t some areas that were caulked properly, so I was all planed out, stripped down, re-caulked and we put these things back in. And we’re working on the House Stage which is a Cadillac. It’s enormous and it’s beautiful to work on because it’s real smooth. [Quite a bit of difference from 1968.] Yeah. But this is the house rig. [So you got to work on the Hancock twice?] Yeah. [Wow.] Years later, we came back and I did this repair work with my partner. And then we also did the... This was another one of our pride and joys. We did all that work on top of the...ahh...Chicago Title and Trust Building. [Oh yeah.] And there we are, we’re working on this here, on top. [So it was safe to work on the Title?] Yeah, Chicago Title, yeah. And my son was playing soccer for Aurora University so I took these pictures and they used it on their program brochure. [That’s great. Oh, that’s a good shot.] It’s got my Hancock in the background. 51:010 [You talked some about the union. You worked with the union too, and probably saw all the changes.] Yeah. [You probably have some good things to say about the union. Just say a little about that.] Yeah. When I came in, the local was run by a guy named Matt “Moon” Martin. [Yeah, he’s in this picture?] Yeah. And he ran this union with an iron... Well... Towards the end, I don’t know if you’d call him running the local. There was a woman here called Mrs. Kramer who actually did the hands-on running of the local and...the administrator, in a sense. But when I came in, he was the power house. And...ahh...in 1968, we came through changes. That’s when benefits were extremely important. In the old days, Moon used to come up to the podium and say, “Ah, yeah, we got your new contract. I gotcha a quarter for ya.” In other words, we got a 25 cent raise. Well, back in ‘68, that’s when things started changing and then the boom in Chicago, well, nation-wide, was just extraordinary. And the union changed because we had the younger guys coming in. They were looking towards better benefits and more retirement security and less of...ahh...corporate...ahh...owner of the companies... Less company involvement in what you’re going to do with your money and how you’re going to do it. And the unions were getting a change of... We were going through a change. And ahh... I was into the union very much so. I would be one of the rare apprentices that would actually get up on the floor during a meeting and ask either a question or make a statement and stuff like that. And I ran for office. I got into office...ahh...just before we moved to New Mexico for personal  reasons. And...ahh...ahh... helped form the union to what it is today. Today...guys got a nice package now whereas they have the apprenticeship...is there to put money into their survival. The apprenticeship is the most important thing for the unions, to make sure that you have trained product to put out there that is into safety, that’ll make the company money and yet keep job security going. And that...just...ahh... A good thing which today I don’t understand why the unions are losing all of their market share and all that. Because...I used to get into arguments with my cousins who were always “Yeah, you union guys. You ruin everything...” Well the stigma of the old Chicago type unions isn’t what it is today. We’ve got good hard young working...young kids that are working hard and trying to do the right thing and trying to build, whereas in the old days, there was always... You’d have your slugs...you know, and they were protected. Those are the days of the past. And today, it’s a good thing. I was proud to be a part of that. Unfortunately, I didn’t stick around here long enough because, like I said, I had personal issues to go through. We had a major change in our lives for 12 years. But...ahh...yes, the unions to me is what makes America. It is what made America. When you look at the history which Richie’s [Richard Rowe] has told you so much about, to me its baffling why there isn’t more. We should have a stronger base. I mean, you’ve got my nephew coming in. He would love to be a union man. He’s always looking at the union labels on things and always, you know. To me, that’s what we need more young kids doing. Corporate America has got too much of a strangle hold on the middle class today and I hate that. And that’s why I think the unions are good. And...ahh... 55:30 [Are there things the unions could to improve...?] They are doing. They are doing. They are doing. As a matter of fact, I read in the paper today, Bucky, about McCormick Place unions...are... making changes because they see that they need to get the competition from Orlando and Vegas back to Chicago here. I mean, you can’t do it by coming in here and saying, “Ah, union...we’re going to do it this way.” You’re going to say, “I’m union and we’re going to help you make money.” And to me, that’s what the union is basically for. They want to protect the rights of the workers and make sure they got a fair wage and a good living, but yet make that company money. I always stood proud and Joe Harris along with it... We did a job. We made the company some money...and we made ourselves a good living. So to me, that’s what union is all about. The middle class is what made this country great and the unions are part of the middle class. That’s what keeps us strong. It’s a different thing today. It’s hard to understand. I don’t understand it now. [Well, I’ve asked all the questions I was going to ask. Do you have any closing comments you want to make?] Just that...ahh...I’m looking forward that Chicago will continue to grow and be a great union town. I hope that people that are looking back at this whatever...if this winds up in the Library of Congress, looks back at this and says this is some of my roots. I hope it goes on too. We show by example what can be done. Chicago is one of the... And I’ve been all over the world. It is absolutely the greatest city on this planet. And that’s about it. [Thanks very much. It has been a pleasure.] END: 57:34