repository;interviewee;datebirth;dateinterview;text
MadisonCounty;Wendell McAfoos;1943;1918;Wendell McAfoos 1943 - 1918  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Wendell and Barb McAfoos Oral History Interview Meghan McNamara, Interviewer Alton, Illinois November 16, 2018 Meghan McNamara (MM): The following interview took place on November 16, 2018 at the home of Barb and Wendell McAfoos. This interview is on behalf of the Madison County Historical. Barb and Wendell, you want to tell me a little bit about when you were born, and how things were whenever you were in your youth? Wendell McAfoos (WM): Well, in my youth, and Barb's background is pretty similar to mine as well. But basically, we were a family where the father worked, the mother stayed home, and that was pretty common. Now we're talking about in the 1940s. I was born in '43, Barb was born in '44. But the fathers worked, the mothers stayed home, raised the kids. Our environment was really a neighborhood environment. One of my earliest memories of the neighborhood was bread and milk. Milk and bread was delivered to our door by the White's Milk Company, and of course they provided bread and rolls as well. But as part of that neighborhood scene as well, our refrigerator in the early days, in the '40s was not a refrigerator, it was an ice box. And ice was delivered as well by a horse drawn wagon. And they drove up and down the streets and you would go out, buy a block of ice, and my mother would get a block of ice, chip it up, put it in the ice box, and that's what kept things cool. It was not really a refrigerator, but it's part of that same era of having an ice box. In maintaining our yard, we had a push mower, one of those rotating wheels with multiple blades, and you just manually pushed. So you mowed your grass with a push mower, a manual sickle, there was no such thing as power tools, you know, in those days. And heating our home, our home and most all other homes in our area, which was a working- class neighborhood, all the homes in the '40s were heated by coal. And every home had a coal bin where the coal supplier would back up in to, or drive into your driveway, and then dump coal from the truck into the coal bin. And then of course, to maintain heat, a family member would shovel coal from the coal bin into the coal-fired furnace. In later years, the coal-fired furnaces were refined, and they became stoker coal furnaces, where there was an auger that would draw crushed coal into the burning pit of the furnace, and then that was in the early '50s. Then in the later '50s, oil became more popular for furnaces. So existing furnaces were converted to oil burners, and then gradually into the '60s, those furnaces were inverted into natural gas. So from the '40s to the '60s, you had coal-fired, and usually that meant that the heat was distributed on the ground floor, and there was no heat on the second floor of most bungalow type residences. But at any rate, there was no air conditioning in those years, in the '40s and '50s. That didn't come into the scene until mid to late '60s, before air conditioning became vogue. As well in the early years, our entertainment, family-wise, was basically by radio. So in the '40s to early '50s we listened to the radio. And there were programs like The Phantom, and Amos 'n' Andy, and there were usually thriller type programs. The whole family would sit around and listen to the radio. But in 1950, or the early '50s, television came to be. So of course, that was black and white television. My family was one of the later families to get a TV, so we used to go to the neighbor's house and watch television. The neighbors made 1  us stand behind their sofa. And we're talking about being a five, six, seven year old kid, you know, watching television, which was black and white, and there were only three channels. So clothes as well, of course my mom did all the maintenance of the clothes. We had a washing machine which was a ... What was it called, Barb? Barb McAfoos (BM): Ringer. WM: A ringer washer, and a manual wringer. But my mom would wash the clothes, clothes were hung on clotheslines to dry, and in the winter or rainy weather, then everybody had clotheslines strung in the basements in order to dry clothes. My mom, among all the other domestic duties, was ... There were no perma press that we called clothing- BM: Perma press, yeah. WM: ... perma press clothing. Most everything was cotton in those years, the '40s and '50s, so everything had to be ironed. And growing up, there were two things that strike me in my memory. In our kitchen, where I came from a large family of nine children, a large kitchen table, but our oven door was always open, and with the oven on to provide additional heat to the kitchen, but there was an ironing board in the kitchen, because my mother was always ironing clothes for all of the kids, my dad and all the kids. And growing up, I just thought it was natural to have an ironing board in the kitchen you know, like you might have a stove and an ice box and an ironing board. I mean, that was just the thing to expect. But life revolved around the neighborhood in the '40s and '50s, and everything to do with the neighborhood. The ... Go ahead. MM: I just wanted to have a question. You were born and raised here in Alton? WM: Yes. Born and raised in Alton. BM: Wendell was born at home. Isn't that right? WM: Yeah. And we grew up in the Milton area, which was Wood River Township. So we were unincorporated part of Alton. We became annexed into Alton in the late '50s. So we had a volunteer fire department, we had no streetlights, no sewers, the streets were oil and chat streets. And going back to the coal fired furnaces, everyone took their clinkers, that's the burned coal, they would take their clinkers out to the street and smash the clinkers up to use as aggregate to support the roads. But all the recreation in the neighborhood was in the neighborhood. All the kids played at the local school playgrounds. There were no organized sports in those years, and certainly no girl's organized sports. All the sports were neighborhood, local sports and they were all boys. Then looking at in those years as you go up from the '50s into the '60s, excuse me, automobiles. Automobiles were big, hokey machines. They were all stick shift transmissions in the 1940s and '50s, and the automatic transmissions didn't come into play until mid to late '60s. BM: They were all metal. No plastic. WM: Yeah. Automobiles were all metal, metal bumpers, you know, everything. In 1960, I took my driver’s test, driver’s ed class, and that was with a stick shift automobile. But no automatic transmissions, 2  and gasoline in that period of time, actually in the year 1961 when I graduated high school, a gallon of gasoline was 25 cents. In younger, earlier years, it was close to about 15 cents. And I remember also that cigarettes, because I was like a junior in high school in 1960, and started experimenting in smoking, and you could get a pack of cigarettes, and I remember it was Star Cigarettes we would buy for 10 cents a pack. And that was in 1960. MM: Where did you go to school at? WM: Went to elementary school at Milton School, which is on the corner of Milton Road and Fernwood, and went to junior high school at what was East Elementary School. And then Alton in those years, the '40s, the '50s, the '60s, actually the '50s forward, because Alton went through a school building and renovation program in the '50s, but there were all neighborhood elementary schools, a bunch of them. Then there were four middle schools. So it was East, West, North and Central. And Central was the black middle school, or junior high school. And during those years, it's interesting. I graduated in '61 as I had said, but all through the '50s, and the schools were desegregated in the '50s, I think somewhere around '55. But I never heard of segregation, never noticed it, realized it, didn't know what it was. I just grew up in an all-white elementary school, middle school. I played sports, I competed against all the other schools. When we went to Central or Central came to our school to compete, we competed, but I never thought anything about Central being all black. MM: It was just normal? WM: It is and was what it was, and never thought about it. BM: We really just, I mean, you really just didn't know. I mean, you didn't have things like water fountains with "white only" or "black only," things were never like that. And I know going to the shows, I think the Grand Theatre, the black kids always sat in the balcony. I don't know if they had to sit there or not, but I remember one time going and wanting to go up to the balcony, to sit in the balcony. And Gary, my brother, you know, said no, we're going to sit here. And Wendell was telling me that in the theater that he went to, that the black kids, what, they always sat on the side, Wendell? WM: That was the Uptown Theater and, no balcony, there were three sections. And there was a center section, which was always all white folks, the section on the right was always white folks, the section on the left was always black folks. And that's just where people sat. Never thought a thing about it. That's where people gravitated towards. And Barbara and I had this conversation about Alton High School, where there was one area at Alton High School, it was the corridor between the gymnasium and the main building, and all the black kids had their lockers in that area. And they were not assigned the lockers in that area. It was interesting that I was assigned, as a sophomore in high school, I was assigned to a locker in that corridor. And I went down there with all black kids, and I remember being approached by, and I'll never forget, Donald T. Davis, a black kid, played football who I knew, and he wanted to trade me lockers. His locker was inthe main corridor where all the white kids congregate. So that's what we did. We traded lockers, I spent three years up in the main corridor with all the white kids, and Donald T. took my locker and ... But that's what they did. People wanted to be with folks that they were comfortable with, and I never thought anything about it, never thought that that was a racist, or segregated kind of attitude, it's just what folks wanted. And so that's what we did. 3  BM: Also, I only remember one child in school who was mixed, and that was Charlie Smith. And he played the flute, and he sat next to me in the band. And he's the only person I ever knew of that came from a mixed family. I mean, you just ... well, it was hardly unheard of and black then, black kids were really black, I mean, they were dark. And, you know, you look at the black community now, and it's just not black anymore. WM: But back to the schools. All the years, elementary, junior high school and high school, again I graduated in '61, Barbara graduated in '62, there was no public school busing in Alton in those years. I walked to all of the schools that I went to. And when I got to Alton High, there was busing, but I noticed, it was interesting, because all the kids who came in on the buses to Alton High always wore their green FFA jackets. So those were the Future Farmers of America kids. And they were being bused in from Cottage Hills, Godfrey, and those rural area, and those were the only people being bused into schools. BM: They did have buses. They had buses from here on State Street to go to Alton High. I'm sure they did. WM: Well, most of the kids that I knew that came to school or that took buses, they were city buses. They weren't "public school" buses, you know, your yellow public school ... They were just city buses, and that's how ... You either walked to school, or you got a ride from a family member or if you were well-to-do, then somebody had a car, one of the kids would have a car. Of course, that would be elementary, but there was no public school corridor type busing. You walked to school. And so again, you know, that's what we did, and didn't think a thing about it. BM: What did we do for lunches? WM: Oh. That was the... Now for me, I thought that, you know, in high school, you know, we had the cafeteria food, and I thought that was absolutely great. For 35 cents you could get a plate lunch, and for 2 cents extra, you could get an extra carton of milk. And for another penny you could get a couple slices of bread, and I thought that was just fantastic you know, to be able to get a plate lunch and get that much food. Now again, in high school, the affluent kids like Barb, she drove to school, but they would go out to the Morning Star Drive-In, or to Block's Drive-In and get a Redbird Special, which would be a burger, fries and a soda, which you used to be able to get for a dollar. And that was in 1961. But I didn't have a car and didn't know anybody that had a car, and so I stayed and ate healthy in the cafeteria. BM: Well talking about eating, I was thinking about the fact that you know, women cooked. And when they cooked, they always, you know, one of the main ingredients of cooking during that early, you know, in the '40s and '50s and '60s was they always fried food. And Crisco was- WM: Crisco. BM: Crisco was a staple in everybody's house, and I know in going through my mother's things I found a grease strainer and you know, she would either cook bacon and fry bacon and she would always save that bacon grease and use it for flavoring green beans or something like that, and I mean, you just, you know, you just saved all of that stuff. And then as well, people saved things. They didn't just buy things and get tired of it and just throw it away. I mean, you used it up and you wore it out and you didn't usually get something else until you know, that whatever you had was gone. So it was just a completely different 4  philosophy. Hey, let's talk about our toys when we were little. MM: Can I interrupt before we go on to toys? We talked a little bit about the teachers, and the way that they had to dress. Was that- BM: Well, teachers, you're talking about teachers when I was teaching. MM: Oh, okay. I'm sorry. BM: Okay? That was when I was teaching back, you know what I mean, teachers always had to be, you know, as my ... as our teachers, men always wore suits. And then the women always wore, you know, dresses. They always had a dress. MM: Okay. We can get to that whenever we grow up. BM: But talking about segregation as well, I guess our classes probably became segregated when I was in about fourth grade, and there weren't a large proportion of black children there. But as the population and people moved and things like that, it got larger and larger. But you know, it was fine. Nobody had any problems with it at all. WM: Going back a little bit, there are a couple things about again, neighborhood. Everything revolved around the neighborhood. For example, there were no supermarkets in the '40s, '50s. There were grocery stores, and depending on how large of a neighborhood, there were multiple grocery stores, a little exaggeration but there was almost a grocery store on every corner. And that's where you did your shopping. And as time went on into the '60s, larger stores were created, but they weren't chain type stores. I remember there was the Davis Market, which was like a supermarket. It was up on the corner of Brown and Washington Avenue. Paul Davis owned it. In later years, Tri City Grocery Store became as a chain, popular. But there were neighborhood grocery stores all over town. Likewise, gas stations were all over town. BM: Service stations. WM: Service stations. BM: Yes, service stations. WM: Where basically they pumped gas, changed oil, fixed tires, and did all the maintenance. But they'd be one and two bay service stations. And the service stations really started going south in the '70s. And then by the '80s the chains, the convenient marts started developing, places like QT, et cetera. And then you didn't do service anymore because there were places like Jiffy Lube and everything became specialized. And whereas in the old days, cars were simple enough that anybody could work on a car. And that's what they did. BM: Oh, if you're talking about shopping, shopping changed as far as clothing and things like that, women sewed. I mean, all through our junior high school years, we used to wear these blouses and these skirts, you know, just a skirt, and we'd get these big ruffle petticoats that went underneath, which were 5  layers and layers and layers of different kinds of netting, and we'd always sew ribbon around the bottom. And we were doing, you know, watch American Bandstand and you could get those skirts going, and it was really, really fun. And so parents really, or mothers, women, sewed a lot of their children's clothes. Then you had the more affluent stores like downtown where Tony's is, that's where Vogue was. And Vogue was more of a high-class clothing store, and then of course there was Sears, the Sears and Sears Roebuck, and Snyder’s, and Montgomery Ward was very important at that time, you know, everybody did their catalog shopping. There were several shoe stores downtown, and I'll never forget one of them where you would go in and you would put your ... They had an X-ray machine. And you would go and you would stand in this X-ray machine, you'd put your feet in these little slots, and you could look down in these tubes, and went down and showed the bones in your feet and showed where your toes were and how close they were to the end of the shoe. And of course, that was highly dangerous, people had no idea. But there were, you know, it seems like now there's just a lot of bars and things like that downtown, but it was, Penny's and Ben Franklin, the five and dime stores, and I mean, it was just ... Downtown was just booming as far as shopping. And so you know, clothing stores have certainly changed. WM: Cafeterias. There were no cafeterias until we got to high school in the '60s. But- BM: We made our food to- WM: ...I remember in the elementary grades, you could always tell how affluent a family was by what the kids brought their lunches to school in. And of course, the more affluent children brought their lunches in a metal lunch box. The middle-class kids brought their lunches in brown paper bags. And then there was a group of kids like the McAfoos kids, who didn't have brown paper bags. Our mother would wrap our lunches in newspaper, and then tie it together with string. And we weren't the only ones, but we knew the pecking order, that even though those of us with our lunches wrapped in paper, those of us carrying brown paper bags, and- MM: There was quite a few of you though, wasn't there? WM: Oh, yeah. There were a lot of kids- MM: No, I mean McAfoos kids. WM: Oh, yeah. There was nine of us. There was nine. BM: Wendell was number six out of nine. And were all of them born at home? WM: No. Alan ... Number seven, eight and nine, no. Eight and nine were born in hospitals. BM: Okay. WM: So first of us- BM: Now, let's talk about toys as children. And as toys, we didn't really have any. We had very, very few things. I think I probably had a doll, and I know I had probably a tricycle or a bicycle and roller skates. We also had scooters, and sleds. Oh, and talking about sleds, we used to sleigh ride all the time. And 6  there were, I mean, if you'd have a snow, you'd have this deep snow, and they never cleaned the streets. And you know, we lived where my mother lives, it's right next to Sanborn Hill. Well, I mean, we'd sled on those streets for a week. And just, I mean, just up and down and up and down, and I mean, it was just wonderful. And of course now, you know, all the street cleaners come on and they salt everything and it just ruins it for sledding for kids. But as far as toys, everybody played outside. You played things like kick the can, hide and seek. I know my mother's house, none of the houses around it, the newer houses, were developed and so that was all fields. And everybody in the neighborhood used to come up in our yard and just absolutely play ball and just do everything. And that area was just really a location for the whole neighborhood kids to come in, and it was just so much fun. We used to make our toys a lot. Boxes were probably the best toy you could have. Wendell can tell you about being the Knight of Kotex because he used a Kotex box for his shield and because it was the biggest box you could get at a grocery store. But my sister made a dollhouse out of mine. We used to get boxes and put them together and get out places for us to sit, and we'd make space ships, we would use things like wooden spools and knobs and to drive our space ship and we'd be flying through space. We used our imaginations. And I was the youngest of three, and so well, we'd always play cowboys and Indians and I'd always have to be the one who would die. Or we'd play Tarzan and Jane, and I'd always have to be Cheetah. You know, it just didn't really work out too good. But I mean, it was just so much fun. Back then, if you played cowboys and Indians you could have a gun and holster and things like that, you know. You having a gun and holster on you today if you're a kid and you'll get shot. I mean, it's just ... We all had BB guns. I used to sit around and try to shoot the frogs out of my mother's lily pool, and we would practice target shooting in the back yard. We used to play Mumblety-peg, did you ever play Mumblety-peg? WM: Oh, yeah. BM: And, which is- WM: With pocket knives, yeah. BM: ...extremely dangerous. And you have a knife and you would hold it in between your two fingers and flip it so that it'd go down and stick it into the ground. And you would do it by somebody's feet. And they had to move their foot out to where the knife landed. And you'd do it like with this finger, this finger, each of the different fingers. And is that how it was, Wendell? WM: Yeah. You basically would throw the knife to the outside legs of your opponent to get them to ... and they had to stretch out to where you threw the knife until they spread far enough apart that they couldn't spread any further. So the winner would be the person that spread the furthest. BM: We always used all sorts of things to make toys. Popsicle sticks were absolutely wonderful. And then over in Hogg Hollow, there was a plastic factory that developed there, and they had all of these scrap pieces of plastic that they threw away behind their thing, and we would get that scrap plastic and make whips and lanterns and all sorts of things from it, I mean. WM: Go back to the Popsicle stick. Because this is something that all of the kids did. We would go to the local corner grocery store and of course, all the kids would get popsicles and then they'd throw the Popsicle sticks on the ground, until you just had piles and piles of Popsicle sticks mixed in with the 7  gravel. What we would do is we would go and reclaim the Popsicle sticks, and then clean them off, and build cabins and houses out of the Popsicle sticks. The people would be ... They'd have a conniption fit now thinking about you know, touching something that somebody had been eating off of, but we did that constantly. [crosstalk] The other thing is, this was again in the '40s and '50s, and so war movies about World War II, and still cowboys and Indians was popular because the Wild West was from the 1880s, '90s, but what we used to do, we would play War and to have badges on our shirts, the bottled soda, and of course in those days, the soda all came in recyclable bottles. And when you popped- BM: No cans. WM: No, no cans. When you'd pop the top, the caps off of the bottle of soda, it had cork on the inside liner of the cap. So what we would do is we would take the cork out of the cap. We would put the cap on the outside of our shirts and the cork on the inside and press them together, and then that would hold the bottle caps on your shirt. And of course, that would be your badges or your medals, pretending like you're in the military. But geezl, it was just great fun playing with bottle caps and Popsicle sticks and rocks. And BB guns and of course, it's almost terrifying to think of now, but you know, we used to have BB gun fights. My neighborhood was similar to Barb's neighborhood, and a lot of vacant land and vacant lots around. We used to chase each other around with BB guns, and you know, shoot each other in the butt, that sort of thing. BM: Another thing is that living over here on State Street, when we were little, in the wintertime, we would all go out to Fairmont. Fairmont of course, is the most beautiful part of Alton, and we would love to ride our bikes out there and everything. But in the wintertime, we would always go out and we would ice skate on Fairmont Pond. And I mean, we did that for years and years. And they would always build bonfires out there, and you go out and spend your Friday or Saturday nights out, you know, at Fairmont ice skating, and it was just so, so nice. But as far as, you were talking about sports and things? There weren't a lot of sports for girls. But we had what was called Fort Nightly. Did you go to Fort Nightly? WM: Those were the dances, yes. BM: Was that in ... We were in sixth grade, seventh grade, middle school? WM: Middle school. Junior high. BM: Junior high school. But the boys would select a girl, and you would go and you would take dance lessons, wouldn't you? Isn't that what it was? WM: Yeah. BM: Yeah, you learn ... go to dance lessons, dance classes. And then they would have a formal ball for you to go to. You'd dress up and you had your little booklet thing where you had to get your people who would sign you up for dances, and you wore white gloves and all that. And it was just, I mean it was just really, really classy and really nice. And then in- WM: You would sign your dance card- 8  BM: Yeah, sign your dance card. WM: ... who you were dancing with. BM: And then in junior high and high school, they also had sororities. And they had the Thetas, the Betas, and the Zetas, and they had three different sorority groups that you could you could ask to become part of. So I was a Zeta so, you know. But they had sororities in high school. Do you remember that? WM: I do. BM: And we also had socials. And when that was in, that started in elementary school too, wasn't it? WM: Mm-hmm. BM: School socials? WM: Yep. BM: Then another thing about that era is pets. Pets were, I mean, pets were outside. You know, they didn't have to be leashed, you just let your dog out, and he was just out. WM: Yep. If they liked it where they were, they'd come home at night. BM: That's true. We had an old hound dog by the name of Skipper. And Skipper really ran with a pack of dogs. And in the morning, he'd ... Skipper'd sleep inside at night, but in the morning, you'd look out the front of my mother's yard, and out there in the front yard would be probably five or six dogs all waiting for Skipper to come out. And he would go out and they'd just be gone for the day. And you know, I'm sure they were out to mischief because I was told he'd got shot by somebody. But anyway, they were out you know, out doing something. WM: The kids roamed like the animals, also. BM: That's true. Pets were outside, and- WM: My mother used to tell us, this would be like on the weekends, we would get and it might be on Saturday morning, and I'd want to run off with my buddy Jay [Tolley] or some other neighbor, and my mother ... It might be 9:00, 10:00, whatever in the morning, and she would say be home by dark. And we were off in the neighborhood or wherever we wanted to go, but we knew we had to be home by dark. So we just had the run of the neighborhood or the run of the town. MM: So Alton was pretty safe. WM: Oh, yeah. It was really safe. And I can't remember of any incidents of people abducting children or anything like that. I mean yeah, it was really pretty safe. Going back to the neighborhood the environment also was, and I've always been amazed at this, mailmen. Mailmen in the '40s, '50s, up to even the '60s, mailmen were actually men. And they were almost always veterans. And mail was delivered twice a day, seven days a week. And these guys that delivered mail, like I said they were all veterans, all out of the 9  military. And then over the years, that has declined until you've got just, almost anybody carrying mail. MM: Did you have telephones? WM: Oh, that's a good ... I had that on my list, actually. That was interesting. In the '40s up to the '50s we had a party line. And so you'd get on the phone and there might be somebody already on the phone. And I never did because I was a kid, but if my mother needed to talk, she'd know pretty much who was on the phone and she'd say, "This is Lucille. I need to make a call if you can wrap it up." But you shared a phone line, so there would be multiple people on one line. But the phones then of course became your rotary dial phones, and then you'd have your own phone line. But they were the heavy, black plastic, you know, they were plastic casings, but they were a durable phone. And as a matter of fact, Barb and I still have several of them in the basement, you know ...We don't use those phones any longer, but- BM: Well, we had ... Well, number one, if your electricity goes out, only a rotary phone will work. So we do have a rotary phone staying downstairs that plugged up and it does work, and I mean, it's working. Another thing is back ... Like diseases for children, I mean, you got everything. You got the mumps, you got the chicken pox, you got the whooping cough, you had the measles, you know. And everybody got everything, didn't they? WM: They did. BM: I think we were vaccinated for polio, though. But didn't Alan get polio? Did Alan get polio? WM: I think Alan did have polio. But that was another interesting I remember in our grade school going through and getting vaccinated for who knows what it was. But we'd stand in line and we would get these manual shots and you know, with the syringes, and you'd line up, there'd be a whole line of kids, they'd send the third grade up, and you know- MM: Who was giving these shots in school? WM: Well, it was interesting. This I don't know as fact, but I don't remember them ever changing the needles. You know, they just gave- BM: Oh, surely they did. WM: Maybe they did, but I just don't remember how they do it right now where they slip the thing out and everybody gets a clean shot. And stick that needle in and give a squirt, and they'd get the next kid, and so that's- BM: They couldn't do ... They couldn't have done that. WM: That's the way I remember it, but then I was only in the third grade. BM: Also at Alton High, the school curriculum was so much different than as to what it is now. I mean, they just taught ... They had an awful lot of vocational classes available for kids. And they don't have hardly anything now. They taught cosmetology classes, they taught welding, and you know, becoming a 10  mechanic, all sorts of things. And they don't offer those now. And the choices, and when I was going through school, I mean now, things have changed so much for women as far as their opportunities as to what they can do. And when I was going through school and going to college, I mean for the most part, women ... I mean, they were to be a teacher, a nurse, a secretary, or to work in a clothing store or something like that. They weren't out there, you know, becoming lawyers and doctors and I mean, very few of them were doing that. So things in that area in that timeframe had changed. Another thing was the development of credit cards. Because, I mean, during the '40s and '50s, they didn't have credit cards. WM: No. We grew up in a cash economy, in the '40s and the '50s. Everything was cash. BM: Or layaway, you'd use layaway. WM: Well, that ... Layaway became more popular in the '50s. But after World War II, even before, during and right after World War II, our economy was a cash economy. If you wanted to buy a car, you know, in the '60s a car might cost $2,500. Well what you did, you just saved until you could buy a car. Credit was introduced, and it really totally changed our economy. And I don't know if it changed it for the good or not, but- BM: That's why we didn't have anything. But we were so much happier. We talked to each other, and kids played. They played board games, they played cards, parents dealt with their children and interacted with them, and they didn't all sit on a phone and ignore each other. It's just ... I mean, it was so much better. WM: Well, in the spirit of the time also, if you had a game, you know, kids took care of their games and their toys and their bicycles because they worked for them. And they knew the value of those things. And it just seems like there is so much consumerism today that you know, if something doesn't work, you throw it out and you go get another one. And in our youth, you know, we couldn't do that because we couldn't afford it. BM: I know my brother always talks about the fact that he always got a new pair of jeans, you know, or pants or whatever it was, for school each year. And so my mom had gotten him a brand new pair of jeans, and we went up to my grandfather's farm, and my ... We always used to go up and we used to slide down the barn roof into a big pile of hay, and my brother would slide down this rope in his jeans and ripped a hole in them. And so my mother put a patch on those jeans, and he had to wear those jeans to school. And he was so embarrassed at having to wear those jeans with a patch on it, but Mom just said, we just can't afford to get you another pair. But anyway, I know that when Wendell and I got married, I was 27 years old. And I had graduated from college, I lived on my own in New York and California, I was quite capable and had a job. And I had several credit cards. But you know, when I got married, that I wasn't allowed to have a credit card in my name? It had to be in my husband's name. So it had to be in my husband's name. WM: Yeah. The credit card companies, that was a requirement, that was- BM: So, as far as the economy, that sure has changed. WM: Speaking of the economy and in the '50s, minimum wage was 75 cents an hour. And I worked as a 11  bagger in a Tom Boy grocery store, and this actually taught me my first lesson in capitalism. I worked in this Tom Boy grocery store. I worked for a guy who I just thought the world of. I loved working there. I worked an hour and a half every night after school, and then I worked all day on Saturdays, and I did that for two years, my junior and senior year in high school. And finally I got up to where I was making $1.25. That was in 1961, I was making $1.25 an hour. And I remember on Saturdays he used to sit down and he would figure out my hours and my rate, and then he would deduct from my pay, my Social Security, my FICA, et cetera, for federal taxes and all, and I don't recall what it was the net would be, but it was whatever your pay is after all your taxes. And when I was 35 years old, now this was when I was 16, 15 and 16 that I had this job. And so from there, I went on to work many places. Firestone Tire, Olin, Laclede Steel, on and on and on and on. And when I was 35 years old and in a career position at that time, I got my first report from Social Security of my earnings from my first job forward. And you know, I looked at that, and that son of a gun who was taking my 75 cents an hour and deducting all those federal fees out of it, he never filed any of that. That did not come up on any of my Social Security earnings, and that son of a gun who I thought so highly of... BM: Was stealing from him. WM: ... was stealing from my 75 cents an hour. I thought, oh my gosh. But I didn't realize it until I was 35 years of age and by that time, he was dead and gone. But- BM: Another thing that's really changed over the years is the development of fast food. And I mean, now so many women depend upon fast food for their kids and you know, instead of cooking a meal, a really good, balanced meal, it's just so much easier to go through McDonald's and something like that, so the development of fast foods has just really changed the home style, sitting around the table and eating, which we always used to do. And believe it or not, even my children, we all sat around the kitchen table in there and had dinner. And so I mean, we had a sit down meal every night. And I remember it was in probably, I was in school down at Carbondale, and so it was either '63 or '64, McDonald's had just sold its first millionth hamburger. MM: Wow. Did you go out to eat ever, as kids? WM: No. BM: Very rarely. WM: I don't think ... No. I don't think- BM: What did we as- WM: No. It was my family and ... As a matter of fact, we were poor. We fit right in that middle-class group, but we were poor. My dad was not a steady earner. He didn't have a wage job. He was a salesman. He had some issues after he came out of the military and never really held a full-time job after that. My mother used to cut hair. And on Saturday mornings, the front porch of our house would just be filled with kids in line waiting to get a haircut. And she also... BM: Made ceramics. 12  WM: ... taught ceramics. And so she had classes and she taught ceramics. But actually, my mom was probably the primary breadwinner of the family. And of course, that's why, you know, I had that job in high school. That was the first real money I ever earned, and I was able to go ... You mentioned layaway, I was able to go to downtown Alton to the [Barliff's] Clothier, and he was one of the first that did layaway, and I bought a leather jacket down there. I think I had it on layaway for about six months, and when I finally paid that off, I was so proud of that coat. I thought that was a real chick magnet at that time. But anyway, that was ... but going back to the environment and all, roads and highways, the roads in Wood River Township were all chat, oil and chat roads. But nationally, all of the roads in the '50s up to the early '60s were all two-lane roads. And it wasn't until General Eisenhower became President Eisenhower, but he was responsible for the beginning of the building of the interstate highways. But at any rate, prior to that, most of your highways were all two-lane highways. And Route 66 that's become sort of memorialized now in history, Route 66 originally was a two-lane highway running from Chicago to Los Angeles. And in 1961 right out of high school, I went to Oklahoma. It was the first time in my life I'd ever been outside of Illinois and Missouri, and Missouri being just across the river. But my friend and I took a job working construction in Oklahoma. And he had, at that time his dad had let him use a '53 Chevrolet, and we drove Route 66, you know, out to West Clinton, Oklahoma, west of Oklahoma City. But two-lane roads, you know. I remember where you used to, talk about how culture has changed, in Oklahoma and then also in the southern states, you could stop at a gas station, fill up your tank, and get a bottle of beer. So gas stations all sold beer. And of course, you were supposed to be 18 years of age at that time, and nobody checked IDs, you know, you'd just grab a couple beers, get back in the car, and head on down the road. But that has changed of course. BM: You know, Wendell says he was poor. Well, my parents weren't what you would call to be poor, but they certainly were not wealthy. I mean, my mother and father, I mean my dad used to refinish antique furniture, and in what was the family room of my mother's house, we used to have an antique shop. My dad used to collect and sell antiques. And many of them that he sold at that time actually ended up in the Smithsonian. But my mother worked. And so most women did not work, but my mother got a job when I was in seventh grade, and Montgomery Ward came to Alton, and she went in and interviewed for working at Montgomery Ward, and she worked there at that store, which had changed locations a couple of times, the day that they opened, and she finally retired the day that they closed. And so you know, we weren't, I mean my mother and father had three children. My father had several jobs, but he started his own personnel agency in St. Louis. And he was a good provider for our family, but my children's ... My parents sent all of us through school, and my brother through graduate school and medical school. And none of us came out owing a dime. And so there was a lot of priorities towards our education. Alton never did have a public swimming pool, but they had summer sports. And of course, summer sport opened when, in the '50s? WM: '50s. BM: '57, was that about it? WM: Mid '50s, yes. BM: And I know all of the kids, all of our friends were joining summer sport. And we just begged our parents to join summer sport back then. And you know, they just said no, they just couldn't afford to do it, 13  so. But it's a shame that Alton is a community that has never provided a public pool for the residents here, and I think it's because it has such a high minority population which is so sad, you know. MM: What were holidays like? BM: Well, we didn't ... You're talking about us going out to dinner and things like that? We really never did go out to dinner a lot as a family, it was just too expensive, but we would oftentimes have large dinners for Thanksgiving and Christmas. And as far as Christmas presents, we never got a huge amount of toys. I mean, now kids get toys that just ... I mean, they don't mean anything. They just open them and two weeks later they're tired of them, and they throw them away. Let me tell you, if you make your toys, you sure do appreciate them more. WM: In our family, again, it was a family of nine kids, but Christmas, you talk about holidays, let's say Christmas. We would get a gift. And it was always an article of clothing. So it would be something functional. One of us would get a pair of gloves, and somebody would get pajamas, you would get an article of clothing. What my dad used to do is just before Christmas, he would go out and he'd go to the markets in St. Louis. And he would come home and he would have under the tree, you know, a crate of oranges and he would have nuts, and I remember the one thing he used to get, and this was only ... I don't know why it was only at Christmas, but he would get dates. And we just loved those dates. But you know, it was all the fruit and the nuts and under the Christmas tree, and that was our Christmas. And decorating the Christmas tree, we- BM: We made our decorations. WM: Yes. We made decorations, and the older girls would do paper cutouts, you know, Christmas trees and bells and that sort of thing. BM: We used to take ... They used to get, was it milk bottle caps that were kind of they were like red... WM: Those aluminum... BM: ... and they were-... WM: Yeah. BM: ... like an aluminum metal, and we used to save those milk bottle caps, and you would... They were round, and you would cut to the center, and then you could twist it. And it was like a bell. WM: Shaped a bell. BM: And then you'd just string them up and hang them and so, oh, we used to make those all the time. WM: We would sit, and my mom used to pop popcorn. And that was our treat I mean, year-round, was popcorn. But for Christmas, we would do popcorn, and Mom would fix the needle and thread, and so we would thread through popcorn on a long string, and then we would hang that on the Christmas tree as well, a long strand of popcorn. 14  MM: Did you go to church? BM: Yes, we did go to church. We went to church all the time, actually. I had my Sunday school pin, where I had probably ten years of perfect attendance. So we went to the First Presbyterian Church in Alton. And you know, one thing I wanted to mention about was movies and how movies have changed. And you know, back in the '50s and '60s, I mean, everything was so wholesome. You know, you didn't have the vulgar and the vocabulary and the cursing and all of that. You didn't have the sex and you know, they talked about it, and they gave you the idea of romance and sex and things like that. But even Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz, when they were married, could never be in a bedroom scene where they were in the same bed. They were always in twin beds. And so everything back in that period of time was, if there was a bedroom scene, it was twin beds. And if they had a very intimate relationship or happening, instead what they would do is they would just kind of take the camera and drift off to the sunset and let you use your imagination. WM: Or go to the ocean scene where the waves are coming in, crashing on the rocks. BM: You know, it was just so wholesome. It's just show everything and say everything, it's just spoiling things. MM: Did you go to the movies a lot? BM: No, not really. Well, yes and no. We used to go to the movies almost every Saturday, and it cost a dime to go to the movies. MM: Was this the movies or the drive in? BM: No. Well, we went to the drive in. There were drive ins, but this was ... We used to, I mean, we would walk to the movies. When we were living on Brown Street, there was a movie theater down on Broadway that we used to go to, and then also we would walk to the Grand, and then my grandmother was seriously ill and she had a stroke, and we used to drive up to Whitehall every weekend to see her and just to get the kids out of the house, we would go to the movies. And so we'd go up there, pay, get our dime to go to the movies, and we'd also get a nickel to spend. And so my brother and sister used to always take my money, and they'd tell me that they would share their popcorn and stuff with me, but we'd take my money and they'd buy a comic book and the problem was that they'd never read it to me, and I couldn't read. So just really, they kind of took advantage of me. WM: The Uptown Theater, where we went, was 14 cents to get into the Uptown Theater. And my mom would give us 15 cents, you know, a nickel and a dime, and so that left a penny change. They had, there was what was called a Holiday sucker. It was like a caramel, a long caramel sucker, and it cost a nickel. Well, we only had a penny. And I wasn't the only one that would just have a penny. So it was sort of a free for all in the movie theater of all the little kids like myself, trying to get somebody else's penny. So you would beg, steal, wrestle it out of their hands, do whatever you could do, to get another four cents so you could buy a Holiday sucker. And that sucker would last all the way through the movie. BM: When we were little, didn't they use mills to use, to be on the public buses? I don't remember being on the bus very often, but I'm sure I probably was at some time. 15  WM: Tokens. BM: Well you had tokens, but didn't they have mills also? WM: I don't remember that. I never rode the buses. I couldn't afford it. BM: Well, a mill, have you ever seen a mill? It's a tenth of a cent. MM: I've never heard of it. BM: Yeah. They used to have mills. You want to talk about Metro and starting Metro? WM: Well, that's kind of a fairly modern- BM: It's 30 years. WM: Huh? You know, that was, well after childhood, and going to school, military, I started working for ConAgra, and then after 18 years with ConAgra, we parted ways, and we started a health club, Metro Sports. We were there 30 years, and actually, that was, when I look back over that, I mean all of that was pretty much uneventful. It was just event less? BM: Starting a business. WM: Yeah. BM: Well, everybody thought you were crazy. WM: Well, yeah, they may have been right. For us, you know, starting a business was a big risk. And we just went ahead, forged ahead. We bought what was the YMCA in Alton, which was a 40,000 square foot building which failed for a number of economic reasons, but it failed and was vacant for almost five years. And Barb and I at the time were in Minneapolis with ConAgra, the corporate work I did, but when I came home and had left the company, then we bought that building, renovated it, and ended up running it as a health club. You know, really, I don't know what else to say about that. We just worked every day and raised our kids, and sent them to school and got them married, and got old, and sold it. BM: Yeah. That's pretty much it. MM: So we also talked a little bit about some of the stores in Alton, none of them that I recognize anymore. So do you want to talk a little bit about just how Alton, maybe not even just the stores, but the industry side of it as well, has changed, you know, since you- BM: Well, you know, Alton had an opportunity to be the, what was it, the capital of Illinois? State capital? WM: Mm-hmm. BM: But they chose to be a railroad hub instead, and Springfield got it? How did that happen Wendell, 16  do you know-? WM: I don't remember the details of that. But actually, the state house circle was the site that they had chosen, you know, the state capital. And we're talking about something going back into the early 1800s. But basically, going back to the history of industry in Alton, Alton was a strong, bustling industrial and riverboat trading community. There was a lot of trading coming off of the Illinois, Mississippi River, and Alton was sort of the hub for that commercial industry. And Alton developed a number of industries, you know, going back to the tannery, which puts all of the cattle, livestock that was slaughtered in the area, then they would bring the skins to Alton and the tannery was here, and Brown Shoe Company had a plant here in Alton. There was the Vinegar Works because of Brussels, Hardin, Calhoun County basically, and Carrollton, [Eldrin], and you know, the vineyard, or not vineyard, but the orchard areas, hauled apples into Alton and the Vinegar Works was down there, so it was a major industry in Alton. There was the Alton Box Board, there was Laclede Steel, there was ... Illinois Glass became Owens Illinois Glass, became Owens Brockway, blah blah blah, you know, major glass producer in the world. It wasn't Alton, but East Alton, Wood River, Olin Mathieson during those years from an industrial standpoint, grew to where there were just thousands of employees at Olin Mathieson. BM: Who owned our house, the [Tiska] house? WM: The Levises. BM: Yeah. WM: Yeah. BM: And they were from where, the Box Board? WM: No, that was Illinois Glass. The Levises were the glass producing family. BM: Did you know that? The house that you lived in. WM: So what happened was, all of these industries after World War II, thrived. Alton in the early '50s had a population of near 50,000 people. In the early '70s, a number of things happened. There was a struggle with union power. All of these plants and industries in the community were unions. The union, or the companies, started moving their plants out of the area because of the union wages. And also competition. These plants, like Olin, Owens Illinois, the Box Board, these were all plants that started in the late 1800s to early 1900s, so by the '50s, '60s, '70s, the plants and the equipment were getting old. So the companies, it was cheaper for them to reinvest to communities or you know, places like Mississippi and other southern states that had Right to Work rules so they didn't have to pay the union wages. So industry just started grinding to a halt, and then at that same time, there were some socioeconomic issues. We had developed a larger, because of the industry and the jobs, we had developed a larger minority population than what had originally existed, so- BM: The development of projects? WM: So by the mid '60s, and particularly around 1968, then we started having a lot of racial strife in 17  town. Now bear in mind, I didn't even know there was a race problem. I never thought in terms of anything racial. But then again, I wasn't black. But by 1968, you know, the crap started hitting the fan, and we had a lot of racial strife in the late '60s and early '70s. A lot of demonstrating. There weren't really any riots as such, but there was a whole rash of firebombings in Alton. That changed the community. But the other thing that changed Alton, that changed our community, was in the mid '50s when desegregation became the law, there was white flight out of Alton. So the white middle class started moving to Godfrey, Brighton, Bethalto, moving out of Alton where there were the black people. And so that white flight actually has continued and continues on to this day. There's a young generation of people your age, for example, that had good education, good jobs, and rather than staying in Alton and grow their families, they chose to pack up and go to Edwardsville, Glen Carbon, and the more affluent areas around Edwardsville, you know, the county seat, Madison County seat, so that white flight continues today. So we've gone from a population of about 48,000 people in some period in the '50s, to where right now we are at about 27,000. And Godfrey, which had basically a nonexistent population because they were an unincorporated rural area, so basically in the '50s they had no population, to where today, well, say no population, Alton 48,000, Godfrey today is somewhere in the area of 18,000 people and Alton, 27,000. So, and those folks that moved to Godfrey are basically all white. And good, bad or indifferent, that's what happened. So there was that industrial decline, and then the racial exodus, you know, the white flight from Alton due to the desegregation, has really hurt the community. And the community is still struggling to ... Back in the day, again, after World War II, everybody owned their home. There were some neighborhoods in Alton like in the Wood River Township, the Milton area, that was unincorporated where I grew up, we had no streetlights, we had a volunteer police department, we had no paved roads. But you know, times have changed, and we now have those amenities. But in those early years, not having the amenities, it just seemed like folks were really pretty happy. Maybe dumb, naïve, whatever, but everybody owned their homes in those years, in the city, in the unincorporated areas. Now, moving from 1950-ish, when everybody owned their homes and lived you know, happily and stupidly or whatever, you move forward to where we are in 2018, and in the city of Alton, the housing in Alton right now is 50% rental property. So only half, or fewer than half of the people in this community own their own homes. And the others don't. And that shows in the appearance of the community. People take pride in home ownership, and they'll take care of their homes. Renters just don't, and this isn't faulting renters, it's just ... you know, it's a fact. It is what it is. And you have a community now where only half of the people own their homes to where 50 years ago, everybody owned their homes. That's a big transition, and not a good transition. MM: We have about ten minutes left. Barb, did you want to talk about teaching at all, or is there anything else that you guys wanted to talk about to kind of wrap things up? BM: I think I pretty much ... Teaching, no. I mean, teaching has changed a lot, I think, from the time I was in school, but, you know- MM: What grade did you teach in? BM: Well, the first year that taught, I taught at West Junior High School. And I taught ninth grade biology. And it was just a wonderful, wonderful group of kids. I mean, all of them, those kids, they were just some of the brightest kids around. And many of them have become very successful. But the problem was my mother's house was located right next to West Junior. And so here I was, 22 or 23 years old, well 18  after I graduated from college, I went out to L.A. and I lived in L.A. for a while, but when I came back, I got my job at West and taught biology there. And the problem was, here I was young, and probably about 80 pounds lighter than what I am and looked pretty good, and here I was teaching all these young kids, these ninth grade boys. Or... yeah, they were ninth graders at that time, and girls. And they were always coming over to my mother's house. And this was, you know, football games, they'd come knock on my door. And this was not good. And I just thought, I do not want this happening. And so I left my job at West Junior and I went and I taught over in Kirkwood, at Nipher Junior High School. And then I thought, you know, things here, I've tried the West Coast and other things here, and the Midwest isn't working out for me, so then I decided I was going to New York. And I went and taught school in New York for two years. So then I came back and got a job at Pattonville. I was there for 13 years, and Wendell and I went to Minneapolis, and I got to be a nice young stay at home mother for a couple of years, and then I came back and taught a year at University City. And that was just a little too rough for me, and so then I had two job offers. One was at Parkway and the other was at Riverview Gardens. And I just preferred teaching real kids instead of snobby little kids, and I took the job at Riverview Gardens. And so I was there until I retired. MM: You want to talk about the dance studio at all? BM: I started the ... Well, yes. I started Showtime Productions. I did it as part of the programming for Metro Sports. We had a dance school that was at Metro prior to that and they relocated, and so in order to keep the programming going for Metro Sports, I started our own dance school, Showtime Productions, and became the largest dance school in the Alton and Godfrey area. And after retirement, my daughter [Meghan] is taking it over and it's nice to see it growing and being so successful. MM: Did you know anything about dance when- BM: I don't know anything now about dance. The only thing I know is how to run a business, and I guess I did it all right. MM: I guess so. WM: When Barbara and I came out of high school, there was employment opportunities everywhere. There was never a question about you know, if you could get a job. The question always was, where do you want to go to work. Gradually, that changed, and the job opportunities became less and less until, actually, up until just a couple of years ago. Now with the influx with all of the warehouses in Alton, now these are not high paying jobs, they're low skilled jobs, but there are thousands of them. And Amazon is leading the way with a salary of $15 an hour. They're the highest paid of the warehouse locations. But Madison County has become a hub of warehouse distribution, mainly because of the highways out here, 270, 70, and 63 into Missouri and all, so close to 55, and what's the other one. But at any rate, but the jobs that are here today are ... There are more jobs available, so employment is sort of booming, but they're low income jobs, whereas in the past, with the steel mill in Owens, Illinois, and Olin, those offered more skilled employment, which there is very little of now. MM: I do have one last question. Is there anything that's the same? Is there any place that's still open? Is there anything that has not changed? 19  WM: I tell Barbara, and I think about it all the time. There is a bar and restaurant out in Bethalto called The 140. MM: Geno's? WM: Geno's 140 Club. And again, early '60s, '61, '62, I worked for my brother in the gas station, and we would go to Gino's and get ... This would be, we would be in our grease monkey attire, and smelly and kerosene and all, and that's what you cleaned yourself with. But we would go to Gino's and get a steak dinner, T-bone steak and fries for $2. MM: The price changed. WM: And the prices are... Geno's is still there, and they advertise, you know, being there since 19, beginning, whatever, a long time. But yeah. Geno's is still there, and that's one of the few places that, me thinking about it, I mentioned it to you going up through Grafton, you know, when we were dating. There was a bar up in Grafton called Lone Star, and it is still there. But- BM: Well, until a few years ago, I'd probably say my mother's house. But it's changed now. You know, one thing that we don't have that I really am disappointed to see that it's kind of left the area, and that's the Alton Water Ski Club. When I was in my 20s and when I was in college, I wanted to learn how to water ski, and I went down and wanted to join the ski club, and my mother was so upset for me being on the river and she was so concerned, that I would get hurt or something would happen. And I came home from school and I told her I was going to go down to the ski club, and she says, "You're not driving the car down there. You're not going to take the car and go down there." Because they were having ... I'd called the Telegraph to find out how to contact somebody from them, and they were having a meeting at the ... well it was a bar down there on the river, what was that, the Cave, was it called the Cave? WM: Clifton Terrace Cave. BM: Whatever it was. And she says, you're not going to drive the car down to some bar. WM: Actually, it was the Clifton Hotel. BM: And so I said okay. So I called a cab and went down there. And I went down and met the most wonderful group of people. There were kids from St. Louis and from Alton and from Godfrey, and I joined the ski club, and I probably had some of the best times of my life down there. We skied. I learned to ski. I skied in shows, I learned to fly the kite, I did trick skis, I, you know, was top person on pyramids, I mean, it was just like being Gidget on the Mississippi. It was just great. And you know, I just see that the old clubhouse down there is for sale, and you know, they don't dredge that area of the Mississippi where we used to ski all the time, and so it's just so shallow and boats can't really be there. And it's just sad to see it gone. MM: Well, I think we're out of time. Thank you so much for letting me interview you guys. It was interesting. BM: Well, thank you for asking us. 20 
MadisonCounty;Hal Patton;1968;2018;  Hal Patton 1968 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Hal Patton Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer February 27, 2018 Steve Hansen (SH): Just, just um to recap what, what we'll do is uh, I'll have the recording transcribed, you'll get a chance to read the transcription, edit it in any way you want, and add, subtract. We will do so with the digital recording at the same time [This is inaccurate, Madison Historical does not edit the audio for an oral history]. When you then approve it, we'll then load it up on the website and it will be in the archives and available for people who listen to, to study, to use in their research. Hal Patton (HP): That's fantastic SH: Madison County. So we've, we've, we've got about, I think thirty oral histories up so far. Uh, and we're trying to do at least ten a year, or fifteen a year depending upon how many students we can get. HP: Sure, I love the old stories. I love listening to Bill Haine, the person I am running for his seat. If you've ever heard a Bill Haine's story, you know, he's just, he's fascinating how many things he was connected to and who he knows and how he connects it to American history. Ben Dickman was really good too. SH: Well, so today is February 27, 2018. We're talking with a, with Hal Patton. So Hal, tell me a little bit about, about your background. (01:13) HP: Sure, I was born here in Edwardsville and SH: ...closer to, um... HP: ...sure. June 3, 1968. And lived in the Leclaire lake area for about a year and that's where my family lived when I was born but we moved, um, to Grand View subdivision which was a relatively new subdivision in town when I was about a year and a half old and that really, I think, led a lot to the person I am today. Met a lot great people in Grand View, had an opportunity to, as I think one of the important things is to have a woods near by to go play in, a creek to get muddy in. We have some very influential people in Grand View for being a small subdivision. Former Mayor of Edwardsville Gary Niebur grew up down the street and he was mayor for twenty years so I think he was an influence that I met there. But um, met three of my best friends that I still have close friendships today and they're in different professions. One's a medical doctor and the other two are carpenters. But we still hangout with each other and just always remember the opportunities that Edwardsville provided whether it was little league, or whether it was a great parochial school that I attended or just different, different things that made you, made you feel like you were safe. You know when I was a youngster, just like we try to push today with public safety, I want to make sure that the families have that same opportunity that I had when I was little. To get on my bike and be told I had to be back in two hours. I didn't have to be told where I was going, you know, and I think that's a neat thing about Edwardsville and the small town that we still had 1  in, in those seventies and eighties. But I am hoping that parents can still enjoy that today. So that's a little bit about my background. I did attend Ed O. Nelson elementary school and went to St. Mary's grade school as well before coming back to the junior high and graduated from Edwardsville Senior High in 1986. (03:13) SH: Did, did, um you say you, you grew up and got to ride your bike all around town. Was Edwardsville a fairly small town in the sixties? (03:26) HP: I think there was maybe 12,000 in town. 12,000 to 15,000 seems to be what I remember the entry signs and that would've been in the late seventies and early eighties. One of my stories, one of my close friends that I mentioned earlier, we would leave the house and he was known to wander way worse than. He would be out all day at times and when he was young his mom clipped a clothespin, not a clothes pin but a safety pin, excuse me, to his shirt and said my name is ... and if found please call. SH: [laughs] HP: [chuckles] And out he would go. So, I think that's a sign of pretty safe community. Pretty neat thing to grow up under that type of freedom and those opportunities. So we're, we did a lot of exploring. Whether it be the old railroad tracks or the Legion Golf Course or visiting the new subdivisions so we could hopefully pick up some wood that we could use for out next treehouse or fort down in the woods. But uh, lot of fun growing up under those circumstances and again the city, you know, had a good park system. It had little league and the basketball leagues, so enough... (04:32) SH: [inaudible] and safety is one of the things that you felt safe going up as a child and in Edwardsville and Edwardsville's reputation for being safe today. But how else would you contrast and compare Edwardsville then to how it is now? (04:52) HP: Well, I think the focus we have on education, having SIU in town. I remember some of my neighbors, that I enjoyed playing with the kids, their parents were instructors out at SIU and unfortunately that meant that sometimes they would move because the parent would get another offer from another university. But um, I knew that, um that level, the university education was important to the community. The school district itself, we were very competitive academically and very competitive in sports and extracurriculars back when I grew up. Which is similar to today but I think even more so. I think the school has grown in its reputation and its prestige, um both Edwardsville High School and SIU. I don't think there's, there's really a limit on, on that positive energy that that brings when you have a great school district and great opportunity to get your secondary education in the same town that you grew up in. That's what my son is doing now and he literally has told me, he said, "Dad I love Edwardsville why would I leave?" and I can go out to SIU and feel great about getting the next level of education that I need for my career. So, those are, those are realities, we always push that. You know, Edwardsville always said, "We want to be safe, we want variety of good education, and um we want to be good neighbors." I have noticed that as I have traveled around this country. I spent four years down in Louisiana getting a biology degree at Centenary College and then I went up to Minnesota for dental school for four years, no offense to SIU's program, but I needed to be away somewhere where I could study [chuckle] and not be pestered by [chuckles] the temptations of my friends. But I thought the great white north in Minneapolis would be a good place for that. But, you know the, the um, the fact that, you know, when I went to those 2  areas. The South is supposed to be known as being, you know, super social and super friendly, but they didn't even compare to the people that I remember from Edwardsville and our approach to new neighbors and our approach to people that we meet in town. We're a place where you, you still hold the door for people and you do it because that is the way you were raised and you enjoy that, um, feeling helping others, you know, whether it be um, a community project or something at the church. We have tremendous apt for volunteerism and I think the school district continues to push that and teach that. So, when you see all of the different special parks, the watershed, the Children's Museum, um Stephenson House, or, you know, you even take that to our little league coaches and soccer program, the YMCA soccer program. Tremendous amount of volunteerism and tremendous amount of community spirit, and um, I didn't see that, and I really don't see that as much as when I traveled to the other areas in the country as I see here. They're some areas that may be close, and maybe I missing, but I think we have something special here in regards to the... (07:51) SH: Has, has the sense of community, um, changed at all with the growth and the population, you think? (08:08) HP: I haven't really noticed it as much I think what we've done is we've encouraged the people that do move in, to have that same attitude, that same spirit of, of community and volunteerism and keeping the community safe. You know we talk about the school district getting bigger, um and that bringing in potential challenges. But I remember early on, saying, yeah we have 7,500 students at our school but that means we have 15,000 eyes and 15,000 ears. And we need to let them know what it's like to be a member of this community and they need to speak up when they see something that offends them and they need to let others adults know, you know, there is something that scares them that we need to do better. So, we have grown. I go to restaurants now thinking that, oh man I don't go in there thinking that I don't go in there because I am going to see 100 people that I know and, of the 100 I may only know three or four. You know, there's been so much new growth and visitors coming in. Uh but, there's other, other circles that you hang in and again it's probably those volunteerism circles where you end up doing a lot with the Rotary and you see members of the Rotary that you've been volunteering with for over twenty years. (09:11) SH: So what, what gives that community its, its sense of itself? Mentions school are important, you said parks, uh, and um organizations like Rotary, the YMCA, all kind of help form a sense of who we are, of, of a community. HP: Sure SH: Are there other, are there other institutions that, that kind of help shape that and hold us together? (09:50) HP: Sure, I mean the, the churches. You know, all, all these special things we have here they're not amenities that the city provides. You know, these are amenities that volunteer groups, um passionate parents, you know, people that grew up with this as part of their expectation or desire to have. They've kept these things going. You know, whether it be the Bonifest, you know, or the Apple-fest, or there's, there's just, Habitat for Humanity. There's countless opportunities for individuals in this community to give back. And I think when you, when you give something and you get something back you're hooked. 3  You know, you've participated in a system that makes you feel good because you've volunteered and then in return you look around and say, wow, we all have done this. It's, it's an all-in situation and I think people that'll move here, they get, they get trapped into that. They, they figure out they're going to participate. Junior service for example, you know what a fantastic organization that um, provides money for playgrounds and um money for special programs for kids that don't have the opportunities that some others might. So, it's, if you live in this community and you don't step it up, I think you feel like there's some pressure on ya. I need to, I need to do something to make this community what it is or make it whole. And a lot of people have done that and we're, we're the beneficiaries, we all are. (11:04) SH: Some people have argued that, that Edwardsville has moved from a small town to a kind of commuter bedroom suburb. I don't know if that's true or not. What is your take? (11:34) HP: Well I know that when, when I was growing up we were known as a bedroom community. Meaning that most people worked over in St. Louis or worked at Scott Air Force Base, or someplace other than Edwardsville. And we have definitely changed that. Um, I've been fortunate, you know, to be here for fifty years. I wish, I hope I can see what it looks like in thirty and forty years because we have so much opportunity and, and moving forward but still retaining the things that we all like about Edwardsville. Um, but we're no longer a bedroom community because we have over 40,000 people that work in Edwardsville every day. So, if we have a population of 26,000 now but 40,000 come here to work, we're not all leaving. There's quite a few people employed by the university, by Madison County government, but we have over 6,000 down at the Enterprise Zones working with World Wide Technology or Amazon. We added some headquarters with Prairie Farms and Scott Credit Union, so, 40,000 people working here, we have about 45,000 um, students at different levels from the school district to um, I need to correct that, we have about 25,000 students from the university to Lewis and Clark to district 7 to our parochial schools. So, that's a tremendous uh day time number. Edwardsville is pretty dynamic during the day and, and now I think people are starting to visit here more often for the night life whether they be our good restaurants uh coming to the Wildey Theater, events out at SIU, or sporting events for the school district. We've seen a steady increase, more than steady, about a 6% increase in sales tax revenue coming in every year um just because of the attractive businesses that we've um been able to put in place and support. But uh it's changed certainty from when I grew up but I don't think it has lost its charm or its character. (13:25) SH: Yeah, I think, I think that's, that's something that people will wanna study. How is it that some communities um, change and they do lose their character. They, they become very, um maybe bland uh, because they're all commuters and it's just a bedroom community. But Edwardsville has, does have this, this character about it and uh, how we have been able to hold on to that is something that, that's worth exploring and to study. (14:11) HP: Yeah, cause um there's a lot of pride in our surrounding communities, I've heard wonderful things about East St. Louis, you know, fifty years ago, it was the place to be, the place to have a business. Granite City, great, you know, jobs there at one point and the school district had some of the best performing extracurricular teams, you know. Now, the, the answer to both of those places is you have to retain your people. If you want to retain the attitude and the, the character and the quality of your community you need to keep those people in. And have the amenities, have the nice subdivision housing choices, um have, you know, good restaurants and, and good job opportunities to have them stay. If, if 4  you just raise them here and they all leave you kind of lose that feel. And I think, I've seen some of that in my dental practice where we have tremendous number of people living up on the bluffs that used to live down in the industrial areas and now they've come up here for housing and the quality of the schools and the safety. So, we better keep those three things, you know, the good infrastructure, quality schools, and uh the safety. Uh if we don't keep those three things strong then we'll see a, an exodus or a flight and then I think the charm and the character uh, could go with it because people just, you know, have, have come to a level of expectation and they, they don't mind participating in that and producing that. So...(15:18) SH: How did you decide to become a dentist? (15:36) HP: You know what, growing up I played a lot, my, my father played a lot of golf and he encouraged me to play golf with him and I enjoyed it. Um, met a lot of, um different individuals at those golf courses but several of my friends um had parents who were in dentistry. So I was able to observe them, um literally going through their offices and kind of checking things out. Um, I had an unfortunate incident when I was about 10 years old, that I was hit in the mouth with a baseball bat in a, in a corner lot game. We were just playing in our subdivision and uh, I accidentally got hit in the mouth with the bat. So I went to the dentist quite a bit for a stretch there and it just kind of caught that this was a pretty neat profession, something I'd like to do to help people overcome fear and um, be, you know, attention to detail. I like, I like the detail and the artistic aspects of dentistry as well. So, my sister kind of capped it off for me, she went to Carbondale, um SIU Carbondale for, um, a hygiene degree, she's a dental hygienist. So, she went um there, she’s four years older than I am so that kind of really solidified it. I went away to school thinking I was gonna pre-med or pre-dent and um, that's what my biology degree was for and it just so happened that the dentistry was more appealing. (16:36) SH: And your, you, did you always think you'd come back to Edwardsville and set up a practice? (16:56) HP: You know, I really did. Um I, I had opportunities in Minnesota to stay up there and to partner with different groups or different individuals um, but I wanted to come back to Edwardsville. So I searched out here to see if any, um, providers were looking for partnerships or selling their practices and there wasn't, uh, that opportunity. I had a, I had one interview but the individual decided not to have, uh, expand the practice into a partnership. So I just set up my shop and it was fortunate because I set it up and the former mayor, uh, Steve Ellsworth's building. And Steve and I, uh became very close over that twenty years um that I, my first twenty years in business. And uh, he was just, just a rock of the community. I mean he, he had such a wonderful demeanor and uh work ethic and really knew how to make friends and make family out of his clients. And so I emulated that [chuckles]. Tried to do my best to uh, to take that same approach with building my dental practice. And um, so that's how I came back, you know. But dentistry was, it was a good choice for me. I, I like again, the detail of it and the patient communication. I think that's been something that's kind of drug into my politics. Patients like to talk. They like to talk politics with me, and um, it's a good distraction from the dentistry. [chuckles] (18:09) SH: And how did you get involved in politics? What, what sparked your interest? (18:25) HP: Um so, I wanted to be a a part of the community, came back and Gary was mayor and I knew Gary from growing up and so I set up a meeting with him. I called him and said hey I would like to go out to 5  lunch and see what it's about, you know, being an alderman. Now, I have my grandfather, um, Spike Riley was an alderman in five different decades. Not for fifty years, but five different decades. He served um, in Edwardsville and he was also on, a volunteer fireman which was a big thing back then to be involved with the community. So, um, I knew about it, I knew a little bit and that, that I'd be interested in that. And Gary said, yeah you know we've got, we're gonna have a spot open in a couple of years and so if you want uh some advice or some help running and just turned out that it was an, an open seat the first time I ran, or there was two of us running for two spots. So, um I got, I got involved with a very impressive group of alderman, not to, to, toot your hats since your from SIU, Rich Madison, Rich Walker, Janet Hurorian, um there were quite a few SIU employees or representatives that were serving. And uh, I was pretty young at the time, I, um I, I listened a lot and learned from them and we just uh sat back and watched what I thought was, was good public input and public service by those individuals. (19:35) SH: When, when was this that you had your first... (19:48) HP: 1998. So, I would've been thirty. I think I was elected when I was twenty-nine, but um, thirty years old. I, I came back to Edwardsville at the age of 25 or 26 to start my practice. (19:48) SH: So, wha, excuse me for interrupting. Were aldermen elected at large and not, not by ward? (20:04) HP: They were elected by ward but then we had two aldermen per ward so there was fourteen council members where today there's only seven. SH: Oh. HP: So, when there was fourteen in, um, there were two per ward and there were two of us. It was an engineer Sue, I cannot remember Sue's last name, but she was a civil engineer and she wanted to run for office and I did, and there just happened to be two open spots, um in that, in our ward. So...(20:17) SH: Not Sue Morgan? (20:29) HP: No, not Sue Morgan. Um she wasn't here very long. She was a professional engineer and she was in and out, but she, uh and I ran at the same time and um yeah, but I, I really, like I said enjoyed uh those individuals, uh especially Rich Madison. Rich Madison also grew up in Grandview so, same street, Sunset Drive right down the street from me. He would've been on one end and Gary Nieber would've been on the other end and my house would've been in the middle. So, we've had quite a, quite a bit of representation, uh from Grand View over the years. (20:50) SH: And what, what ward was that, that you were representing? (21:06) HP: I think it was seven at the time. But it was out, we rented um, a place out near Sunset Hills, uh for the first five years, six years that we were back here. And uh saved up to finally build a house over on, in Homes of Center Grove, off Center Grove Road. But, during those first years I was an alderman I was, I was renting and then I moved into the house. The house we moved into was still in the same ward so I was able to continue service. I served as alderman for six years and then, um, left to, uh go to the county board. I was the first republican elected uh from Edwardsville on the county board in fifty-four years. Which was, was kind of neat and I stayed there for ten years uh serving on different committees making, 6  I think, some real positive changes at the county. The park program is kind of our judicial reputation was something I took on and um certainly government accountability. There was some pension issues uh that weren't very positive back then with people bumping their own pensions and um supporting others to move into higher pensions. It's just things that I thought was fiscal waste. (22:02) SH: Talk about the judicial issue that you, of the interior. (22:16) HP: Well, you know uh, Edwardsville being the county seat um we've had uh a reputation of having a lot of attorneys here and uh [chuckles]. I can say that without being mean because my dad's an attorney, my dad’s a patent attorney and so, he challenges me, or has challenged me on the law for many, many years growing up and uh even today. But, I think there needed to be a better balance. We were seeing a lot of out of county cases coming into our court system and a lot of, of um, heavy support for the plaintiffs side. And the defense, um wasn't as uh successful or as robust as some of us thought that they should've been to give proper balance. Um, one of the examples, you know class action lawsuits were real popular then. It was 186 dollars to file a class action lawsuit but literally this settlements of those could be in the billions of dollars. And so, individuals were coming to our courthouses, to our community potentially making millions, or hundreds of millions of dollars. And um in the meantime we weren't receiving those rewards and we were dealing with the reputation of being uh, uh place that was pretty anti-business. And I saw that personally with the medical malpractice insurance situation. My insurance as a dentist wasn't very high but an OBGYN was paying 160,000 dollars a year and for them to leave they had to provide a tail coverage insurance after they left to the same tune of about 160,000 dollars. And the points that I was making was that same individual practicing, maybe seeing the exact same patients in the county right next to ours, the premiums would have been about half, 60%. Just because the insurance company said, oh you're in Madison County. Right, wrong, or indifferent they didn't think they had a fair shake here so we needed to clean up the reputation and if necessary clean up the process. Um and I think, I think we did a good job of that without, you know, tipping the apple cart. There, there are some, there's some bad businesses out there that harm people and harm their employees and they need to be held accountable. Um, but there's also, in my opinion, the need for that, that support and that financial benefit to go to those people that were harmed. And so it's a balance, a system that needs to be balanced, and when I first got elected I don't think that balance was there. (24:35) SH: You served on the county board from what, from when to when? (24:44) HP: It would've been '92 to, um, to 2012. Yeah, I became mayor here in ... (24:54) SH: '92? (24:55) HP: Excuse me, 2002, yeah, 2002 to 2012 and then became mayor in 2013. (24:56) SH: When did it first, uh, the idea come into your head that you wanted to run for mayor? (25:08) HP: Well uh, Gary had, had served, Gary Niebur had served for that 20 year period. And he and I would talk on the phone quite regularly and uh, I'd ask him, you know, if you're going to run for another term um I certainly wouldn't have challenged him. I think he did a great job for our community. Um, not only leading the growth in the success of the YMCA but really building the infrastructure in Edwardsville, uh the way he did with our water plant, our sewer plant, bringing on the Enterprise Zone, so many different 7  things. So, if he was gonna run again I certainly was just gonna stay at the county board and continue my efforts there. But when he decided that he was not going to run for reelection that's when I kind of talked with some people and I had, honestly had some people approach me and said, hey we think you would be the kind of person that would be able to come in after Gary and keep things going. So, that's when it started and um, I see, you know, you asked a question what is it like to campaign for office. You know it's, it's tough. You know, you spend a lot of time, you put a lot of, um, mental equity into it. You know, a lot of nights you go to bed and you stare at the ceiling because you're wondering if you did everything right that day or if what you’re going to do tomorrow. So I don’t want to say there were sleepless nights but there were certainly sleep impaired [laughs]... SH: [laughs] HP: ...evenings. But um, and you also, you know the criticism that comes along with running for office. It's unfortunate that when you have to declare a party that there's, you know, maybe 40% of the people already don't like you or question you, um, in a different way. Um and it's also difficult to please everyone. You know, in a, in a town of 26,000 you're going to have people that you'll never make happy. And so you have to happy pretty thick skin to deal with um the ups and downs of campaigning and the ups and downs of service. Um I think one of the, the uh, personality traits that I have is I don't take things super personally, you know, I take it, if it's a pol- political thing, I just, sometimes we agree to disagree and we move on. As long as people don't take it personally with me, you know and, and take it to my business or take it to my family, I can, I can have pretty thick skin and I'm pretty quick to forgive people when it comes to politics. Um, just move on and move to the next issue, and um, not um, not do it for, you know, the selfish reasons. I think when people get in trouble in politics it's because they take it so personally 'cause it's something that they think they have to have themselves. Where if you're just trying to represent the people and make the community better, uh that's, it's a lot easier if you have that attitude. My satisfaction, you know, I, I do, you receive probably more criticism than you do complements, but uh, at first, but when a community is having success like we are and we've got great employees working very hard to, to build that success um we get a lot of complements now, which is nice. But I think I got two nasty emails today. So we still get the bad ones. [laughs] (28:03) SH: [laughs] Did you have opposition when you ran for mayor? (28:12) HP: I did, yes, um Barb Stamer uh who is somebody that I served with on the city council and she had been an alderperson for twenty years. Uh she ran for this seat as well. So, um she had a lot of support from the city council members which was natural, she had been there. I'd been at the county board, you know, for ten years. And um, that was interesting because I was successful in the election but coming into an environment where five out of the six alderman had really rooted for her. You know, and I, I understood that because of the personal relationships, but again as I just mentioned I, I want to move beyond the personal, you know, what's best for the community and not what's best for me or for Barb. Um so, soon as they realized that that's what we, that's what the agenda was, you know, how do we, how do we make this town even better than it is. Um they came, they came around but, yeah, that was- it's never fun running against someone because you don't, you don't wanna be on the losing end and you don't necessary want them to be on the losing end either cause um, you know, it's, it's tough to, it's tough to run and it's tough to serve but um ... (29:17) 8  SH: Talk a little bit more about how you run for mayor when you have to, what do you do, do you, do you walk the precincts? (29:25) HP: Yeah, you definitely have to walk. Gene Meyers from Troy, when I was running for the county board one time, she said, you have to literally wear out a pair of tennis shoes, maybe two. And so there's a lot of walking and knocking and um introducing yourself um and that's, it's really awkward the first door, the first two doors. It's, it's the worst going up to that first door at the beginning of an election cycle because you don't know how you're gonna be received. But, once you do get a positive reception it becomes, um, very contagious, you know, you're able to open people up a little bit. Ask them what's going well, what needs to be worked on, you know, what a, tell them a little bit about you qualifications and uh go to the next door. But yeah, it's, it's interesting. I've had just really honestly two or three nasty interactions at doors and I've probably knocked on, I don't know, 10,000 doors. You know so I, I campaigned through the county at large one time and I knocked on doors in Madison and Highland and Alton, every city in the county and um so, it's, it's interesting. But yeah if, if somebody can do that without having a little bit of uh butterflies in their stomach you know, their, their different than I am. But a lot of people I've talked to have that same feeling, that first couple of doors is pretty tough. You put a walk piece together you know, what your objectives are and what your background is and you hand that out as informational. Um you have to put a campaign team together to raise some funds, uh help with some of the challenges of putting events on. And um you, you know, rely on them for feedback whether they like your walk piece or whether they think you should be talking or going in a different direction or an issue. So, that's, that's, that's 101, you know [chuckles], running for office 101 it's, it's it can get a lot more detailed and a lot more scary. Editorials, you know, talking with newspaper people, writing letters to the editor there's, there's a lot more out there that you have to be careful with, um, but, I, I found it you know, just be natural, be yourself if people don't like ya [chuckles] it doesn't mean [chuckles] they, they don't like ya as a person, I mean they don't like your political views and they're not gonna to support your political views and so you just, again, don't take it personal. (31:51) SH: Did, did you have to go out to a lot of events? Uh, eat a lot of rubber chicken? (31:57) HP: Yeah,[chuckles] yeah there's a lot a, a lot of hand shaking that can occur. A lot of evenings where you may want to stay at home uh with your family but you should really go out and talk with individuals. Edwardsville has a lot of events to raise money uh for different causes and I think it is important as a business owner and as a resident and somebody running for office to be there to support them, thank them, and, and try to give those causes what you can. Either, now a days I, I do a lot of, I'll do some MCing or I'll do some presenting and um I'm not a, I'm not the most natural public speaker but I've found over the years as you learn more about a subject it becomes a lot easier to talk about it. If you, you got more information than the rest of the people in the room, um you shouldn't be nervous about speaking the rest of the room. So, that's kind of the approach I take now, but um, fortunately we have a lot going on. And the public likes to hear what is going on so as long as I get up and talk about that seems to go pretty well. (32:55) SH: Is, is, um there's been a lot of talk about the influence of money in campaigns uh, did that, did that have a play in your mayoral campaigns? (33:09) HP: You know, it didn't in the mayoral campaign, I'm seeing it a lot more now that I am running for state 9  senate. Um, you know, an alderman could raise anywhere from 2 to 5 thousand dollars. I think at the mayoral election, because it was the first time in twenty years, there was more money put into that one. I want to say that each side put in between 30 and 45 thousand, would be my guess. Certainly that's more than I would've ever wanted to, but by the time you pay for ads, you know, pay for signs, pay for mailings, uh trying to get the message out there um, you know. Now, at the state level it's millions of dollars and the influence that comes in and the amount of postcards. I don't believe you need to throw out 20 negative postcards about your opponent. I think if you can say this is me, this is who I'm running against, these are the issues that I care about. Um but unfortunately at this, at this next level uh there's, there's way too much money. (34:80) SH: Is, is... HP: Based bat [?] SH: ...at, at the mayor and city level, was there much political party involvement or is that pretty non- partisan? (34:21) HP: You know, I think it was there because I was a republican on the county board and so I think there was some people that thought that I would bring the republican ideology to office, you know, or maybe create a partisan. In fact, I received a couple of letters, asking, people asking me not to do this because they're afraid that it was gonna become partisan. And um, those individuals didn't know me very well, you know, didn't know my passion for the community and not for the party uh aspect of things. Um, at the county you have to declare. You know, so, when you, you have to give a choice, do you like what the democrats are doing or do you like what the republicans are doing? And so that's the choice that I made when I first ran. At the city, you know, being an independent position it's a lot better. But, unfortunately during campaigns people want to bring in that, that party, you know, that background of, you know, well you voted against this one time, or you know, at a national level that party is doing a terrible job so we're gonna assume you're gonna do a terrible job at this local level. So, I, I, and I did get some of it, but I didn't. I don't know. I, I didn't let that stop me. [chuckles] (35:25) SH: But, but now, now that you're running for state senate um how did, how did that process work for you, you said you, you set up press release announcing you were gonna run, did you talk with, um, republican party, county party, central committee first or ... (35:44) HP: Yeah I, I talked with um, an individual that works for uh, representative Shimkus and um I was just kind of keeping tabs through her who was running for the local races for uh the state office. And my typical approach is that if there's somebody running that I respect, that I think will do a good job, um I just stay out of it and say, awesome. I'll, I'll sit back and let that person, have my vote. And uh you know, I have voted for both parties, so sometimes if there's a person running in the Democratic Party that I have that same respect or admiration for I, you know, can sit back and say, I don't need to run against that individual. The state senate situation was, was different 'cause it was wide open. Senator Haine, another, you know, an individual that I respect, um, was in that position and he was retiring. He's been at it a, quite a few years and so, he wasn't going to run for reelection so it was an open seat. And um, I talked with, you know, a couple of individuals, said who's, who's running, you know, who do we have that's gonna step up? And um, there was an individual who was considering it who probably would've, I, I would've 10  stayed out of it and stayed mayor. Um, but then when, um, that individual decided not to seek the office, I said well, I, I will run, you know, at the senate. But I was recruited quite a bit to run at the rep um for the two year term but I didn't, I don't feel, the two year terms are, are ridiculous in my opinion. You know, you're in office for six months and you're out raising again to run for your next campaign. I don't think two year terms should exist, um, and certainly with the busyness of my dental practice and other things in my life um, I didn't wanna be, you know, on the representative side. So, when the senate side, site came open that was appealing to me to run for a four year term. Run in, uh you know, out of, yeah frustration that I'm not happy with where the state is going and what the state is doing. So what can I do to bring the principles or the experiences that I've had in my years in office, um, to make things better in Springfield whether that be a balance budget, whether that be cutting out waste, whether that be dealing with people across the aisle in a more professional way so that we can really see the issues for what they are and come up with real solutions. So I, I honestly getting tired of sitting back and, and watching it not go well. (38:09) SH: Do you, um, since you haven't run the campaign yet, I, I, it's difficult to answer but, certainly state politics and issues are gonna get involved. What about national issues, do you think, do you think that's going to, in any way complicate, or how will it complicate your, your campaign? (38:23) HP: Uh I, I definitely think that national politics will come in to play for some individuals. I mean, I remember knocking on doors when I was running for the county board as a board member and knocking on a door that said, the man said, I am not voting for any republicans this year, I'm tired of what's happening, you know, at the national level, and I'm just voting straight down the ticket. So you have individuals that do that and it's, it's disheartening because, you know, they could literally [chuckles] be voting for, you know, somebody off the wall or maybe there's no, not even an opponent over there. You know, you should really, I mean, I really encourage the general public to take the time to look at the individuals that are running, get a feel for whether they would be good representative for ya, and, and deal with it that way because if not, um you get the government you get. You get the government that somebody else selects for you if you're not willing to put the time in yourself. And so, in many cases when we, when we're dissatisfied with state and federal government but we haven't taken the time to, uh get to know the candidates, maybe ask them some questions, maybe give them a phone call. We spend lots of money sending out literature and trying to be in the newspaper, and you, you would still be amazed at the percentage of people that go to the polls that have no clue of anything about who they're voting for. (39:55) SH: I, I heard that uh, that only 7% of the registered republicans voted for Trump, so I mean, it was so, it was like that was how low the turnout was during the primaries and that's uh, so he's able to secure the non-republican nomination on 7% of registered republicans. That, um, and I think when you figure out the turn out rate nationally uh and, you know, 51% something like that, it turns out to be only 23% of the voters elect our president. HP: Right. SH: So you're, you're right, and, and can get pretty discouraging. (40:38) HP: Yeah, it's disappointing. And um I, I just, that's the number one thing I would encourage people both 11  at the federal and state, even at the local level, ask some questions, get to know the people that are running and put some time into it. Look at everything else we do in life, how much time do we put into, um, softball you know, or basketball, watching sports on TV or getting into different clubs? If you want real good government you got to participate. And fortunately, here at the city, we have some really good alderman, um, we have some very intelligent and, and community orientated alderman. I think that's why we're having really good success here and have for years. Gary did a, did a great job at putting a strong team of department heads around, a, a concerned group of aldermen. But, if you, if you get to the next level and it's all about money and lobbyists and special interests and you keep electing those same people who are feeding those lobbyists and special interests, um you get, you get what you vote for. You get what you didn't vote for. (41:47) SH: Yea, yea that's right. What, there's, what are some of the challenges you face as being mayor with, with the growth in this area, work challenges that are not associated with growth? (41:57) HP: Um, you know the, the main things that I have been able to focus on uh the changing campus out at SIUE was a great opportunity for us to build a better relationship with the university. For the longest time it was a commuter based university and now with more student housing and, on campus and off campus it's given us an opportunity to interact um in a much closer way. Bringing the students into the downtown and also, you know, forming the uh SIUE destination committee where we interact with new professors, um parents during the orientation. I think all of those are positive changes um that I wanted to pursue knowing the importance of SIUE to our community. So, that, that made um a natural move for me. Public safety wise we had some old facilities and there had been a study with different opinions I think, 11 options of where we could build new facilities and what would make the most sense. Didn't really explore how we were going to pay for them, I just looked at some different scenarios of where they might go.And um, I was able to get in and work with the university leadership and get a satellite station on the SIUE campus which, you know, gave me great, a great feeling to know that those students and faculty would be protected. Talked to the alderman, you know, about raising some money for that. You know, I had described as, as being mayor, if you had one parent that came in and said you didn't get to my daughter or you didn't get to my son in time, you know, um that would've not have sat well with me. Being somebody who's in the healthcare business and uh believes in protecting our citizens. So, we did that one and then we did the combined facility because our downtown station was way out of code, it didn't have the, the proper space, proper parking, handicap accessibility. Even the, the joint services we have now with both men and women serving in the police and fire department that facility didn't adequately allow that. So, we built the new combined facility which I think turned out really well. It was a challenge um to get, to get all of that architectural and all of the votes and all of the money to support that but we were able to do that. I'm working on parks, we added a spray and play park, and we have a sports park uh property purchased, and we're in the process of adding those facilities. And um working also on downtown parking. So, downtown parking, with the success of our downtown, um people find it to be a challenge to get down here at times and it impacts the success for our businesses, so we're looking at parking solution for downtown which I hope to be able to roll out here in 2018, at least a solution. I don't think we will see construction until '19. But uh, I've had great stride and great support from the local businesses and the property owners. And uh, the governmental support has been good too 'cause all of these things cost money and in order to get the money you have to build the relationships and be sure that the taxpayers support, you know, how we're going about that. (45:03) 12  SH: Why do you think Edwardsville's grown so much over the last twenty, thirty years? (45:03) HP: I, I think it goes back to that safety and education that we talked about earlier. You know, if you can bring your family to a place and know that they're going to be safe and protected and you're also gonna get a good education and have plenty of things to do. Uh, we have, you know, endless opportunities each weekend to, to go out and do different things so that's, that's a big part of it. (45:33) SH: Are there any, uh, what are the pressures on being mayor, what are the different tugs and pulls that you have to deal with? (45:43) HP: Um, you know, you have to coordinate things that the aldermen choose to do. So, if the aldermen, you know, vote majority, wanna do something, then I like to, my rule then becomes uh coordinating the staff to implement that objective. So, um, I appoint the fire chief, police chief, city attorney, human resource director, public works director, all those people are appointed by me. So I have to make sure that we have quality professionals. Um, I work hand-in-hand with our city administrator who is here full-time. You know, this being a part-time mayoral job, Tim Harr is responsible for making sure that all of these projects that we do support come to fruition. Um, but before those votes take place often times, you know, we are behind the scenes formulating things for the aldermen to consider. You know, the aldermen are all so part-time. You know, they have day jobs. So, they expect us to come to them with solutions to their problems or ideas that other communities have used to improve, you know the, the quality of the community. So, we work half the time on creating new ideas and half the time on implementing those that are supported by the council and by the public. So, that's keeps you pretty busy. I know that, you know, I mentioned public safety, parking, and parks, the three "p's" are, you know, an area that I think we needed some improvement in and we're, we're making good progress on those. You have to have your city infrastructure, we, we're one of the few cities that operates its own water plant, its own sewer plant, we take care of all that infrastructure, we take care of our roads, which I think is a 125 miles, linear miles of roads. Um, quite a few parks you know, that we maintain and, and keep up. And then we have to run you know, the day to day services that you see. But police and fire are probably our two largest employee groups well they are our largest employee groups combined. So, we have 23, uh well, I guess now we've added the new station, we have 28 paramedics and firefighters on staff and we have 43, uh, police officers. So, keeping our streets safe, our neighborhoods safe, and in particular, our schools safe uh is a huge priority. But um that's, that's a challenge. I mean and just making sure you have good people. As I said earlier, you're gonna get some people that complain and you're, you're never gonna be able to please. But I think in general, you know, we're, we're working hard to make sure that the residents get a good value. There's a lot of talk right now, and I think, you know, if you listen to this fifty years from now there will be talk about property taxes, or taxes in general. And my attitude has always been, yeah you pay to live here. You might, you pay a little bit more than you might pay somewhere else, but what do you get for that money? You get a quality service, you get good value, and so the word that I often use is value. I've, we treat this like a business and a business gives you a good quality value for what you're paying, then you're gonna go back to that business or you're gonna be satisfied with that business and um so I, I push the staff to, you know, yeah we could cut property taxes but as we cut property taxes we cut services, as we cut services we cut quality, we cut corners, you know, cut, cut, cut, you end up with nothing. You know, but if you could add, um, new growth to the community and bring in more revenue and use that revenue to enhance the opportunities that the current residents have. Fix up the old streets, replace the sidewalks, add a new park, build a new fire station- those are things that I think add value. 13  And we, even though we get complaints about property taxes I don't think we get many complaints about the value that people get here. (49:17) SH: How is it that, that the uh that, that the city will say well the land [inaudible] can convince them come and build? (49:27) HP: So, yeah big companies like World Wide and Amazon uh we're very fortunate that we have the Enterprise Zone down there which allows us to, uh make property taxes... SH: When you say down there you mean, the uh... HP: In the, in the lower, the bluffs. SH: Below the bluff? HS: Below the bluffs yeah, the American Bottoms. Um so, there's these Enterprise Zones, I think there's like 100 of them across the state. And you have petition to become one and the county and city of Edwardsville and city of Pontoon Beach put in uh, uh request and we've received that now and it'll be, I think it'll be forty years of Enterprise Zone activity that we'll have in total. Uh, but during those years, for the first seven year that a business is down there, the property taxes are 100% abated. They pay zero for seven years. Um, now they still employ people from your community and those people pay income tax, so the state still benefits, you know, from having those jobs there. Um, and the community does too because you've people that can afford to live in their homes, and you know, shop in their community etc. So, we give up property taxes for seven years, um, theorizing that, you know, those business don't add any strain to our school system, you know, they’re not uh going to school uh from there, they're actually just working there. So we've, we've done that abatement, and um, the developer down there uh, Mike Towerman, uh has been very aggressive at luring businesses um, putting his own capital up, his team's' capital up to build some facilities. They'll build those 760,000 square foot facilities on, on speculation. Um, might be 30 to 40 million dollars for them to put that in place. And then they go out and try to find a company to lease that space. And so Amazon, growing as rapidly as they are, they needed, um, very quick move in time, uh they wanted these facilities built and wanted to get into them quickly. So, fortunately Mike had one built and the individuals over on, um the Lake View side um had another large warehouse built and between the two of them they were able to negotiate um leases with Amazon. We were told that Amazon was looking in the area, but that area was including St. Louis proper, as well as Memphis. And we were told that, that they were looking at two sites in Edwardsville and we were hoping, with our fingers crossed, that we would get one of them. And then, you know, Christmas came early and they said we're picking both of them. And so both of the sites in Edwardsville, one in Lake View and one in Gateway commerce um, became Amazon centers and then at that point we don't even know what that means, you know. How many jobs does that truly mean? Um, and now we look back at the numbers, each one of those facilities during normal time will employ about 1,000 people. During peak operation it will go up another three or four hundred at each facility. And um, we looked at some numbers provided by the transportation uh group MCT Madison County Transit and uh 62,000 employees worked down in Gateway. And of those like 1490 come from Granite City, 980 come from Alton, only 138 come from Edwardsville. So the, the Enterprise Zone and the Gateway Commerce and the Lakeview Commerce are, you know, a benefit to the entire region um that the city of Edwardsville 14  has abated property tax for, for seven years. But we're able to produce a lot of jobs and benefit and now we've started to see revenue come out of there so it's not just a freebee, these companies are not leaving. There's about 29 large facilities down there and um, about half of those are now paying full tax. So, uh Granite City School District, even though none of the businesses are in Granite City, they're either in Pontoon Beach or Edwardsville, Granite City School District got 2.1 million dollars last year uh in tax revenue from those businesses. City of Edwardsville got about 800,000 um, from those businesses. (53:27) SH: Wow. HP: So... SH: Didn't Edwardsville specifically move its, its borders to encompass uh the bottoms? (53:36) HP: Right, we annexed out um as the developer had requested so the people who had bought the property created the Enterprise Zone and said we would like Edwardsville to annex us because of um a couple things. The services, we have the water plant, as I had mentioned earlier, the sewer plant, so our rates are really, really low. What we sell water for and what we treat the sewage for is, uh, some of the lowest in all of Illinois. And then um the other aspect is we have a very quality fire and police department and they wanted those safety features to be associated with their facility so they asked for annexation um because we could provide the services. (54:11) SH: You roughly remember when that was? (54:13) HP: Yeah, um its started back when I was an alderman back in 2001, 2002 would have been about the start of the first buildings. The first buildings went all the way up on the other side of 111, so the Gile Warehouse was on the other side of 111 and then later uh in my first or my second term as alderman we annexed all of other side of 55, Interstate 55, where Hortica moved their offices out to. So, the City of Edwardsville, we like to say is wider from West to East than the city of St. Louis. You know, and we're not really encumbered to the North. We have our neighbors Glen Carbon to the South, and um, Pontoon Beach and, and Granite to the South but, to the North, you know, next up is Hamel. So, it’s pretty neat to be that wide and be able to go that far north. I think I kind of touched on that earlier in the discussion, it would awesome to come back in 30 to 40 years and see what other mayors and other aldermen have been able to do with the community because um there doesn't seem to be many limits. [chuckle] (55:19) SH: Yeah, that's great. Well um, is there anything else that you, you'd, you'd like to say or that we haven't quite covered? (55:27) HP: In just real quickly um, as you asked when I started in, off as being alderman there were, there were three really influential people and I have talked quite a bit about about Gary Nieber being the mayor and the YMCA director. Um, Dr. Ed Hightower, um being the superintendent of schools had a major influence, he was also a, a trustee at SIU Edwardsville. And um, the, the third one I mentioned the transit district, Madison County Transit, Jerry King has been the director there. Um, having seen those three wise men over the years has been, uh very, um, very much, uh, mentors to me. And just, uh idealist that, very strong-willed, you know, they were individuals that you didn't want to get into a dog fight with 'cause they, they typically fought hard. But their passion about the things that they served for, you know, 15  whether it be the city, the school district, or the transit district, um was so strong that those three entities have been very, very successful. So it was, it was great for me to sit back and, and watch. It be a small part of their leadership, um but learn from them. So, yeah I would like, you know, people listening to this someday to if, if you don't get to hear from them directly, know that they were three pretty big players that made a difference either in our bike trails, in our bus transportation system which provides the employees that work at those 6200 jobs, or, you know, as I have mentioned number times, the importance of education um and uh Dr. Hightower made a huge influence there. So it's, it's been fun to, to watch those individuals and um and in many ways stay out of their crosshairs (laughing). (57:20) SH: Well thank you, Hal, I appreciate you, your talking with us. That, that was very interesting, um talking about the, uh um, how the, how the political system works I think is, is fascinating. That also its just, it’s so interesting how the a, how Edwardsville has, has changed in the last part of the 20th century. And you started out contrasting uh what’s happened say in East St. Louis or uh Granite City with, with the collapse of industry and the loss of jobs and what happens to those towns.57:57 And I guess in some ways the same happened to Alton, yet our, our history has been so much different, you know, um I guess it’s because we weren't dependent on the industry. (58:15) HP: Exactly, yeah diversification is very important. You have to have a diversified tax base and diversified opportunities that's why the warehouse district plays well, so does the corporate center which we are trying to develop, so does our retail and, and restaurant business. Um, I know there is a lot of grow occurring right not in Shiloh and in O'Fallon, but those, that's two communities that are certainly dependent on the base. If anything were ever happen to the Air Force Base, heaven forbid, that would be devastating for them. So, um the other thing that I think those communities, uh because I have talked with some of the past mayors from Granite, I have talked with the, but during the good years you gotta spend money on your infrastructure. You've gotta fix up your old streets, you've gotta make sure your older neighborhoods are as important as your newer neighborhoods. And so I, I think some of the lessons that I've heard that we, we do a good job here. You know the, the adage that you are only as strong as your weakest link, you know, we don't like to have weak links and so ... (59:16) SH: Yeah, well I mean I think that is a good point. That,that during your good years you need to, to reinvest.59:14 Um I have heard that, uh, property taxes in East St. Louis are some of the highest in the state... HP: Umm hmm SH: ...and yet they don't, it, they're so far behind... HP: Yeah. SH: ...because of the infrastructure. The, the bureaucracy, the school system and everything that they have to, the, the few homeowners that are there have to spend huge amounts of their income on property taxes just to try and tread water ... (59:48) HP: Right, yeah we, we get as much every year out of property taxes as we do out of sales tax. So having people shop here and visit here, um, that's super important for us to keep the property taxes down. Um 16  which makes us, you know, more attractive on that rate, um, comparing us to any other community in the metro east really that our property tax rates are very low. The problem is our properties are valuable here and so when you have a valuable property, against even a low rate, you still pay a pretty decent amount in tax. But, I go back to that value and I haven't found somebody that, you know, said that's not worth, I pay 7,000 dollars a year on my home, for example, 5,000 of that goes to the school district. But last year I had two kids in the school district, 2,500 dollars a child to have them educated, protected, extracurricular, I mean, you pay a lot more in that in day care. SH: Yeah, and, and, and, you know, I think people are, are proud of the Edwardsville school system, and um, the quality of education that, that our kids get. I think you're absolutely right that, that's really, really very important for any community towards, towards future growth. HP: Yeah, yeah and now with the success that SIUE is having it's just it puts a smile on your face. Especially for somebody like you that had worked there for so many years. You've got to be proud of where the university is going. And it's always, it’s always been very, I was interested in how controlled that growth was and how structured and just recently there's been some things that's pushed it outside of its normal safety and in the structure but I think in a positive way. I think, I think um you'll, we'll see an expansion of their, their sports eventually, um to me I think that will really raise the attention of the university. Shouldn't be the primary focus but if you look at the way these colleges have grown over the years, and uh, SIU has about the same enrollment as Notre Dame but Notre Dame has quite a bit more endowments [laughing] SH: Yeah. Well, I, I, you know, and I think the relationship between the university and the town is, is, is just so important. And um, it hasn't always been good and at times it's just been, uh um, live and let live. You know, they just ignore each other. HP: Yeah. SH: The fact when, when the two can work together, uh and they, they're just mutually reinforcing it, it means so much to the university to be able to say that uh Edwardsville is one of the 50 safety-ist, 50 safety-ist, safest towns in the US for a college campus it is just really, really important... HP: Yeah and I, I have mentioned this in the whole interview but you talk about relationships, um I get along real well with mayor Jack Stat. Just had a meeting with him earlier today and um getting along with your neighbors, you know, and not having uh any infighting or worry about which development goes where because um we all fall underneath the same school district and the same township. Um and I know that SIUE also feels strongly about their relationship with Glen Carbon and that's important, you know, because we are all right it and we're in it together. SH: Well again thanks Hal for your time I, I really, really appreciate it. HP: You bet, thank you. 17  
MadisonCounty;Herman Shaw;1934;1918;Herman Shaw 1934 - 1918  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Herman Shaw Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer Southern Illinois University Edwardsville February 12, 2018 Steve Hansen (SH): We can record it and you sign it and you then, you get to keep a copy and we'll keep a copy. And as I mentioned before we're gonna have the students will transcribe the recording and then send it to you for you to read, edit, and approve. In case you say something about one of your neighbors that you don't want, [both chuckle] we'll dig it out [This is inaccurate, Madison Historical does not edit the audio for an oral history]. And then after you approve it, the interview, both the written and the recording, will go on our online website for Madison Historical. And so prepare for posterity. So a historian fifty years from now can listen to us talk and make conclusions about what life was like in Madison County and Edwardsville in 2018. Herman Shaw (HS): Ok, 2018. That is what we are talking about now, huh? SH: Well, what we'll want to talk about is you and your life. And so we'll just go ahead and get started. I'm Steve Hansen. Today is February 12, 2018. It is Lincoln's birthday and we're at SIUE talking with Mr. Herman Shaw. And when were you born Mr. Shaw? HS: When? SH: Yeah. HS: I was born in 1934. SH: 1934? You don't look, you can't possibly be that old. HS: [chuckles] Well, I'm 83 and I'll be 84 on April the 5th. SH: And where were you born? HS: In Union, Missoura SH: And how did you, tell us about growing up. HS: Uh, well. SH: Your life as a young child. HS: Well, I grew up in a small country town in Missoura. It was the county seat of Franklin County. And, I of course, I grew up black and poor [chuckles]. Those were, those were two, two characteristics that 1  after I got old enough to realize, that there were, that there were something unique about me, those were two things that I had noticed that had an impact on my life. And Union was like, I think most of the rest of the country. It was segregated. And I lived in an area that was predominately where the colored people, at that time that's what they called us, lived. My grandmother owed some property and she had a big house on the front of the lot and like a log cabin on the back of the lot. And that's where I was born in that house that was on the back of the property. And when, I guess growing up, I, we had a, we raised chickens and we had a well and an outside toilet. And my mother traded eggs with our neighbor next door, who happened to be a white lady who had some cows, so she always had milk and butter. And I can remember my mom talking with her at the fence. And they really talked like they were friends. They had lots of laughs and would talk for sometimes a half an, I know now, a long time then. But you know, as I think about it, it was maybe for a half an hour. And they really acted as though they appreciated each other, you know, and respected each other. But the rest of the community was...uh.. if we had to go to the filling station to get water, sometimes the well was dry. They would always, the men would come out and chase us and call us alligator bait and rastus. I didn't know what rastus was as the time, [chuckles] but I didn't think it was anything good [chuckles]. And we'd always run back, back and forth, and finally get the water and go home. And we had a church that was there that was for the colored people and they had a circuit minister. He went around, he came around, he got to Union maybe every fourth Sunday. And on the odd Sundays my grandmother would take us to Nazarene Church on Sunday and we'd sit. They had a row in the back of the church for us to sit. There was a school for coloreds. It was just a one room school, very small because the population wasn't very big. And all of us went there regardless. You were 10, 12, 13, 14 or if you were 3 or 4 or 5, whatever age they started. I don't remember what age I started school, but everybody went to that little one room school. It was that way, I guess, until I maybe was in fourth grade. My uncle was the teacher. And my mother, my uncle and my aunt, all three went to Lincoln Institute in Jefferson City. That's where they went to school there. As I think about it as an adult now, I just can't imagine how in the world my grandmother had made enough money or to send her children from Union to Jefferson City to Lincoln Institute. But somehow she did and all three of them ended up being teachers. So we left Union, maybe when I was, a... SH: You were, so you were born right in the middle of the depression. Do you have...? (07:28) HS: Yes. SH: ...were you all aware of... HS: Well, I know my father worked for the WPA, they called it. And a matter of fact, he didn't, there were lots of times when he didn't work at all, you didn't have a job. And that's one of the reasons we left Union is because my, my father was trying to find a place to work. And he, we moved from Union to Webster Groves, Missoura. And I don't know, maybe I was six, seven, something like that. (08:13) SH: So it was before the war? HS: Yes, yes. And, I guess maybe it was during the war because I remember collecting silk. There was some little pods that grew on a vine that they used to make parachutes or something and we would gather those pods and turn them in. And I don't know what they'd give you a mill or something, it had a something that was less than a penny [chuckles] that they used in Missoura. Now, I understand that they 2  didn't use those everywhere. They had half pennies, but in Missoura they had this thing called a mill. And it was not made out of metal it was made out some other material that they gave that to you as for collecting these things. And if you got so many of those mills you could get candy or something, you know. SH: [chuckles] Does, this fascinating now, when you're growing up down in Union, you say your grandmother owned property. (09:24) HS: Yes. SH: Did she grow a cash crop or... HS: Yes SH: ...or is it, oh ok so HS: She didn't grow a cash crop, but she grew a crop. We had a cellar, and all the food, basically all the food that we ate we grew in the garden. And we grew tomatoes, and you name it, all kinds of greens, corn. And everything was canned, put in jars and put in the basement. And we had fruit trees and we found blackberries and dewberries and all kinds of berries. Well, we'd pick them and we take 'em home and they would can 'em. SH: Do you remember how many acres she might have a... (10:18) HS: Oh, I'd, maybe, I would say five, six, maybe ten. Something like that because she owned the property those two houses were on and then back behind there, my uncle's house and my aunt's house and there were three houses back there that she owned or the Aitch, they were called, she was an Aitch family and if today you go into the Union area, Moselle, Robertsville, those places up there, they have a road that's called the Aitch Road. They have their own cemetery, and just a lot of Aitch's live back there. A-I-T-C-H. And, so, and again, I have my grandfather I didn't know. He died wither when I was very young or before I was born. I'm not sure, but I never met him. But my, but my grandmother, I grew to be a young man and she was still alive. She lived to be 100 years old. SH: 11:47 And she was able to hold onto the property all through the depression? HS: Yes, yes, yes... SH: That's great. HS: ...yes she did. She ironed, and did, took in laundry and things like that. And she, I don't know that whether she sold any of the vegetables, the vegetables that she raised or not, but she had lots of them. And we all worked the garden and pulled weeds and whatever. But she raised asparagus. Almost every vegetable that you can think of she, she raised cabbage you know, plants and stuff, so. SH: Oh ok, so then your father, your family... your father's looking for work and found some around... (12:22) 3  HS: In Rich...around Webster in Richmond Heights. There was a brickyard there. And so he went to work in the brickyard. And there was a streetcar.The Kirk, I think it was the Kirkwood Ferguson streetcar line ran from Kirkwood through Webster to, a, I think it went all the way down to the University City streetcar line. And down by the what was at that time they had a place called where the World's Fair had been and they're on Skinker and... I don't know what it is now, but right there in Clayton, anyway. And so he went to work in the brickyard there and we lived in Webster. And the first place we lived was in a house, I don't how many rooms, maybe three or four room house and had an outside toilet. But did have, if I remember, did have running water. And... SH: Was this a segregated neighborhood? (13:56) HS: Oh yes, yeah, it was segregated. But just a street divided between this, where this, colored people lived it was still colored at the time [chuckles]. On one side of the street and on back on the other side this street called Lafayette, and the white neighborhood started. And so we were right off kir, we were right off Kirkham Avenue which is really Brentwood Boulevard if you take it all the way out. And, um... SH: Now was your father too old to be in because he had children to... (14:36) HS: I think he... SH: ...to be drafted? HS: I think he, I learned later that he, I think he had been in the army and because he had some mental issues or something he got of the army. They discharged him and he didn't get a dishonorable discharge. Unable to adjust to military life or something, but he got out of the army. I didn't know until I was an adult that my father had been hospitalized for some mental illness. But we lived there and they had a, had a segregated school system there. Went to Douglas. It was kind of a complex. They had a elementary school, high school, all the way through the twelve grade there. All in in maybe, maybe five, six buildings they had on that property where the schools were. And I don't think there, there were more than one elementary school there and the high school, they only had one high school that colored people went to. And we stayed there in this, we moved three times while we were in Webster. We moved from there we moved to, to Kirkham Avenue, we, we stayed in the storefront. and then we moved out of the storefront into another little shack down on, I forget the name of the street now, Holland I think it was. That was right next to a creek that flooded a couple times every spring and we had mud on the floor and it was really kind of bad, again, maybe like, two rooms and by that time there was like four of us. And um... SH: When you say four of us, counting your mom and dad, or four children? (16:59) HS: No. There were four children and mom and dad. And um... SH: And your dad was working at the brickyards? (17:07) HS: Yes. And I don't know what happened but then we moved again. And we moved to Edwardsville then, and by then I was maybe like nine, ten years old, something like that. 4  SH: So that would have been just about at the end of the war toward the... (17:27) HS: Yes. SH: ...end of the war? HS: Yeah, yeah I, I would like so, yeah. SH: Do you have, do you have other than collecting these pods for the silk for parachutes do you have any other memories of, of the war going on around you? (17:34) HS: Nah, not a lot, no. I, you know, at that young age, I was, I, I remember as we came down that highway from Union, it, going to, there was a, there was a section off the highway where that was all fenced in. And there were supposed to be, there were mounted police on horses and supposed to be ammunition sites buried over in there. You know, and I don't remember exactly where that was, but, but other than that I, you know, there weren't, I didn't know people that went off to war. Most of the people were old, the African American people were older people, you know. They just weren't, there wasn't enough of us there to in Union to have people going into the military. And when I moved to Webster, I, I just don't remember anything connected with the war at all there. And, and I'm not sure that if I, if I, if I talk to one of my other brothers they might. I was, I was kind of a little bit different from, from my brothers for several reasons. Some is, I think my relationship with my father was not good. From, from the very beginning as I remember, I was petrified of him. I just, I don't know why, but it was obvious to me that I wasn't, I wasn't his favorite son. And, and he was physically abusive if he ever had to discipline me it was using weapon with a switch, or whatever. But verbally, he was not, my name was not Herman it was, or son, it was snake-brains. And that, plus the fact that he was verbally abusive to me almost constantly. I just was fearful of him and, um, so, I was, I don't know. I spent as much time away from home as I could. I didn't, I didn't want to be around him. I loved my mother, but I thought that she should have protected me from him, you know. Yeah. SH: You said your grandma sent, she sent your mother or your father to Lincoln Institute? (21:12) HS: My mother. SH: Your mother? HS: My mother. SH: So your mother was trained to be a teacher? HS: Yes. SH: And did she ever work as a teacher? (21:24) HS: Yes, she did and, and she taught in, she came here and substituted for my aunt. SH: Here being Edwardsville? 5  HS: In Edwardsville. My aunt was a teacher here in Edwardsville. And when she got ill they asked my mother to come and she came and she taught in Lincoln School here. And that's when she met my father, when she was teaching here, because he was originally from Edwardsville. SH: Oh. HS: Yeah. So that's how we ended up here. SH: Coming back here. HS: Coming back here, yes, because he was raised here. And I think his father had worked in Richard's Brickyard and so my father ended up coming back here and going to work in Richard's Brickyard. And... SH: And this is like around 1944? HS: Yeah, yes, ya I would think so, yes. And... SH: What was the Edwards... okay, so you would have been like about ten. (22:31) HS: Um hum. SH: Do you, do ya have any remembrances of what the Edwardsville community was like? HS: Yeah, well, it was just about like, I didn't know anything different from segregation and when I came here it was basically the same Edwardsville. We moved into a house up on what they call North Road up on you, go down Liberty Street, there used to be bridge down at the bottom and you cross there and then you went up a hill there. And it was, I mean when I say it was a shack, it was, it was a shack. It was very bad, you know. We grew up basically in, in that place because when we all got here you know we were all pretty young, we weren't very old. And It was, we had three rooms and then by then there were five, six kids. And my, my youngest sister, Caroline Turner, who used to work here at the University. SH: I know Caroline HS: Ok, [chuckles] she, she was the baby. And and we lived there again we had a well and outside toilet. All of us, in this, in these three rooms and it was not good [chuckles]. But, we, the school was segregated just like every place else. And of course, you couldn't go into restaurants in Edwardsville at the time. And I had at that time, I, I guess I was old enough to, to realize that, that it shouldn't be that way. You know, it's a, that, I guess before then there was no pressure on, for, for me to even deal with the fact that we were different. You know I, being poor it seemed to me it didn't make any difference what color you were if you were poor like we were, your life was gonna be, [chuckles] is gonna be rough anyway. SH: How, how, how, how was segregation enforced? For you personally, I mean was it, yeah, how was it enforced? How did you... (25:30) HS: Well. SH: ...did, did white people say, call you a name and say you can't go in there or... 6  HS: Yeah. SH: ...or was it just... HS: Well, here in Edwardsville, you know. In Webster, you know, we had a, there were certain stores. I, I never tried to go in, I didn't have any money to go in the restaurant, to try to go in a restaurant to go eat so that wasn't a problem. But there were stores that we, you could go in to buy groceries and in certain areas and so you went. And I didn't pay much attention. But, when I got to Edwardsville I was little bit older and a little bit different responsibilities. And I'm on the playground playing at Lincoln School on the weekends, there was white kids in the neighborhood, you know, they'd come over and we'd play together but we didn't go to school together. And something's wrong with that picture, you know. And we couldn't go uptown and go to the root beer stand or to the drug store and get a soda. SH: How, how how do you, how did you know you couldn't do that? (26:51) HS: Because we'd try to go and [chuckles] they would, they wouldn't serve us. SH: Okay. HS: You know, and that went on until, even in, when I went into integrated schools here, I was a sophomore when the schools were integrated. But you still couldn't go in. When the basketball team and after a game if we went uptown to, if they went uptown to go to Musso's or one of the restaurants that had something to eat. I couldn't go in, in Musso's and, and believe me I tried, and, and you know. And they would tell me, you know, you can't come in here and so I'd have to leave. I went in at a place called, down below the high school there, I can't remember the name of it now, but it, but there was place down there. You couldn't go in there. You'd go into Wildey, and, and they had two theaters here, Lux and the, the Wildey. and you could, there were only certain places that you could sit in the movie. They had one section over to the side in the Lux and upstairs in the Wildey, in the balcony, which was [chuckles] not a bad place to sit but you couldn't sit downstairs you had to sit up there and in a certain section. And I had noticed that I would go in and they had the fire escape door and I'd let the fire escape down and other kids [chuckles] come up and come up in the Wildey. But I noticed that when Miss Robertson, Rella[?] Robertson, she did a history for the same lady that I am talking about and she had done the same thing when she was a kid and she lived to be over 100 years old. So, I'm saying that the same process of, of the segregated upstairs in the Wildey and people letting other kids up, you know, up those, that fire escape had gone on for long time. SH: Does the high school, so the schools became integrated? (29:17) HS: In 1950. SH: 1950. HS: '50, school year '50-51. Yes, and I was a sophomore, supposed to be a sophomore then. SH: Do you have any idea why? 7  HS: Why? SH: Yeah, why were this, it... HS: Well. SH: ...because it wasn't court enforced. HS: Yes it was. SH: Oh, it was? HS: Oh, yes it was, yes. A matter of fact the, the court said that we should have integrated before. It was mandatory that they did it and they wouldn't do it, they didn't do it anyway. Well the state finally said that well if you don't integrate your schools we're going to cut off your funding. So they did [chuckles] so, so they were forced, they were forced to integrate schools here. SH: Did you, did you feel any resentment or, or have any trouble when the schools integrated? (30:06) HS: No. No. We, I wasn't gonna go because I had, I hadn't done well in school at Lincoln School. And as a matter fact I, I, I stayed behind a year in, in Webster because I, my, my, I wasn't learning as fast as I should have learned. And so I, I stayed back a year there. So, I wouldn't go to school a lot of times. I'd go down on the canal or railroad tracks or something I wouldn't go to school anyway. I skipped a lot of school and so when they integrated schools I, I was gonna quit school. And the football coach, guy by the name of Warren Harris, came down on the playground during the summer and he asked somebody who was, he said he was looking for Herman Shaw. And they told him, they showed him me and he came over and he talked to me. And he said that he heard that I was gonna quit school and I don't know who he heard that from, but, and he said, "Well, why you gonna quit school?" And told him because I didn't think white people was going to treat, treat us right over there. That wasn't really the reason I just didn't think I could cut the mustard, you know, academically, so I wasn't gonna go. But he said, "Look, you can always quit." He said, "You come over there and you might like it." and he said, "And I want you to play football for me." Well, I didn't know how to play football because Lincoln didn't have enough boys to have a foot, we just barely had enough to play basketball so he convinced me to come and try and he did teach me how to play football and how to run hurdles and, and I know now that he deliberately did it. He developed a play called "The End Around" that was just to help me have an opportunity to get in the game and play and maybe have some success. And he put me in the first football game that year. I played varsity, and I didn't play, I played freshman, sophomore, and varsity. He dressed me for varsity and I sit on the bench. And we went to, the first game he put me in was in Benton, Illinois and he told me to call "The End Around" and I called it. They threw the ball and I didn't get it, it went back behind me and when I went to pick it up they buried me. [chuckles] So he took me out of the game and he said, "It wasn't your fault, don't worry about it, you know." And so, the next game was a home game. And he put me in, told me to call that play and I did and I scored a touchdown. And he took me out of the game, sit me on the bench, you know, and told me that was, "Way to go." And the next two games he put me in for just that one play and, and after the, the, on the third game that I went in the guy said, "There's that Shaw watch for that End Around!" [chuckles] But I still scored a touchdown anyway and it didn't make any difference. And so I got a lot of people in town, you know, well oh, I couldn't come through town, you 8  know. Jerry, he owned a clothing store uptown, I forget the name of it now, I think it's closed. SH: Ember's? HS: Ember's, yes, yes. Oh, he just, he'd stop me he'd talk to me forever. [chuckles] And so, I just, I got in the choir and sang in the choir. I had, I was in a barbershop quartet. I sang with some of the guys. I took voice lessons from Miss Wheateye[?]. And just a lot of things happened that, you know, caused me to at least have some self-esteem, you know. I felt better about who I was. And, but academically, I, you know, I, I was a very poor student. Just, just, my back, if you don't have the fundamentals, you know the back, the basics, then you're in trouble and my reading skills were so low. And they just impact everything that you do academically. And but, because I was good athlete, and I played all four, and I got a Varsity letter in all four sports my sophomore year. And my second, my junior and senior year, my junior year, I did too. Now my senior year, I, I quit and didn't run track and didn't play baseball. That's brave[?] because I, I upset about something that happened. The, in the process of growing up and playing sports and things, I had a, I had a kind of a, a relationship with a white girl. And that was just unacceptable. And so, the, the men in town especially, they just, the white men [chuckles] they just got, they got down on me and they just, they just made it kind of rough for me. And even though the, the principal, Mr. Brock was the principle at the time. He came to Sunday school and picked me up after Sunday school one morning and he asked me and he rode me around and asked me about her. He said, "Well Herman," he said, "things are going to be a little rough." He said, "but you keep your head up," and he said, "now things are gonna pass." And I never saw her again. They just, they, I don't know what happened to her. I don't know... SH: Were you ever physically threatened? (37:22) HS: No, no. Well, I don't know. I was with her and some, some of my white friends, you know. We were out at the lake swimming and they came out there and they got after me and they told me to come on out of there. Well, I didn't come I out, I [chuckles] swam across the lake. I got out over someplace else and Dale and them came around and picked me up and took me home. And there were people that said things to me that were rude. Some of the fathers at the basketball game that, that winter came down when their daughters were talking to me or something they came down and said something you know don't be talking to him or something, you know. Because the kids, they, they didn't care one way or the other, you know. At least most of them, I don't think they did. They never said anything to me negative anyway, none of them. And like I said, some of them, we'd, like, go on dates together. We'd just go riding around because we couldn't go any place [chuckles], you know, but we'd ride around and go to the lake and swim things like that together. So.. SH: Which lake is that? HS: Dunlap SH: Dunlap? HS: Yeah. And so, I quit those two sports and I just said to hell with them. I'm not gonna go out there and bust my ass. [chuckles] It's how I would have felt, you know. I said I'm just gonna let it go. I, I had a scholarship offered to go to Illinois State [phone rings]. I'm sorry about that. [phone rings] I'm not gonna 9  answer that, I'm just gonna turn it off, okay? SH: Okay. HS: [phone rings] I guess I could just let it ring. [both chuckle] Yep, that's good. So, I, but, you know, in, in, in town, by then I had gotten to a point where I just would argue with, with, with Luco[?], who was my, my basketball coach. But he was also one of my teachers, he taught Concept. I would just argue about the fact that it wasn't right for segregation and for us to not be able to eat in restaurants. I went to Benton on a overnight with the basketball team and we went to a hotel in Benton where we were supposed to be staying overnight. And Luco[?] took me to, to me, said he has somebody he wanted me to meet he took, me took me over and introduced me to the bellhop and told me that was who I was gonna be staying with that night. And that just made me, I was just, if I could have walked home [chuckles] from down there I would've. But those kind of things were just things that I just, just thought how can intelligent people think [chuckles]. And I still feel the same way right today. I just think that it's, and I guess there's always... SH: And, and yet you, you still, you play basketball even though... (41:11) HS: Oh yeah. SH: ...even though you were disappointed with... HS: Oh yeah. SH: ...Mr Luco? HS: Yeah, yeah, but I let him know, and, how I felt. And as a matter of fact I was gonna quit at one, at one basketball game. I would have, I would've turned my uniform in and quit, but Warren Harris, who was my football coach was also the, one of the assistant coaches, basketball coaches. And he told me, he said, "Put that uniform on, on and get back out there." And he said, "Because you can't let something like this make you give up on life." He said, "You’re gonna run into this until people get smart enough that they won't be like this." SH: Was Harris white? (42:08) HS: Yes, Oh yes, oh he was a white man. Yes, he was white but he was a good person and... SH: What, I don't exactly know how to ask this question but looking back... Let me, you finish your story. You, you then graduated from high school, you had... HS: Yes. SH: ...a scholarship to Illinois State? HS: Yes, yes. And I went to Illinois State. And I was, I played first string football as a soph, as a freshman and first string basketball as a freshman at Illinois State. But I only was able to stay there two years before I wasn't eligible any, you know, because I couldn't keep up with the academics. Because I, I 10  played three sports at Illinois State and I was gone a lot, you know. And you go to college [chuckles] I mean, you have a lot of away activities as an athlete. And, and I'm playing three sports. And my sophomore year I went in and asked the athletic director if I could not run track because I wasn't on a track scholarship, I was on a football scholarship. And I told him I said because my grades are gonna, I need to get some help with my grades so I keep my grades up so I don't lose my scholarship. He said well you're gonna lose it anyway if you play, run track. And I said but I am on football, it didn't make any difference, so, and I, you know, so I did flunk out. I, I flunked out and... SH: This would have been in the middle of the 1950s? HS: Um hm. Let's see I graduate in '53 so it would've been '54, '55, '56. SH: What was it, what was college like in those days? Was, was that, did you feel the segregation there as well? (44:19) HS: Well, somewhat. Most of the black athletes they lived in a place called the barracks. And you, most of the, all of the, the ones that were in the barracks that I was in were African American. And of course we, there were places that, for example, the baseball team went to, went to Florida for spring training, no black could. If you wanted to play baseball you had to wait until they came back from spring training, [chuckles] before you could go. They wouldn't even take you down there. So,yeah, there was, there was segregation everywhere. It was just, it was just a way of life. And, and you know, I, but it made me think a lot because by that time I got to an age where you just have to start thinking, you know, why, why is, is it like this, you know. And as I looked around, you know, I mean it was the same almost everywhere.You know, even, you know, in other countries, it wasn't like some guy told me once,he said, "If you don't like it, take your ass back to Africa." And that was a guy that lived here in, in Edwardsville. And, and I think at the time if, if Africa would had been where California is, I might've tried to [chuckles] get out there. But, but being where it is I was, there was no way for me to get there. But, as I got older I found out it wouldn't of made any difference because there was a lot of foolishness going on in Africa and it wasn't just South Africa, it was all over Africa. Because Africans were killing Africans, you know, black folks were killing black folks over there, too. You know, because you didn't, you weren't a, you were Zulu or a Watusi and should have been a so and so and so and so, and so, I just got to a point where I just realized that all this craziness is, is just a human flaw, you know, it's just something that human beings do and I not, I'm not, I don't know what we gonna [chuckles] do about it.You know, it's just like, they sing the song "Study War No More" but you, we study, study war all the time, constantly. I don't think since I've been in the world, you know, that there has not been a time when there was peace on Earth. It doesn't exist. It might be someplace where there's no war going on but somebody's fighting all the time. And it's, we're constantly trying to come up with the biggest bomb, the bigger bomb. And... SH: In the, in 1950s when you left Illinois State, were you aware of the growing civil rights movement... (48:09) HS: Yes. Oh yes. SH: ...around you? Or was that just kind of one long constant struggle... HS: No, no. I was a... 11  SH: ...in this, this was new? HS: ...it was, it was, I became aware of it now, it was going on but I just, you know, just, trying to struggle and stay alive and make something of my life with the handicaps that I had. I had to think about what am I going to do with the rest of life, you know. How am I gonna, how am gonna make things happen, you know, given the problems that I had. I mean, bought a reading machine and tried to improve my reading. I went to work at the state hospital and that was in Alton, and that was, and I think that was probably the turning point in my life. And all the civil rights stuff going on. I just got to a point where I figure, I have to find a way to deal with it but that cannot be a priority for me right now because I've got to find some way to get a occupation or something so I can take of myself, you know, and have a family. It was something that I really wanted a family so. I went to work at the state hospital and I think I focused on trying to be the best therapist that I can be. And that worked for me. That helped me I was able to do some things with patients and for patients and for people that shaped my whole, my whole future. And I had found, I didn't know it at the time when I was filling out the papers I remember they had a question that said Why do you want to work at this job and I said because, I said, I just thought it sounded good anyway, I said something about wanting to help people or something like that and I found out that was, that was really true, you know, that I really had a gift. That was my gift, you know. That I was able to do things for people. As a matter of fact, I went to the ethical society in Clayton and worked with a couple of psychologists over there who were, they were doing groups with people that were able to function in society but they had ish-, mental issues, one kind is some anorexics and people. And people were maybe schizophrenic or something but they, they were able with medication get, have, hold a job and things. And, I, one of the guys I was working with asked me, he said, "Herman have you ever thought about working with young people?" And I said well, I guess thought about it I wanted to be a coach but I don't have but two years in college. But he said "Well, what if I could get you an interview with some people would you want to work with kids?" I said sure I'd love to. So he happened to be on the school board at University City. And he went and asked, had me set up an interview for me to talk with the superintendent of schools and the high school principal. And they hired me and they come over there to go to work called me the technical assistant to the principle. And I went there. SH: When was this? HS: It was in '69, 1969. And I went to U City High School and I stayed there 32 [chuckles] years. So, I was blessed, yeah. SH: So you from, from when you left Illinois State until '69 were you working at the... (53:04) HS: I worked ten years at the state hospital. SH: at the state hospital? HS: Yes, yes. And I went to Manteno for training and, and SH: That's Manteno, Illinois? HS: Yes. And... 12  SH: Which is a state hospital. HS: Yes it's a state hospital there, yeah. And I just went there to, for training and then I came back to Alton State Hospital and I just worked on. on the wards, I worked on a viol-, on a violent ward there. And I just changed things on the violent, well they put me in, made me in, put me in charge. [chuckles] And they shouldn't have did that because I went out and got some furniture, and donated, and brought it in. And had the people in the shops to build some dividers because in those wards it was just one big open mass and people just walking just back and forth. And a person if he had any sanity about him he could, he had no place to get away from all that madness, too. So I put mason dividers divided it all off and put some nice soft chairs in some places and the lamp[?]. And made it like, more like home, you know. And, and I got some blow- back from some of the guys from the state but then there were other guys at the state that said and hell, it's working, said, let's don't, let's don't, look how much. I reduced the population of the, of the wards because I started having people go like a day, day treatment center where you could bring people into the hospital and then you could come back and pick 'em up in the, in the afternoon and they took that portion of it and moved it, moved it out to Shurtleff College and just, then pretty soon they had a mental health clinic there in Alton. And I was working with a guy named Dave Shaw and some other people, you know. And we just set up a whole system of things that we could do with patients beside putting them in with all those people that were really, really, really sick, you know. SH: Um, hm. HS: There's sick and then [chuckles] there's sick, sick, you know. And it just made a lot of difference. And so SH: But did you maintain your home in Edwardsville or did you move to Alton? (55:55) HS: No, I, I, I, I moved to Alton at one point, yeah. And as a matter of fact I moved over there and got married and stayed over there. SH: And when you got the job at, at University City High School, did you, did you move there? HS: No, oh no, no I was too country. I moved back to Edwardsville. SH: [chuckles] HS: [chuckles] And, and stayed here and commuted and went back and forth. I just, I didn't want to live over there. This was, this was my home by then. I had established and working on different committees and different things. Working with human relations people here in Edwardsville. Trying to make things better here. I decided this was my home. And so I came back here and started arguing with people about different things. And, SH: What, what, what is some of the changes you've seen in the community and in Alton as well over the years? (56:59) HS: Well, here we got lucky. We got, they stuck a university in here and I think that's, this university here is the biggest change. It took a one horse town and made it, I think a very desirable place for people 13  to want and come and raise a family. I, I, I think that, I don't think the university has done enough to reach out to the community to try to, but I don't think the community has reached out enough to the, to the university. To, I mean, they don't realize how, I don't think as a community, I don't think we realize, I do, but I don't think there's enough of us that realize that this university brought some people in here [chuckles] that helped us grow as as a community. I mean, we were just kind of stuck and would've stayed stuck if this university wouldn't of come in here. And now that we've got Lewis and Clark and the university, I mean, that's just, that's just a big plus. So, I think this is, this the place. This is the institution that made Edwardsville, what I think is, one of the best communities around here today, you know. The people, and I don't know. I think a lot of good people came. There's a lot of good people in Edwardsville before, but I think one of the things that happens is good people don't, they don't get to together and work like the bad people do. The bad people get together and they get their little gangs and they call themselves the Barracudas or Rats, the Termites, ISIS or whatever. And they get organized and they sell their drugs and they do all these bad things and just mess up stuff. And we kinda get, we don't do like we ought to do I think we ought to realize how important it is for us to get ourselves together. 59:45 And to be the Rotaries and, and I, the only thing I find short of the rotaries that they, they're very selective about who they let in and some of us good people on the outside, don't get to be, we don't get to join up with them and do things, you know. But... SH: So looking back, what are some of the, the influences that you, that you feel that, that help shape your life as, as a black man, as an African American? (1:00:10) HS: Well, let me. I, I have to go to the bathroom, see [chuckles]. [Recording stops, then starts again] SH: Okay, so we're back. HS: Right. SH: We're talking and I just asked you the big question. (1:00:37) HS: [chuckles] SH: [chuckles] So what are, what are this, what are some of the influences that, that you feel shaped your life as a, as an African American growing up in a white society? HS: Well, I have to say my mother was the first person that had an influence on me. My aunt, my grandmother, and they were the first people that had influ-, influence on me. I think, maybe, my brothers. My youngest brother had a tremendous influence on me. He, later on, but early, I'd, I'd say those three women had a tremendous influence on me. My high school football coach, Warren Harris. I think he saved my life. And a, [sighs] maybe, I'd have to say Roy Jason, Emil Jason's father, had an influence on me. Tremendous person, I think he was the first black man that I knew that was, I, there were, I'm sure there were lots of them out there, but I saw him take care of his family. And, and every chance that I got I would go to his house when I was a young man. And he, had some horses, mules I guess they were, and he would be out plowing the field with that, those horses and planting crops. And he, he took care of his family and I paid attention to that. My mother and my aunt and my grandmother, they were all religious 14  people. But I don't know, for some reason that, they were good people and they were all in, just, just didn't seem to let anything stand in the way of them trying to help people. And the prejudice and the racism and whatever that was going around them it, it, it didn't make them angry people. They, they were still reaching out and they still, you know, that there are good white people and there is some that is not so good. And that's the lesson that I learned from them is everybody that's white is not bad and everybody that's black is not good [chuckles]. SH: Do you, do you feel like, like you, you've lived the, the American dream? (1:04:44) HS: [sighs] No. No. I ,I, I, I, I don't know, what is, I guess, I never thought about it that way anyway. What is the American dream? To me, the American dream ought to be to, for us to love each other and help each other. You know, to, for us to wanna make other places where there are people that aren't doing well, get them to a point where they're doing better, you know. But we should, people on Earth ought to help each other. That's, that's, that's just a dream period. Now if that's the American dream, yeah then, then I, I, I just think that we've got a long ways to go before we get there. And that's my dream, is, I just, I want us to raise some younger people that are better people than what we, than what we've been able to demonstrate that we are as a, as a population. You know what I mean, of older people. There are good people that are, that are among us but it doesn't seem like we're making a dent in, [chuckles] or something, I don't know. It just, it's just so much other terrible stuff going on every day. You know, you look at St. Louis, it's just, it's not like Edwardsville, it's not like St. Louis, I know. But my goodness, them people over there killing each other every day, every, you know, it's, it's just a mess. SH: You, you've got, you, you, you've talked about when you came back to Edwardsville, and maybe I have a sequence wrong. When, when you're, as an adult... (1:06:39) HS: Mm-hmm SH: ...a young man... HS: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm SH: ...married and everything that, that you wanted to become involved in the community and help... HS: Mm-hmm SH: ...make the community better. HS: Mm-hmm SH: How did you do that? What were the things you got involved in? HS: Well, they had a human relations commission in Edwardsville and a, I worked on that. SH: As a volunteer? HS: Yeah, oh yes, yes, yes, yes, just a, they were 15  SH: Who set that up? HS: I don't know. It was just something that was here and I got involved. And I, we don't have it now but I, I was talking to somebody, oh what was her name, can't think of her name now. But, she was on the, a white lady, she was on that committee with me. And we, we did a lot of things. We, there was a mural on the front of city hall and... SH: [chuckles] yeah. HS: ...we, we changed that thing. SH: [chuckles] HS: And we fought SH: That thing, this mural. HS: Yeah, yeah. We fought and fought and fought wanting to change that. And we finally got that thing changed. And we, we fought, and we got to the point where, you know, we could go into restaurants and eat and sit down and not be hassled, you know. And you could go to the, the root beer store and get a frosty mug. You know, there were, there was, there was a time when they wouldn't give you a frosted mug even. Even after they'd let you, you could, they would serve you, but they would put your, put your, you know, root beer in a paper cup. SH: [chuckles] HS: And they'd say, "Three frosty mugs and one paper cup root beer." SH: [chuckles] HS: You know, that's just crazy stuff, I mean put, put glass in your chilli. You know, I, just add some, that didn't happen in Edwardsville, actually that was Cottage Hills. But just get ya to a point where felt like you could go to a restaurant and, and ask for some food and people won't spit in it or, or worse. You know what I'm saying? That they'll just treat you just like you're just another customer. And, and, and, and, what, what you know, that's, that's an achievement. You know, that happens now. I don't, I don't, most places that I go in I expect that my food isn't gonna to be sabotaged just because I'm black. Now you know there's, there's some places you can go in and you can be white and somebody will sabotage your food [chuckles] because they just some ornery folks working in a restaurant. But, that, that might not happen as much now as it used to. It used to happen all the time. So, I think that we have grown as a, as a community here. But less than[?] there, I guess all over the country things are better, but there are still some places that if you go into and you're black you really had to be very careful. I, I, I have to kind of go back a little bit. When I, when I went into the service I learned, that was another lesson that I learned, too. Because when I... SH: Was this after Illinois State? 16  HS: Yeah, yeah, yeah after Illinois State. Between Illinois State and the state hospital I went into the service for two years. And I went to Leonard Wood, and, and I didn't stay there because you couldn't go into town if you were, if you were black. Because down there in them boot hills, down in Missoura, I'm telling ya, there was some folks down there that would have killed you if you would've gone into town there. So I wouldn't stay there and I was asked to stay there and play, play basketball. And I said no, no, I don't want to stay down here. So, I went to Georgia, to MP school and, and when I got to SH: Which, which fort? (1:11:21) HS: Camp Gordon, Georgia and Augusta. SH: Uh huh. HS: And, and I went there to MP school and when I, I went and put my uniform on and I went downtown. And I couldn't of walk on the sidewalk if a white man was coming down the sidewalk I was, I had to get off. It didn't make any difference that I had my uniform on you had to get off. And I didn't know that until the, the, the guys were coming down the street and telling me, "Nigger, get off the sidewalk." [chuckles] And I ,you know, and I didn't hesitate, I didn't, I didn't give 'em any, I didn't even hint that I wasn't gonna [chuckles] get off, I got off. But I just said to myself, if I get back on base, I'm not coming back down here anymore. So I, but I left there and I went to Germany. But when I got to Germany I found out that there were certain guest houses that I couldn't go in over there. Because, not because the Germans didn't want me in there, but because the white soldiers from America didn't want me, didn't want me in there. And if you went in there, the guy that owned the place said, "I, I don't want trouble." Ah ha, I don't want trouble either. I just want a beer. And he gave me a beer but the next thing you know somebody throw a glass at you, a bottle or something, and you had to get out. They just, they just, even though you were in the same uniform that they were in it didn't make any difference. You had to get out of there, they didn't want you in there, so it's just SH: How do you, how do you maintain a positive outlook on life when you face so much... (1:13:07) HS: Well. SH: ...racial adversity? HS: Well, I, let me, let me just put it this way, when you, when you look at the fact that Africans are killing Africans. It, it, you just have to realize that you, you have something going on that has to be corrected. And just don't, don't just always look at like a black and white thing. You have to look at it as a, as a, as a, as a problem that human beings have to, have to find some way to resolve the fact that there's this kind of a class system or some kind of system. Something going on here where there's somebody always gotta be the whipping boy. Or somebody's not as good as, but, but when you start trying to deal with it, you, you can't rationalize it away. You have to look at it and say this wrong, now let's, let's work and see if we can't get this fixed. But anger doesn't fix the problem. SH: How do you think your children are facing the world differently than, than you? (1:14:27) HS: I, well, I, I, I think they're, they're facing it differently because I don't think young people as a whole 17  have the same type of resentment and hostility that, that us, as an older population have. I think that they have, they, the majority, the majority of them have, don't have the, the animosity. I think that there are some areas where there are young people that are white people that are, somebody's telling them that, that we're better than them. And, and they really get brainwashed into thinking that that's, that we've got to save the white race or whatever it is, whatever that they tell them, you know. It's almost like the, like the gun people, you know, brainwash people into thinking that you've gotta have a gun. [chuckles] You know, I think that there's some folks out there that are almost as bad as saying hey, look you know you, those white people, those black people are trying to take your jobs and stuff. You know they're trying to take your women. They are trying to do this to you. They, you know, whatever you know we're better than they are. And it's, it's and they get, they get brainwashed into that. And, and, and I would hope that the majority. Again, like I said, if the good people don't realize that it's just as important for us, to, I think constantly, the human relation commission is an example. We don't have, all the good work that we did. Now, we got to a point where I guess we felt like we, we've, we've solved all our problems. That, that human relations commission should still be functioning right today. And, and doing, you find things to do, people to talk to, young people to talk to and say, you know. And have them involved in community buildings find some plus things to do together. We have a Hispanic population that's moving into the area. We should be connecting with them and trying to, just try to build positive relationships with people. And don't let, don't let the Trumps [chuckles] don't let the Trumps, [chuckles] don't let them get a hold to us.You know, we just, we got to do better than, than what we're doing, you know. That's what I think anyway, you know. And I've been out here and talked to Dr. Pembroke and, and I'd talk to Dr. Chatman and I just trying to encourage us to, to try and be creative and come up with ways to get the community together. You know, get us working together with the university, and the university working with the community to, to make this place, not just good, I want to make it awesome. You know,just make it a center of, I mean, how many communities do you have where you have a,a,a junior college, and a college and a university and a center for the humanities and two YMCAs and just thousands of good people running up and down these streets every day. I mean, I see 'em all the time. The people don't even have a clue who, what my name is or anything and they're speaking and you know that. And you can tell they're genuine in their, in their speaking to you because you can just see it in their face. And so, I just think, man, all these good people around here and we, we ought to be doing all kinds of things. And I think that if we set an example for our kids they'll realize that if they want to have a good community and want to live in it you have to work at making it that yourself. You know, but we've got to set the example for 'em. So we can't just say, well, we don't need the communi-, human relation commission anymore. We, we've got to keep it going. Get kids that'll talk to 'em or do whatever we have to do. Work on this relationship between this university and the, and the community. What'd they call it town and gown? [chuckles] (1:19:36) SH: [chuckles] HS: Yeah. SH: I really appreciate you taking the, the time to talk and do this interview. Yeah, I guess I have two questions. One is who else would you recommend that, that I interview for a, for a oral history? (1:19:40) 18  HS: Are you just, are you just looking into interview African American people? SH: No, no. HS: Okay. SH: No. HS: Okay. SH: Anybody. HS: Okay. Well, I don't know whether the, Richard Mueller is a guy that I would say interview. Guy I went to school with and he's about my age. And a good person. Let's see, [can hear banging noises] Houston Laurey. [Can hear voices in the background] I wish my brother was here who, my, he's my youngest brother but [can hear voices in the background] he's a professor at a, he's a retired professor from University of Florida, Gainesville. And he's the one I told you that I, that he's, he's an awesome guy. I wish you could interview him. He's, he's a, he's a, he's a person that [cough] I used to have to tell him. He, he was so angry at white people that he couldn't hardly play sports because even in practice if one of them fouled him. [chuckles] You know, like you keep playing, playing basketball and somebody fouls you, I mean hell, he'd want to fight. I mean he just was angry. And, he, and I'd just talk with him all the time, you know about, you know just, you can't be like that, you know. You just, you gotta learn how to control that. But the one thing that he, he was very competitive, he didn't want, he, he wanted to prove to everybody that he was just as smart as, as you are, you know. And but I remember when I came home from the service and I went up to, he went to Illinois State also. And he said I got somebody I want you to meet and he took me over to this guy's house. And it was a white fella, and he said this is the first [chuckles] white guy that I have ever really liked. [chuckles] And, but, but he is, he's a person that I watched him. He got his leg broke when we were young and he just was a determined person. He went, I, I can just see him right now running up and down the street trying to build that leg back up, you know, so, he broke it up in his hip. And just limping, and limping, and limping. And he got to a point where that leg was strong enough that he could, he played all kinds of sports and, and he can jump about seven or eight inches higher than I could. Maybe even more than that, just tremendous, and I know, I know it was all because he just worked on those legs and worked on them, you know, until he got up the strength. And I've just seen the way that he goes out and sets his goals for himself and he's, he's able to do a lot of things that, to let me know that, if you want to get somewhere in life you've got to work your butt off to get 'em, you know, and set your goals for yourself. And he overcame that hostility that he had and he's, he's a, he's a very smooth gentleman now. [chuckles] So, I, I, I, I know he won't be in town for a long time but I wish you could talk with him. SH: Well perhaps, and I don't know if we can do this, but perhaps we can interview him by telephone and, and, and record him. (1:24:17) HS: Well that would be awesome if you could. SH: Yeah, I'll, I'll check with, with some folks around here and see if we, if we can do that and if so I'll, I'll call you and see if I can get his telephone number. 19  HS: Okay, okay, that'll be fantastic. What was the other question? SH: The other question is that, did you have any, any, anything else that you wanted to a, to say that about, about life in Madison county... HS: Oh SH: ...or growing up? HS: No. I, you know, I, I think that you talk about living the American dream I won't say that I would say that I was, I am fortunate and I feel blessed to have come to Edwardsville. I think if I wouldn't have come here, I think that him, I wouldn't have met Warren Harris. I don't have a clue as to what would've happened to me. I had, I, I don't know, I just know, I just know that my whole life changed because of meeting him, having an opportunity to go to the high school. And, and even though I didn't finish school, going, that college, that trip to college, and out. And the ability to, to work at U city and go to school at night at Webster College and, and get a degree. Those things kept me, or helped me just be the person that I am today. You know, and so yes I think, I think I've been very fortunate say that. And that's, that's it. [chuckles] SH: And I appreciate it. 20  
MadisonCounty;Bill Haine;1944;1918;Bill Haine 1944 1918  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Bill Haine Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer Simmons Hanly Conroy Law Office in Alton, Illinois May 4, 2018 Steve Hansen (SH): Okay, this is Steve Hansen. I'm talking with Senator Bill Haine, and today is May the Bill Haine (BH): Fourth SH: Fourth, thank you, thank you, Senator [laughing]. Why don't you start out and just tell us a little bit about growing up. When were you born and where and something about your childhood? BH: I was born in 1944 in August. My father was in the navy during that time. I was a furlough baby, actually they called us. My mother took the train out to Virginia Beach to meet my father at a furlough. Came back pregnant with me, and I was born in August of '44. He didn't see me 'til forty five, but I had it, I was one of four sons, the second of four sons, and had an idyllic childhood, actually. Late forties, early fifties, late fifties, Alton was an interesting place, not afflicted with crime. It was part of a post war boom. Almost everyone had a job. If you were a young white kid like me you had an idyllic childhood. The schools were segregated, Humboldt School up, I went to St. Patrick's School, and we had African American children in our school in every grade. No one thought a thing about it. The Catholic Schools were always open to everyone, and the public schools however, the grade schools and the middle schools were segregated. Humboldt School was all white. Washington School off of Milner was all white, and you had Lovejoy School, which was the African American school. Over on, used to be on Union, I think, that ended in the late fifties, early sixties. But my father was Supervisor of Shipping at Owens-Illinois. As I said, I went to St. Patrick's Grade School. My brother Jim and I, older brother, were stamp collectors, which introduced me to a foreign country's history. There was a little stamp store on State Street near St. Peter and Paul's Church that we'd take the bus to. You could get on a bus at eight years old and take it anywhere. No one thought a thing about it. And that introduced me to history, all these foreign countries, these fascinating stamps, it was a great window. In fact I found out some years ago that F.D.R. was a stamp collector... SH: Yes, right. BH: ...of some note. But we love stamps and I gave my collection to some young guy, and they had a house fire burned the whole thing up. Sad thing, and Jim, my brother Jim, had a similar experience, and we'd exchange stamps. I'd recommend stamp collecting. I know it's arcane, but it introduced me to a, as I said, history, geography, current events. I still remember these stamps from around the world, and these historic figures in... My mother and father had as all upscale parents, upscale I mean, they weren't wealthy, but they wanted to be educated. They got the Encyclopedia Britannica, and every year they'd 1  come out with the Book of the Year, and the Book of the Year had the entire year, and I would go cover to cover with that book. SH: I remember that well and during, because we grew up in the same period where you'd have door-to- door salesman selling encyclopedias, and my parents must have been similar to yours, they aspired for their children to be educated and that, you know, is the great American Dream. We bought World Book and I couldn't wait to get to that next year, and thumb through the book. BH: And there was, and there was a thin book called the Historic, Historical Digest, just thin book that would come out every year, every six months, it would come out, and I remember reading fascinating histories of the Old West, the Civil War, the modern era. It still sticks in my mind, the story of New Jersey and Boss Hague, how he ran New Jersey in the twenties, thirties, and forties. Took over in the twenties. They finally threw him out in the late forties, he became kind of a tyrant. I first read about Pendergast, Kansas City in this book, a similar figure to Boss Hague. And a guy, the mayor of Memphis or Nashville, a major southern city, named Crump. And there was a famous blues song. Crump had a regime that tolerated vice, but only up to a point. And there was this famous blues song, I remember, Mr. Crump don't like it. That was the refrain. If you go on about doing things, but don't do this, Mr. Crump don't like it. SH: Is that how you got your interest in history? (06:45) BH: I think it is. No question about it. I loved it. I loved reading history and the current events. I would deliver the Post-Dispatch and the old Globe-Democrat. The Post was an afternoon paper and the Globe was a morning paper, so I would I’d collect the Post-Dispatch over in Middletown off of Central, and I remember reading, every day I would get the paper, unfold it before I deliver it, and look at the Fitzpatrick cartoon. Do you remember Fitzpatrick? SH: Yes BH: Great cartoonist, and then Bill Mauldin, one of my favorite cartoonists, political cartoonists. And then I'd go downtown, take a bus downtown frequently, and then the bank. The old First National Bank for the Riverbender is they'd have the newspapers set out. You could buy the Tribune, the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, there you just put the money in the pot, and I'd look at the front page of the Trib, they'd have their cartoon on the front page, you gained a lot just looking at these political cartoons. The Trib was the best because it was in color. SH: Yes. Right. And did you, when did you go to college? BH: 1963. St. Louis U, yeah. SH: And did you always know? Or was this an expectation of your parents that you would go to college? BH: Oh, yeah. All of us, all of us went to college, all of us went, and I went to St. Louis U, Jim went to Purdue, my brother Tom went to St. Benedict's now called Benedictine in Kansas, John went to SIU when it was in Alton, the old Shurtleff campus, now the Dental School. Then he quit and joined the Marine Corps, went to Vietnam, came back and went to Florida State. That's why I joined the army because John 2  was in Vietnam, I figured I want to be part of this adventure too. So I joined up. They had a two-year enlistment program, so I joined up. SH: And how did you decide you wanted to go to law school? (09:13) BH: I just, I felt it was the road to political involvement. I really did. I don't know whether I was enamored with the practice of law. I don't think I was. I wanted to be a political figure, participate in political office, always had that on my mind, and I went to law school, came out of, came back from Vietnam, took the law boards two weeks after I came in country did pretty well and was admitted. SH: Was that at SLU as well? BH: Yeah, 1969. SH: It's interesting that you had an interest in politics from an early age. BH: Very early age. SH: Was your father or mother... BH: No SH: ...political? BH: My mother was, she was an election judge, Democratic election judge, and she was very, very, she had a very astute perception of current events, and she would debate us. Dad was completely, my father was apolitical, came from a Republican background in Wisconsin. He was a La Follette Republican kind of, and his grandfather, my great-grandfather, joined the Union Army at fifteen, fought in the Civil War, wounded twice, came back, was head of the G. A. R., the Grand Army of the Republic, in Wisconsin, and was Republican County Clerk, so he had involvement, but dad was completely apolitical. I don't know whether he ever expressed a political opinion, although he liked Eisenhower. That was far as he went. SH: Did you talk politics around the dinner table? BH: Oh yeah, mom would encourage, and dad would tolerate almost any opinion. He had no, since he had no particular opinion himself, he encouraged us to debate because he didn't have any party line himself. You know, we could express anything that we wanted, and we did. I remember my brother Jim upbraiding a great-uncle who married one of my grandmother's sisters because he was expressing racist views at the dinner table, and my brother Jim, we were in high school, upbraided him at the table for using the n-word and being a racist, and isn't that interesting. SH: Yes BH: And I kind of joined in, my father liked it. My mother was kind of shocked because you had young people critical of older people, but my father kind of liked it. I don't think he cared for this uncle [Hansen laughs] personally, I really don't. [Haine laughs] He thought he was a blowhard, but... so he liked it. He 3  told my mother later, he said, "We shouldn't be critical of George," and I remember my father saying, "Well, he was out of line, you got to let the boys express their views." Keep in mind, we're fourteen, fifteen, and calling this man on the carpet, who's, seventy SH: It's interesting. To what do you contribute, where is the source of that? That, uh, racial liberalism come from? BH: I think my mother and father both, dad never tolerated the n-word. Never. He was from Wisconsin. It could have been that Civil War background. He actually, there's a family anecdote. He took up as Supervisor of Shipping. He was given control of the refractory furnaces, repairing them every summer at the glassworks by Mr. Levis. He trusted my father to do it correctly, and dad had a lot of respect for an African American named Conley. Bill Conley. Fact, I met his sons years later when I was State's Attorney walking across the courtyard in Edwardsville, they recognized me. They were there for his estate, he had died with some money. Very dark young men, strapping young men. But Bill Conley was a bricklayer. His family helped lay Alton streets. Most of Alton streets, by the way, were laid by African Americans. They were bricklayers. So, Mr. Conley, and they were all dismissed in the thirties when FDR came in and the unions, the craft unions, took over the bricklayers, and they were all white. That's a fact. And, so Mr. Conley, dad gave him the contract to do the, this was in the fifties, the refractory repairs, and the bricklayers came in and threatened to put a picket line around the glassworks, and it got up to Mr. Levis, the CEO, and he said, "Well, that's up to my father," so the bricklayers met with my father and they said, "You've got a non-union group doing your work on the furnaces," and dad said, "They're all bricklayers," and he said, "But they don't belong to our union," and dad said, "Well they're bricklayers, they're local, why don't you let ‘em in your union," and the response was, "We don't have any openings," and dad said, "It's because they're black, isn't it? You shut ‘em out," and he said, "They're gonna do the work." Dad was considered to be pro-worker by the union, the machinists, the flint glass workers, the guys in the mold shop, machine shop, I had a former head of the machinists, tell me, this is twenty years ago, that my father was the most pro-worker boss in the whole Owens-Illinois system. So he had a great rapport with the guys in the plant, and they told the bricklayers they weren't, they were gonna cross, so it collapsed, and Conley got to work. But dad was a stickler for fairness. It offended him that they could have been denied work that they were good at. I mean these were bricklayers. They laid the brick streets. When Conley was a young man he was laying brick streets in Alton. SH: Interesting BH: Yeah SH: But when you graduated from law school, then, did you go straight into private practice? BH: I was a clerk for George Moran, Appellate Court Fifth District. The old man, who became kind of a political mentor. He was quite a character, and then went to Horace Calvo. And then I went to the Assistant, he became a judge, became Assistant Public Defender, served two and a half years as public defender and it was a fun job. Had a lot of trials, every day was, hell's a popping, and then in '78 I went in private practice with Randy Bono in Wood River. It's a matter of fact, we're here at the Simmons firm, I filed the first asbestos case in Madison County with Bono. Isn't that ironic? 4  SH: Yeah. Interesting. BH: Yeah, I started this whole, and then got out before the, of course I made money, thanks to Randy, but the guys that really hit it big were John Simmons, Randy, Gori, Goldenberg to some extent, Hopkins to some extent. And Jeff Cooper. Jeff worked for me as assistant state's attorney. He went on to make millions. Simmons worked for me. Randy, as assistant state's attorney. It's funny, all these people that are now judges and millionaires, worked for me as state's attorney. Both the candidates for U.S. attorney, currently, I can't tell you who they are, but I know, work for me, so.... SH: How does it, excuse me for interrupting and going off on a tangent here, but what why is it that Madison County is known as a judicial hell hole? Why is it there's so many class action suits filed here? (18:34) BH: Because we had good juries, good judges, smart judges. The defense lawyers want the asbestos cases filed here, the companies do, because they're all set up to do it. The judges know what they're doing, the lawyers know what they're doing, on both sides, and you have a system that adjudicates cases. That's what it's all about. If you file the case in Hoboken, the judge probably wouldn't know what they're doing, even though it's the home of the plaintiff or the defendant, and so the case would be more expensive, and you have to get a local lawyer. They don't know what they're doing. So the system's just set up. You had some good judges years ago that helped set it up. Charlie Chapman, who's now deceased, was the first asbestos judge. He was a brilliant guy, and then following him Judge Byron, a number of others, just knew what they were doing, and the lawyers knew what they were doing. Hepler's firm, they all know what the marketplace is. The St. Louis defense firms was come over. Armstrong Teasdale, some of the other ones, they know what they're doing. And, but, to me it's a political football that is used to denigrate the plaintiff's bar, which I find really troublesome. It's a phony attack. This county, as a matter of fact, was a place of lucrative law practice for centuries. When, when the county was first established the county seat was the focus of lawsuits, litigation, that's Edwardsville. That's why you have so many law firms in Edwardsville. Alton had a city court. There were only like six or seven of them in the state outside of Cook. It sat downtown in city hall. A city court had original jurisdiction for every matter except for treason and murder, had original jurisdiction with the circuit court. So you could file a multi-billion dollar case in the Alton city court, and the Alton city court handled admiralty, shipping, insurance. You had some insurance companies that started in Alton. Some of the structures still stand in Middletown that are now homes. They were insurance offices that sold insurance to farmers, merchants, shippers. You had insurance for coal mining, limestone mining. And then the factories grew up, all that entailed litigation. That's why in Alton, when I first started out in the practice of law, you had so many law firms around city hall, because you had a city court. And they abolished that in the mid sixties with the blue ballot, the city judges became associate circuit judges and then later they became circuit judges. They were elected every four years. The city granted, city implemented a city court in the 1920s, and that's why you have all these law firms surrounding city hall in Granite. The city court was a major focus of litigation. Some of the big cases were tried in a city court. Lincoln appeared at the Alton city court on numerous cases. It was a major court, and you had all these lawyers. To be a city judge was the pinnacle of a lawyer's career. And you had some first rate lawyers, John Coppinger, whose family is still in Alton. I knew Mr. Coppinger senior. His grandfather was the first lawyer. He was president pro temp of the Illinois senate in the 1890s. John J. Brenholt, a Republican lawyer, represented the Bibb family in the Bibb lawsuits, trying to 5  integrate the Alton schools. He was a Republican state senator, prominent lawyer. So the idea that this county's become litigious is ridiculous. It's been litigious for two hundred years. And Mark Twain once said, "The town that can't afford one lawyer can always afford two," [Hansen laughs] which means if you have a plaintiff you need a defendant and that means they both need lawyers. SH: Turning back to, to the political discussion, you said the Judge George Moran was BH: political mentor. SH: a political mentor. What other political mentors did you have? BH: Judge William Beatty, the late federal judge, he was quite shrewd. The... Don McLean of the county board, an old man that had been around, filled me in with all these political, he knew where all the bodies were buried. He was an amazing old man. Moran, and going back to the sixties, a guy named Bob Miller, Bill Parker, IBEW, DA and his son, young Bill, who's now in his 80s. Young Bill got me to run for committeeman and arrived in 1966, which I won. In those days people fought over committeemen positions for control of the party, 'cause the party was very powerful. SH: Talk to me a little bit about the party. I was going through the historical society library, and I was looking at Evelyn Bowles' collection, and a lot of newspaper clippings about, looked like all this Democratic Party maneuvering. I couldn't tell how much of it was infighting, how much of it was just maneuvering to set up, and there's this, Madison County has this reputation, didn't it, for having a very strong Democratic Party machinery, and I don't understand how that worked. (26:08) BH: It developed from the fact that we had all these industries, and the unions, these were unionized industries. They were developed along the corridor, beginning in Alton, going south to Granite City, Niedringhaus built Granite City, Henry Niedringhaus, out of nothing, it was all bottomland, and they needed water for the process of making that steel, and they took it out of the ground water. So you develop thousands, they were immigrants, they came to Madison, Venice, Granite City, from Eastern Europe, Ireland, and in Alton, the glassworks brought in many people from the rural areas to work, and they became union. Although the glass workers were originally republican, as a man named Arrington started the Glass Bottle Blowers' Union, his son became Republican president pro temp of the senate in Illinois. Passed the first income tax under Governor Ogilvie. Russell Arrington. I had lunch with him. SH: I remember him. BH: He was the, his father started the Glass Bottle Blowers' in Alton. There's a monument to him at St. Patrick's Cemetery. If you go out towards St. Ambrose and you take a right into St. Patrick's Cemetery, there's a huge stone monument that says Arrington on it, and it was paid for by the Glass Bottle Blowers of America. My late grandfather, James Moran, an Irishmen who came from Ireland, joined the army. And then came here to blow glass, learned the art of glass blowing. He was a deputy to Arrington. He was a Democrat, Moran was, because the Irish were all dems. But you had this, this ferment of union-based employees. So you had a ready-made base for voters. You had to get 'em out and educate 'em, and so they developed a classic machinery to get people to the polls, just as in Chicago, Tammany Hall in New York, 6  it was on a small scale. And then early on, it was the gamblers that paid for the votes. You had those, there was a state's attorney named Bill Burton in the forties, who ran the party, and was state's attorney, was chairman of the party. Very powerful man and ran the party with an iron fist and allegedly took hundreds of thousands in payoffs from brothels and gambling dens throughout the county that served these immigrants. And Burton was finally driven out in the late forties by a group of reformers led by George Moran, as a young lawyer. Moran and Beatty started this revolt in the party, but, and then the trial lawyers came in, because the control of the judiciary meant a lot to them. The plaintiff had the burden of going forward, if the judge was not attuned to that, they could ruin a plaintiff's case from the start. So the control of the court brought in lawyer money to the party, and that just contributed to this Democratic machine where you could beat the party, in those days, but it was rare. There was a guy in Alton, his home is at Henry and 6th, big frame home, wraparound porch. John Lauer, German, he ran the party in the thirties. Very powerful individual, ran Alton, had committeemen. He owned a ice and coal company. Klinke, he married Klinke's daughter, and k-l-i-n-k-e, and John Lauer was a huge Democratic figure in the county. Tolerated Burton, they all divvied up spheres of influence. The Democratic Party decided who worked at the racetracks. Illinois had two race tracks, Fairmont and the one in St. Clair County, and so they divvied up who would get these jobs, taking the bettors' money. There were many jobs, Secretary of State jobs. The jobs at various state institutions, county, were all patronage. The, oh, some of the other, Eastside Levee District, which was always a struggle for control of that patronage fiefdom. So the parties in each county were rivals. But they were Democratic parties. SH: There's, something indicated in Evelyn Bowles's papers that suggested that, if you got elected or you got a patronage job that you had to pay, you gave a contribution back to the... BH: A lug SH: ...the party. A lug BH: That's right. Absolutely. You paid the lug if you were elected before you ran... SH: Before you ran BH: ...and then you were slated by the party, you, the party supported you. Now you could, again, you could beat the party. SH: Excuse me for a, but how did you get slated? Did you BH: You went before the central committee SH: To the committee BH: Screening committee, and they'd screen you. They ask you questions, then they decide who to slate, and they would all do it on, basis on friendship, on political, if that person could win. Evelyn refused to do it, and she beat 'em. 1972 or, I'm sorry, '74. I was fresh out of law school and, I remember my mother calling me saying, "We're all for Evelyn Bowles," and they were angry that the party slated the Township Assessor Von Dee Cruse of Granite City, later became mayor. And Evelyn beat him, because Evelyn had 7  a following of her own with the election judges, and she had worked as chief deputy to Miss Hotz, Eulalia Hotz. So she had her own base, and the Democratic women all went for Evelyn, and they dumped the party. [Hansen laughs] And that was rare, that was rare. It was rare to beat the party. And sometimes the party would go along with people because they didn't know how to fight 'em. Mick Henkhaus won '78. I don't think they cared for Mick, but he was pretty formidable at that time. He kind of lost his base over the years, but at that time they just went along with him. I was slated by the party in '88 as state's attorney because a lot of the old party guys didn't like the incumbent, Dick Allen. SH: Oh I remember him. BH: Yeah, and he was a disaster, frankly as state's attorney, but these were political reasons they didn't like him. They felt he was, I just don't want to... He's dead, and there were a lot of problems with Dick. SH: Backup for a second, so you started to say before I interrupted you, about five, ten minutes ago, that you decided to run for committeeman. BH: Yes, '66. SH: '66, and you, and then what were your next steps from committeeman. (34:19) BH: Well, I went in the army. I joined the army, so I resigned. Came back, I lived in St. Louis when I was going to law school in '69. And I was involved in St. Louis politics. I got involved in ward politics in St. Louis. Fact a guy running for state rep, who's a professor in France now, he's retired, he wants us to come over and visit George went to St. Louis U. Otte, O-t-t-e, brilliant guy, married a French woman. Got involved in his race. In fact, some of my early associates included Tim Wilson, the judge in the police shooting. Tim and I are old friends. I got involved in, Anna and I belong to the West End Food Co-op. We lived at the old Coronado's, we were married in '71. And the West End Food Co-op, I couldn't tell anybody I was a combat veteran from Vietnam 'cause half of 'em were communists, and you had a group of Trotskyites. [Hansen laughs] I'm serious! And the old KDNA, Double Helix Corporation, had their little community, they belonged. They later became KDHX, the Double Helix Corporation. They were Jeremy Lansman's, he founded that. It was an underground radio that, and I used to, we used to support ‘em. They were great. There still are. In fact, I still send money to 'em. But, so I got involved in St. Louis politics. As a matter of fact, people ask me about the Trotskyites, they felt the communists were, um, sissies. They didn't want to really do it. So the Trotskyites were the true nuts. The radicals. And they had this little group. They all belong to this food co-cop. I mean, it was the damnedest thing you've ever seen [Hansen laughs], and we could feed our families on hardly anything. But I learned to deal with some, all kinds of different people in this group. And they were all good people. They were just way, way out there, left wing. Man, shit, I was pretty liberal then. And I thought, shit, I'm ultra right wing compared to these folks. But they were great workers, ya know. We all contributed to this thing. And you could feed people for a week on like twenty bucks with this food co-op. It was amazing, but, and of course they were against the war and all this stuff, it was just an incredible era. A really vibrant era, the Kent State shooting, the tragedy at Kent State. And they had all the shutdowns, and people playing guitars, and then the hard hats coming up Lindell Boulevard, for the war. I mean it was just constant ferment, the sixties 8  rolling into the seventies. Nixon and George McGovern. It was an amazing time, an amazing time. And then I graduated, went over to Madison County and resumed my involvement in Madison County politics. SH: And did you become a committeeman again or? (37:59) BH: In '76, we bought a house in Middletown, and this was a pretty good precinct too. The old man, his name was, what was his name? He was, owned a small construction company, pretty good committeeman, old establishment Democrat. I met some interesting people that were friends of John Lauer, one of 'em was a former alderman whose wife was an election judge. And I went to see this old man, Henry was his first name, I can't think of his last name. He lived over on Garden Street, big old house, and he had diabetes, they had amputated his leg, and I said, "Are you gonna run for committeeman?" I went to ask him, and he said, "You know, I was thinking about it, but, so do you want to run?" I said, "Yes, sir, I do, if you don't run." I put it that way. I could've beat him, I think, but I didn't want to do it because he was well-regarded. And he said, "Why don't you run, kid? I'll be for you." So I got elected without opposition. And I was well-received because I didn't push the old man out. That's important to do, it’s all timing. It’s all timing. You can win, but if you win in the wrong way, takes you time to get ingratiated with folks. You're considered a hot head, or difficult to deal with. And then your influence is not as much as it would be, and I've always tried to maintain that balance, even in the senate. If you disagree with someone, you should never kick ‘em around, 'cause you're always gonna need 'em, at some point. And I think a lot of people forget that now, their politics has become a zero-sum game. If I win, you lose, and that shouldn't be. There should be always some face saving, and I've tried to maintain that over the years, especially in the senate, which is more collegial. When I was state's attorney I did the same thing with defense lawyers, you always try to do what you can to accommodate, they have to make a living, although you can't give up the principle that their client must be punished. And most of them understanding that, a few didn't, but with those guys, you have to fight it out. SH: And so was being slated for the state's attorney the first county-wide? (40:55) BH: I ran in 1980 against the party. Three-way race: me and Dick Allen and Nick Byron, he was the incumbent. And I came within three hundred votes of winning. Dick Allen accused me of being a stalking horse for Nick Byron, which was not true, 'cause I almost won. I won everything in the north end, and Bono and I got involved in it. Randy helped me a lot, as he did over the years, but... SH: Randy who? BH: Bono, Randy Bono, a brilliant lawyer, brilliant, and brilliant judge too. He was a great judge. But when I got involved in it, it was a, people said I was nuts. You're crazy, you never, you're unknown. I almost won, so I had a base automatically. And Don Weber, very conservative guy, good trial lawyer, good prosecutor, but he made mistakes 'cause I think his ideology got in the way of his judgment. And I say that in all fairness. Don was first-rate prosecutor. I hired him later when I was state's attorney, but he lost. He won that year Reagan won the county, Don got in by a close vote, and then lost in '84 to Dick Allen. I didn't run then, 'cause we were doing too well in the law business, and then in '88 I really wanted to be back in political office. I was on the county board, but I wanted to break into the big time, the state's attorney. 9  SH: So you served on the county board. (42:39) BH: Elected in '78 through '88, yeah. It was very productive, I founded Madison County Transit District, which does all these buses and bike trails. That was, I was on the county board, Nellie Hagnauer, the old boss, put me on there because I helped craft a compromise to implement a quarter-cent tax, which was unpopular because it was associated with Bi-State, the St. Louis bus company, which was, um, just absolutely incompetent in those days. They've improved somewhat over the years. But in those days, they were really, there was constant bad press. So I hired Jerry Kane in the early eighties, and we started our own operation, with Nellie's support. Nellie Hagnauer, the chairman of the board. And got into all kinds of good stuff. So I had a pretty productive county board era. SH: And so in '88, then you were elected... BH: State's attorney SH: ...state's attorney BH: Served 'til 2002 SH: Were there any special cases that you remember that were particularly significant or interesting? BH: We had the Sims case off the bat. The woman that murdered her two babies. One in Jersey County, which she got away with, and then one here which she didn't, we nailed her on it. I had a number of other terrible murders. Had a first-rate staff, first-rate staff, they were just outstanding. Some of them are judges now. Kyle Napp, for example, I hired Jennifer Mudge, she was an up-and-coming star. She's now a big star. It was a great, it was tension, but and then we had some controversies, political controversies, within the building. They were all Democrats, except for Shimkus, who was treasurer, who got elected in ‘90. And we, I had some difficulty, we had a police shooting, white police officer shoots an African American. That was a difficult situation. We got beyond it by being very frank, we had a grand jury made up of a number of African Americans that I put, I asked the state police to come in and take over the case, and the detective in charge was an African American, took every step to make sure that this was done openly. And it passed. And then you had the group of black men beating to death this white guy in Alton, Skelton, you remember that, the late nineties? SH: Yes (45:42) BH: That was a very racially charged, they had to put a lid on that. And that worked out too because we were fair with the dispositions. Initially, there was an effort by some people in St. Louis to stir up racial animosity, but it didn't pan out, and it's just a number of other cases that were very challenging. A case, an old case going back to '76, an abduction, rape, and murder of a waitress at a little place that's still there on Main Street in Edwardsville. That case came back near the end of my tenure. Susan Jensen, the first assistant state's attorney, ran into a lady in Glen Carbon at a party who was the mother of this woman who was abducted, raped, and murdered. She was an elderly woman and said she heard the guy they suspected died in prison. And Susan mentioned this to me, and I said, "Well, let's find out." So it turned out he was in Florida in prison through a contract with Alabama, and he was scheduled to be released. It was an eerie 10  thing. And so we brought in a detective from Edwardsville. It turns out the state police and the Edwardsville police had kept the DNA they took from the woman's body in 1976. And it had corrupted, but there was a new test developed a couple of years before that could use it, and this guy was the guy. SH: Wow BH: Isn't that ironic? And we filed the charge. I got a call from Arkansas newspaper reporter, a woman, who said, "I can't believe you filed this charge." I remember, I kept talking to her, and I said, well, I explained to her how we hand out, I said it was almost like a message from beyond, and she said, this man, she chronicled his history in the last twenty years. He murdered a family in Arkansas, he was a, he had red hair, and he was demonic, and he murdered his ex-wife and her child by a previous marriage and was suspected of an abduction, rape, and murder somewhere else and was doing time in Florida on an attempted abduction. Same M.O., and that's when he was scheduled to be released. He had five or ten years in Florida and was going to be released like within sixty days, and we nailed him. SH: Wow BH: And we’d have asked for the death penalty, but at that time the death penalty was not extant. They tried him right after I left the office, and found him guilty. I think Kyle Napp tried that case. I'm not sure, she's now circuit judge. But this reporter said he threatened her because she wrote about him and said, "When I get out, you will die," and she said, "I've been scared to death ever since and I know he would have killed me." SH: Wow BH: That's what she told me. And they printed these big headlines in Arkansas. He murdered this whole family in Arkansas, and got away with it. In fact, a jury acquitted him. The county attorney, the prosecutor, was so distraught, he resigned. He resigned because he, his office. The jury got confused over the evidence, and they walked him, and this guy was so distraught, he quit. That's what she told me, isn't it incredible? Said this, and these big headlines quoted me, and he's now doing, I think, Chuck Romani, our judge over here, gave him, like, 150 to 250 years, because he's eligible for parole after eleven years under the old code, isn't that an amazing story? SH: Yes, it is. BH: And I founded the, as state's attorney we did the first protocol for domestic violence. One of the first in the state. Founded the Child Advocacy Center. Soon as they bought that Wood River Township Hospital, I went in to Kyle Napp, who wanted to do that. And said, "We're in business." Worked out the funding, did a protocol from dealing with the mentally ill. There was an Alton police chief, and I got mental health hero awards for that, I remember. Kind of nice. But had some progressive steps for the office. SH: You first ran for state senate in '02? BH: '02 11  SH: Evelyn called me in '01, said she was getting out. I should consider running, and I said, Evelyn, I'm in, because I wanted to get out of state's attorney. I told the party people I wasn't gonna run again. I told Mac Warfield, the chairman, I was gonna quit before that, and they didn't want me to quit. They wanted me to run one more time and then find some way to get out. Then I backed the county executive plan, which frankly really pissed off the party elders, but I didn't go negative on it, and it lost, which was a blessing because I wanted to run for county executive, but it lost. This is much better for me, so along comes Evelyn resigning, or retiring, and the party endorsement. BH: Can you compare and contrast what it was like to campaign for state's attorney versus campaign for state senate? SH: Different issues. I ran unopposed for state's attorney. In '96 and 2000 I was unopposed, so I had a good office. For a lawyer to run for state's attorney, they have to think they can win  otherwise, no lawyer is going to get involved in it. When I ran in '88 against Dick, a lot of lawyers just ducked. They weren't sure I could win against an incumbent of my own party. Because state's attorney so powerful, a lawyer doesn't want to alienate him unless you think they're vulnerable, you don't run. So I had a pretty good gig going as state's attorney, so the difference was I would get opposition as state senator because it's a more partisan. Statewide, you have state issues: the income tax, all these other issues, play a role. Labor issues, tort issues, all kinds of stuff. So you, so it's a different mindset. I had opposition in '04, a guy really worked. I did very, very well, and then in '12 I had opposition, none in '08 because Obama was running. I guess they didn't feel it was the right year, the Republicans, so no, I had a pretty strong base. In '12 they felt I was vulnerable. I voted for the income tax, which had to be done, frankly the state can't go insolvent, gotta fund higher ed, K-12. It's ridiculous, and we're a low-tax income tax state. So I voted for it, and got a ton of static, and then my opponent thought I'd be vulnerable because I got a big state's attorney pension, which I earned. And that was the law, it's not like I gilded the lily or gamed the system. I just signed up for my pay and my pension. The state authorizes the pension, not me, as state's attorney. So they felt I was vulnerable. Kirk Dillard, a prominent Republican senator, told me that, he and I were good friends, he said, "They think they can get you." I said, "Yeah, well they got another thing coming." And I got almost 59 percent of them, I got almost 60 percent of the vote. 59 point something. And if Pat Quinn wasn't governor, I could have probably got 65 percent, according to pollsters. 'Cause Pat was very unpopular. BH: Yes. SH: How do you campaign? What are...? BH: You go door-to-door SH: Do you? BH: Oh, I went door-to-door every day, had a young guy, Jacob Kaplan, who's now a big shot in the Cook County Democratic Party. Cullerton sent in... I raised a million bucks myself. They sent in a young gal, who sat with me while I made these phone calls in the morning for money, which I hated, I hated it. And then, I just hate asking for money or stuff. I really do. To my own detriment. Bono used to say that. 12  And then in the afternoon we'd have a staff meeting. He sent in three guys, Steve Moore, who was a craftsman of sound bites, who told me what to say, what not to say. Put me on film, he said, "You know, you talk too goddamn much," that's what he told me. [Hansen laughs]. "You gotta keep it real simple." He was great, and then Steve Campbell, the number one guy and then just Jacob. Jacob and I would go out every afternoon, all over the district. I'd hit the doors. He had an app, and we didn't go to hard D's, didn't go to hard R's. The hard D's are gonna vote for me, according to the polling, the hard R's aren't gonna vote for me no matter what, no matter what I do! So we went to the leaners, just the leaners, and that means we went all over the county. I went from Elsah all the way down to Fairview Heights, every day in the afternoon. You don't go in the morning. People are waking up, and they're doing things, and you don't go at night. You go 'til dusk every day. And I kind of like going door-to-door. I met people, served on my past grand juries. I knew I was doing well by the reactions. We knocked on the door in Granite City, Jacob was standing out there on the street. I knocked on this door, and this old man came to the door, and he said, "It's Bill Haney! Ma, it's Bill Haney!" They called me Haney in Granite City. [Hansen laughs]. There must have been some guy named Haney that was big in Granite years ago, because everybody called me Haney, and his wife came out. I said, "Well I'm just here asking for your vote," and this old man said, "Well you know what? Senator Haney, you get too much money on your pension," he told me that. I said, "Yeah, I probably agree with that, although my wife doesn't agree with that," he laughed. He said, "Well we've always voted for you. You were a great state's attorney, and you're a good senator, we've always voted for you. So we're gonna be with ya again." I walked out, and I told I Jacob, "How do ya like that, Jacob," and he said, "Good stuff, good stuff." And I knew, that's why I knew I was winning. You can tell if people are angry. SH: Yeah (58:36) BH: If enough of 'em are angry, going door-to-door, and you have to go door-to-door. You can't, there's no substitute for it. Because you get a flavor, and you can’t go door-to-door inefficiently, knocking on every damn door, because you're just wasting time. This app that they had was just superb, and the politics... I went door-to-door when I first ran for committeeman, when I ran for county board, always went door-to-door, but Jacob’s and Campbell and the party’s app made it more scientific and it maximized your time, 'cause keep in mind you're going district-wide, and you went in a sampling of neighborhoods. The mayor of Granite City called me up one day and said, "Hey it's all over town you're in Granite City going door-to-door." I said, "Really," I said, "Ed is that true?" He said, "Yeah, people have said, 'We saw Senator Haney going door-to-door.'" [Hansen laughs] That's what he told me, because it gets around. SH: Now how many days would you do this? BH: Oh, six, seven days a week, every day, unless was rainy. I remember it was 105 degrees we were going door-to-door and I was wiping, I didn't want to appear too sweaty, [Hansen laughs] so I had water, because you don't want to look sweaty. SH: Right, right. 13  BH: And then I'd go to restaurants and work the room. I see some people that knew me. We went out to eat all the time, Anna and I, and I would go to these places, and people were extremely friendly. I'd see some people, and then I'd be introduced at that table, and then work this table, that table. SH: How many months would you do this? BH: We did it from June all the way up until the election. SH: Wow BH: And you have to do it. If people don't like to do it, they shouldn't run. And then we'd have ads, the money went to ads. TV ads, radio ads. Primarily TV, you really have to... [sees someone] There's Elizabeth Heller! She's great, you know her? Attorney Heller? She's good. But yeah it's real work. I lost weight. The worst areas were Collinsville, the hills, Alton. I didn't do Alton too much 'cause that's my base. I won Alton three to one. But Collinsville, those back areas are really hilly, and Elsah, I went back into Elsah. Man, that's tough. SH: Talk about your experiences being senator. What's your observation about different governors and your colleagues in the senate? (1:01:22) BH: Oh my colleagues are great, by and large. They're really good people, and they had their different views, both parties. There's only one guy in the senate that annoys me. I don't want to go into it, he's Republican, but I don't think he understands persuasion. But it's been a great reward, the give and take. The Illinois Senate committees are great. You have a real give and take. It's a free system, it's the American system. I really am offended at how the legislative branch has been ill treated by Blagojevich, Quinn, and now Rauner. Quinn cut off our pay, because, and I can take it, but a lot of people can't, because we wouldn't vote for some damn thing he wanted. I don't know what it was. And then Rauner had his comptroller, Munger, cut off our pay for something. And it's just not right. The founding fathers, the legislative branch was the primary branch, because it formed the laws and had open access. You can't get in to see the governor, unless the governor allows you. The legislature's open and accessible. And Blagojevich had basic contempt for the General Assembly too. I got tired of him. And I take great pride in being in the senate. I get tired of the attacks on Madigan and Cullerton, in both parties. It's just, it's an attack really on the American system. You know, I told some reporter some years ago, where else do you have chief executives cutting off the pay of legislators who don't vote their way? Venezuela, you know, someplace like that, or Cuba. Damn it's ridiculous. But I love the process. I love it, and I, doing the politics now with my cancer issue. I can't do that anymore, going door-to-door, all the events. It isn't just door-to-door, you've got to go to all the events, you gotta go to the Memorial Day stuff, the Veterans Day stuff, the parades. You can't say no, otherwise they'd figure you don't care, and I don't want to do that anymore. So it's time for somebody else, and somebody younger, like Rachelle. She's young and vigorous, and wants to do it. That's the way I was. It's like that, who did I say this to, got a big laugh... When I first started out, I was young and strong and runnin’ against the wind, like Bob Seger sang, now I'm like Jackson Browne, I'm running on empty. [Both laugh] SH: That's pretty good, that's pretty good. Is the Democratic Party, what used to be the machine, has that 14  BH: It's changed SH: Is it changed because... BH: Demographics SH: ...the voters have changed? BH: Yes, demographics have changed. The county's more Republican now. Mark Von Nida by the way is doing an excellent job as party chairman. He's tops. But the demographics have changed. It's more difficult. We're a swing county now. Trump carried the county. I mean, that is unheard of forty years ago SH: I think he carried it by twenty thousand votes. BH: twenty-two thousand SH: twenty-two thousand BH: Yeah, Reagan carried the county, narrowly in 1980, that was rare. But, I don't think Eisenhower carried the county. I may stand corrected, but I think Stevenson carried the county in the fifties. But, man. So it's more difficult now, you don't have that base. It's all TV ads, negative campaigning more so. There's always been negative campaigning, but... Now the negative campaigning is, we make up things. We say, "Bill Haine voted for his pay increase." Which I've never done, but they say that if I voted for a budget with the pay increase in it, I voted for the pay increase. You have to vote for the budget for pete's sake, you know. And the pay increase is now the law. This is some years ago. Or they had an attack on Dan Beiser, that he took, he gave money to a child molester for state representative. When they took the fact that he gave money to Madigan's political operation, who gave money to a guy named Farnham, a state representative, that Democrat who was viewing child porn on his state computer. But that was after the election, nobody knew that at the time. Do you see what I'm saying? SH: Yes BH: It's just made up. I was shocked at that. Just made up! SH: So what's going on with Madison County, with the, you referred to the demographic changes, which have been profound. Has that goes along with the economic changes that have occurred? (1:07:35) BH: Yes, and Edwardsville, SIU, frankly, has drawn, and the school district, has brought in people that are more independent, voters, more Republicans. And these subdivisions are grand, the bike trails. All these things contribute to a quality of life that's attractive, and they bring in a different type of voter. The highways. We have a great highway grid, thanks to me and Jay Hoffman and a few others pouring all this money in under Blagojevich, frankly. And SIU, I've spent a lot of my waking hours in Springfield trying to get money for SIU, dorms, and all these things, and that brings in more people. But they're independent voters. And Troy, Maryville, Edwardsville, all these areas have boomed, they're destination spots. 15  SH: And contrast that with what's happened with Alton and Granite City. BH: Alton is more static. Alton, Godfrey, Granite is too. Although Alton in the last few years, Alton seems to be jelling, a lot of young families are moving in buying these houses, because it is a, it's a historic place with a lot of interesting neighborhoods. And the quality of life, we're twenty minutes from the airport, in Alton. Twenty minutes from Lambert. And people find it to be attractive so there's something going on in Alton that's different than the past few years. Granite is more of a worrisome situation because they're so dependent on that steel mill. Whereas Alton was on the rocks 25, 30 years ago with the closure of its steel mill, which came back. John Simmons helped it come back, as well as the glass works going under. But Alton seems to have gotten beyond that, they're now in that post-industrial age, so to speak. So SH: How do you think they got past that? BH: They just hung in there, Alton just hung in there, and we have conservative neighborhoods, conservative people, they just, they don't want to move. But now you have some young families saying, hey, these homes are cheap, per square foot, compared to St. Louis County or St. Charles County, and they're coming over here to buy, and I see it all over you. You know in Middletown, you walk around, or Christian Hill, up State Street, there are all kinds of young people walking around, with kids. I didn't see that five, six, seven, eight years ago. So it's interesting. SH: You mentioned SIUE as a factor in the county change and the road system BH: No question SH: Infrastructure that has brought people and boosted the economy. Are there other factors? Was there a role that banks played, did capital start coming in from St. Louis that didn't come before? BH: Well, I don't know, I'm not facile with that, Steve, but I'll tell you what, the CORE project at ConocoPhillips was a huge shot in the arm. We were hitting the recession, and suddenly they were putting four billion into that plant. Four billion dollars! And they hired like, somebody told me the building trades, 39-hundred craftsmen came in from all over to work on that corporate project. SH: Wow. But what about the levee system was that important do you think? BH: Yes, without the levee system, the CORE project wouldn't of gone. And Granite City Steel put 750 million into its coker, its new system. Without that, when they put that plan in the mothballs without the investment some years ago, they'd have closed. They kept the plant open because of that investment they had put in. So they'd of closed it outright. That's one of my, I think one of my biggest, my most satisfactory achievements is the levee repair, getting that done in record time. And it's coming to fruition, we'll have certified levees up and down. Our bottomland is one of the few industrial areas in the nation that is going to be flood proof. Five hundred year floods, in record time, and I think we shocked the Corps of Engineers and FEMA by getting that done, and I don't mind saying, I did everything I could get it done. And I worked with Frank Watson, the Republican leader, 'cause the industries were pressuring Frank, and the farmers too. They would have suffered with decertification, and Frank put Repub- I lost 16  Democratic votes because of the tax, and the fact that I created a new entity: the flood protection board in each county. And that took the power away from the levee board. But you know, these historic Alton, Wood River levy, and the MESD, the Metro East Sanitary District levees system. 'Cause frankly, it was over their head, and it politically it would have been disastrous. I wouldn't have got it passed, and Frank wouldn't have been for it. But when I created this board in this bill, the statewide association of levee districts was opposed to it strongly. They felt it was a power grab, and they have a wide influence, 'cause they're all good ole boys or patronage. They work on these levees, so I had to fight them tooth-and-nail, but with Frank's votes, I could lose the Democratic votes. And he put him on. Frank, without Frank, it wouldn't have gone. SH: Interesting BH: Yeah, and he wanted Tom Long on the board. I suggested Tom Long to him. He said, "Who's gonna be on these boards? Is it your usual suspects?" That's what he told me, I'll never forget it. I said, "Senator Watson, who do you want on the board?" He was thinking, and I said, "What about somebody like Tom Long," who's a Republican lawyer of some note, former party chairman, and Frank said, "Yeah he'd be good." I said, "Okay, excuse me." So I went out, I called Alan Dunstan, said, "I want your word you're gonna offer this position to Tom Long, three member board." I said, "Alan I want your word. The bill depends on it." He said, "Okay, you got my word." I went back in and told Watson. I got Dunstan’s word to the appointment. He said, "Okay," and then Dunstan appointed Pennekamp, Jim, and Ron Motil, good lawyer from Collinsville. Ron's still on there. I don't think Pennekamp is, but Tom’s still on there too. Tom Long and Ron Motil. They've done an excellent job, and the first, I put Les Sterman. I had 'em hire Les, who helped with the bill. Les helped me formulate the bill. He's East-West Gateway Director. He's now running that U City loop trolley, trying to get that up. He's a great guy. SH: You’ve had a very rich and distinguished career, what are some of the, besides the levee system, what are some of the things that, when you look back, you're particularly proud of? (1:16:05) BH: Oh gosh, I was a chief sponsor of the medical marijuana bill, which caused a stir. Now, Missouri's doing it, I heard. You know that? They're doing it. Got that passed. Well just a number. My tenure as insurance chairman, I created a balance, so that you didn't ruin the market. The medical malpractice thing was a huge controversy. Simmons and Bono help protect me from the trial lawyers in Chicago who were furious that we were doing this medical malpractice reform bill, which was later dumped by the Supreme Court because the docs insisted it be, you didn't have any give in it. You couldn't, the nonseverability clause, which was, I told him, "You're making a mistake." They thought they'd box in the court, and you can't box in the court. But it still changed the tenor. A lot of the provisions were implemented by court rule. Changed the whole tenor, and Randy and John, they didn't do medical malpractice, but Randy never liked the bill, but he backed me. So, so did John, but, oh and it's just a number of others. I got a bill passed early on. Steve Davis, who was then my representative for Beiser, told me I'd never get it passed. So did Holbrook, Tom Holbrook, this creates a surface water protection district for the Metro East. Evelyn tried to get it passed and Tom Holbrook years ago, and they could never get it passed. I got it passed. Which means you could, they could implement a tenth of a cent tax, and do surface water containment, which they should do, but they have a legitimate de jure, a containment district appointed by the county board chair. Before that it was all ad hoc. Now they have a legitimate authority, even without 17  the tax. Blagojevich signed that into law. He signed into law the levee district too, even though he said he’d never signed a tax increase. But Jay, Jay gets the credit for that. He pressured him into doing it. [Hansen laughs] Rod never published a thing about it, it all his great local. And that thing just boomed, and they're all union labor, and that's the thing, if you, if I take care of my union, if my union factories are benefiting, they hire union people. That's why I've always found myself pro-business and pro-labor. As long as the businesses hire labor people, I'm with 'em. Hundred percent. SH: You know for the past, you and I are of a similar age... BH: Yeah SH: And for the past fifty years, we've seen huge change in America, but also, Madison County. You alluded to the economic change that occurred, demographic change that occurred. Are there other ways that you could characterize what has happened over this, you know when you think of the sweep of time, and the magnitude of changes? BH: Communications. In fact we have to deal with the fact that we have too much news, too much communications. And I think people are beginning to pull back. Read more. The big issue for me, again, I told you this before we started recording it. You know, in my formative years, I grew up in a country that was, one third of the country was under apartheid, like South Africa was, a brutal system. The African Americans were excluded from the mainstream of life by force and coercion, by the force of law, and that has flowed into this current era. The Black Lives Matter movement, the suspicion of law enforcement. W. E. B. Du Bois wrote about this, about the law being, he said, "The sad thing is, the Africans," as he said, "Need the law to enforce order in their communities, but they're suspicious of the law because it was used against them." He wrote about this before World War I, in his book. That's still true today, the legacy of racism affects law enforcement, and the people's perception of law enforcement, and I think racial issues are the biggest problem we still have in the country, and we have to address it. White people have to be more cognizant of the legacy of racism, and black people have to be cognizant of how that racism has maybe made them more unsafe by corroding their view of what good law enforcement can be, and the, like these monuments, I mean damn. Why would we have a monument to Robert E. Lee? I don't get it. My great-grandfather was in the Union Army, he would've considered Lee a traitor. And I'm a Grant man, [Hansen laughs] and a Sheridan man, or Sherman. But Lee, and these confederate monuments are, I just think it's... And they had this monument down in New Orleans to the White League, which massacred black people after the Civil War. They massacred 'em, shot 'em down as they attempted to meet and organize politically. I mean, and they had a monument to the White League. And then in Memphis, you had Nathan Bedford Forrest, who founded the Ku Klux Klan and was as ruthless a man, he was a brilliant general. Sherman actually wrote that Forrest was the only confederate general he worried about. But he was utterly ruthless and racist to the core. And I saw that monument. Have you seen that monument in Memphis? SH: No I haven't. BH: ...well they finally took it down. My wife and I saw it a couple years ago. We went, we bid on a trip to Memphis, to be at the Peabody Hotel for Beverly Farms. And so we went over and saw this. This was a 18  huge figure on a horse, done by a French sculpture, a magnificent piece of art. You ought to see it, it's stunning. And it's, even the stirrups, these are all bronze, and the hands. It's just unbelievable, but this guy was absolutely... No one we'd want to have a statue to, in my opinion. I mean, and Memphis was segregated ruthlessly until the sixties. It was just an incredible place, but Forrest, as a historic figure, is no one to, you know to have a monument to. SH: Do you feel like, more easy mix of the races today than... BH: There is a little bit more, but there's also more tension, and I think it's on both sides, but mainly the burden is on white people to see the legacy of some of these actions. The system of human bondage was inherently evil, and the reason why Lovejoy was murdered here, not too far from this spot, was because he told the truth about it being evil, and they didn't want to hear about it, because they knew it was evil, and they were profiting from it, so they didn't want to hear about it. That's why they, that's why they shot him. If truth means nothing to you, you don't care. But if truth goes to your heart and you know it's true, and you're profiting from the evil, you want to get rid of that truth teller. SH: What do you see as, other than the issue of race, what other issues do you think that we are gonna have to confront? BH: Oh, how to have an economy that is, that lifts all boats again, like the forties and fifties. We were in an idyllic period. I was growing up for as the economy. One reason why the crime rates were low, everybody had a job. White people, black people, everybody could find a job. Now it's more difficult, and also what to do about the disintegration of the family. I have no thoughts on, I don't know how to address that, but I think the family unit is in great distress, and you have more out of wedlock births, which caused, I think, terrible problems for the children involved. There's a growing number of distressed children. I heard about it at a hearing in Springfield, the great number of increasing percentages of children who are admitted to hospitals with mental problems. And this psychiatrist testified in front of our committee. He teaches in Chicago, practices in Chicago in the big hospitals, and he said, it's an ever increasing rate, and I think it's because of the disintegration of the family unit. It was a bill to provide wraparound coverage for children with mental problems, how to pull that off. But that's the big challenge we face too. SH: Well, you know, I wanna thank you again for sitting down and... BH: Thanks, all I did was blather SH: [Hansen laughs] You know, it's gonna be great, like, 25, 50 years from now, when some historian’s going to be going through the archives and they'll be able to search about any number of the topics we've talked about. And they'll be able to get a great insight into what life was like a turn of the century. BH: Well, let me tell you one of my political anecdotes, my political, little skeleton things. I won't tell you all of 'em. I know a lot of them, from Don McLean and Judge Beede, and others. In 1958, George Moran senior got a wild hair to decide to run for probate judge because it was a part time job. And you had a lawyer up in Alton named O'Neill, an uncle of Judge P. J. O'Neill, who was judge years ago. A 19  friend of mine, he's long retired. O'Neill, Moran, and then there was another Irishman from Granite City who ran named Dufner. So they all ran for probate judge. And it was a nasty race. O'Neill won. Dufner and Moran split the Tri Cities. They were both from Granite City, Madison, Venice area. So, O'Neill won. It was a close race. Moran came in second, Dufner third. And it was Beede who told me this, Judge Beede. So for some time after that, George Moran was really down in his cups. He got beat. And this was his first race outside of committeemen for an office, public office. So he was in a tavern the saloon in Venice, and Venice was mainly Irish then. And the mayor, who was kind of the dictator and mayor of Venice, was a dentist named Dr. John Lee, had a dental office of Madison and also ran the bank, allegedly had control of all the slot machines in Venice, right across the McKinley Bridge from Missouri, which was a blue, what do? SH: Blue laws. BH: Blue laws, no gambling, no nothing. So they come over to gamble in Venice, and they pay a toll too, on top of it, to the city, it was a toll bridge. So Dr. Lee had all this cash. In any case, George, George's wife was named, Cecilia Rogan and his, her sister was George's longtime secretary, Mary Catherine. [unclear] She was just a wonderful person, and so was Cecilia. Ceil they called her. So George was in this saloon, and he was really down in the cups. So Dr. Lee saw him and went over, and George was drinking, and Dr. Lee put his arm around him, and said, "George, you've been really down in the cups the last month, because of that probate judge race, right?" And he said, "Yeah, doc," he said, "I can understand getting beat, you know, I knew going into this with both of us from Granite City area, we'd split the vote and O'Neill could win. So it isn't that. It's just that in Venice, here, I mean, I knew all these people. My wife's from Venice, big Irish fam- we all went to St. Mark's in Venice, and I just can't understand our own people voting against us. We lost Venice." And Dr. Lee patted him on the back and said, "George, if it makes you feel any better, you did win Venice. We stole it." [Hansen laughs] Honest, they stuff, these are paper ballots. They changed the ballot box, and stuffed it with Dufner votes. [Hansen laughs] And Beede said, "George, felt a lot better after that." He could understand them stealing the election more than he could understand his own people voting against him. Now that's politics. SH: That's great. Well thanks again for speaking with me, and I guess I'll see you this afternoon at the reception. BH: Oh I gotta get going. I gotta get a haircut, otherwise I'll look like Buddy Holly. Unknown Third voice: Thank you again for your time. 20 
MadisonCounty;Jim Pennekamp;1950;1918;Jim Pennekamp  1950 1918   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Jim Pennekamp Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer October 24, 2018 Steve Hansen (SH): Okay, so we're on now. This is Steve Hansen, I'm talking with Jim Pennekamp, James Pennekamp, it's October the 24th 2018. So, Jim, uh just, just so we just have an easy conversation here, I want you to kind of tell us a little bit about where you were born, where you grew up, and your, your early life. Jim Pennekamp (JP): Okay. So, I actually am from the East Coast. Not from around here. I'm a Jersey boy, alright, with an international flair, Okay? So, I was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey, in 1950. There were five kids in my family, I had an older brother and an older sister, a younger brother, a younger sister, so I'm the middle kid and lived in New Jersey 'til I was about thirteen years old. My dad was actually a scientist. His dad was a Missouri Synod Lutheran minister, alright. As, SH: He was a Missouri senator? JP: Missouri Synod Lutheran minister. SH: Oh, Synod, Synod. JP: As was my mother's father and they both were professors at a Lutheran seminary in Greensboro, North Carolina, that taught African-American young men to be ministers in the Lutheran Church. And this goes way back in time. Way back in time to a very segregated South. But the reason that's important, is because, the reason my parents were in college—right, was because they were children of pastors in the south. And they went to college for free because of that. So, my father became a scientist, he was a chemical engineer. SH: Who did he work for? JP: Exxon. SH: Exxon, wow. JP: But it was not Exxon first, it was NJ Labs. Right? Then it was Esso, then it was Humble [laughs] then it was Exxon. Okay? Anyway, by the time I was thirteen, he was working out of New York, right? We were in New Jersey, right, we had moved to Westfield. Commuter town, I mean I was a kid, right, so all this was going on. I joke with people, I said, "You know, I didn't know there was green space between cities until I went to summer camp at age eight." By the way, the name of the summer camp was "Way Wayonda." [laughs] That's the truth. It was a YMCA camp. Yeah, that was my first introduction to the country. So, at that point, he was transferred overseas, so I, when I was thirteen, and my family moved to Brussels, Belgium, alright? So, I actually went to the majority of I guess late middle school and high 1  school in Brussels, Belgium. Which is significant for me in that I was, you know, introduced to, I went to the international school in Brussels, Belgium, it's still there. It was a much humbler place when I went there because all the military kids, and Brussels, of course, was a, was a, um, a center, you know, SH: And naval headquarters. JP: Oh, absolutely. SH: Yeah. JP: And this was back in the Cold War days, so all the military folks were there. We all, and in fact, all English-speaking people, went to the same school. And so, we were, I was exposed to folks from all over the world, many different cultures. SH: Right. JP: So, I grew up at least in those formative years of high school through eleventh grade in a very different way, right. And ended up loving it. Really loving it. And then, you know, transferred back to the United States because of my father. Ah, and ended up in my senior year of high school at Westfield High School. [laughs] And, you know, ran into people I knew when I was, you know, when I was there four years earlier. SH: That must have been a really rich experience for you, then. JP: Oh absolutely. Absolute, and you know, it was, it was, in so many ways, okay. First of all, you're thirteen, so understand, I'm a kid, okay. As were, you know, the rest of my siblings and being uprooted from what you knew and taken over to a foreign country, was very difficult at first. But you're, as a kid, you're real resilient, and you get used to things, and all of a sudden you begin appreciating things, and so. Being in Europe at the time, you know, Europe, as a group of countries it's much smaller than the United States, okay? So, you get in your car and you drive for a couple hours, you're in a different country. You've traveled, you know this, alright. And when you do that, you get to experience civilizations that are thousands of years old, essentially. And my father was very keen on teaching us about history. So, when I was thirteen I climbed the Great Pyramid. I was in King Tut's tomb. SH: Oh, my gosh. Wow. JP: But you see, it's not that far. It's really not that far! So, a short airplane trip to Cairo. And hang out in Egypt for a while. Then you go to Greece, then you go to Rome, and then you go to Spain. You know, so you can do all these things on a vacation. Here, you know, you might go to New York City, might go to the Grand Canyon, or you might go to Yellowstone. Okay, it's the same thing. Only...it's ancient there, right. And I do think that in retrospect I appreciate it more now, but then it was simply, I was a kid. Right? And you're experiencing these things, and it was quite wonderful. You know, but all things must end. At four years, tax laws and other things kick in, I think, for foreign nationals and you can't stay after four years, you have to leave. And so we came back to the United States. And again, finished my senior year of high school at Westfield High School. 2  SH: Did you make good friends, ah, any, while you were over there in Brussels? JP: It was transient. Because people were constantly coming and going, so, yeah. You know, what's interesting is with the advent of the internet and social media, like Facebook and other things, it's hilarious. So, do you want to become good friends with somebody that you knew when you were thirteen? You're now capable of doing that. [laughs] That’s a real question. We were the best of friends back then, I'm not so sure about now. That's happening. That's absolutely happening now, yes. SH: Interesting. JP: Yeah, they were good friends. I'm not in touch with any of them at this point. But it was, it was transient. That was part of it, okay. Every year there was a new group that came and some of us had to leave. And that way, I think you learned to adjust, you learned to adapt, you become quite independent through the experience. SH: I bet. JP: So, coming back to the United States, and you know, going to a new school as a senior. To my classmates, the people that I met in my senior year, they thought that was horrific. They looked at me, they go, "How terrible that you have to, your senior year. Your senior year of high school! And you're new! How horrible!" And I'm going, like, "what's the big deal?" [laughs]. It really didn't affect me and I realize that that's just because you became very independent. SH: Were there any adjustments you had to make, JP: Coming back? SH: Leaving Europe and coming back to the U.S.? Did things change enough that your, made your eyes pop? JP: The one, the one thing I have to tell you half joking. At that time in Europe, when you traveled, okay, you still couldn't drink water in many, many places. When we traveled we always got sick. It was just the way it was. Um, and it's one of the reasons why they, they drank fermented beverages from the time they were little. And I'll never forget, you know, my first foray into a restaurant and I sat down and there was a, you know, a little kid. These are tiny children, four years old, you know, like, drinking beer. Which is, which is just that, you're sitting there and you're going, "is that right?" Or a Belgian doctor recommending to an American mother with a small baby who's not gaining weight, "You should give him some beer, that will help." It's a very common thing, you know, but in part it's simply this thing about fermented beverages are sterile, and you can drink them and not get sick. And that's why in a lot of places, you just drank beer and other things. So, you come back to the United States, of course, you can't do that [laughs]. SH: Right. JP: Right 3  SH: So, what was the, let's see, you graduated from high school then in probably 1968? JP: Ah, yes. SH: What was the world like in the United States, then? JP: Everything was new. To me. I mean, new, modern. [laughs]. All of that history was very much gone. It was very trendy and very cliquish and just, and different. But I was, you know, I was a kid. Again, it's high school, you fall into it. The sports are different, over there it's soccer, here was football. You know. So. SH: Yeah, yeah. JP: I mean, but you're a kid, so you just, you get into a group, I got a girlfriend [laughs], you know. You just do it, right. But I was only there for a year. And then I was off. I went to, you know, undergraduate school, I didn't go to graduate school, but I went to Valparaiso University. Why? SH: Why? JP: Lutheran school. All my siblings went to Valparaiso except an older brother. SH: Was it, was that, well, since all your siblings went there, wasn't so much of a cultural shock for you to go to northern Indiana, then. JP: I will tell you this. Once again, I thought it was perfectly okay to get on an airplane with a steamer trunk and fly to Chicago O'Hare and find my way to Valparaiso. And that was the way I went to college. Everybody else arrived with their parents. [laughs] Um, again, it was, you know, it was fine, it was fine. It was, Chicago was fine. When I got to Valparaiso, it was a little bit of a culture shock. SH: As a pretty small, pretty rural... JP: [coughs] Yeah, it was. It really, at that time it was. I think it's very different now. At the time it was, yeah, it was a pretty small city, yeah. SH: You know, that's a little bit of irony here, is I almost went to Valpo. JP: Oh, is that right? SH: Yeah. I, I did my college visit there and looked at it carefully. JP: It's a good school. And it worked, and actually I ended up loving it. I kind of moved away from the whole cosmopolitan, East Coast, in-your-face kind of New Jersey attitude and embraced the Midwest. So, you know, Valparaiso, studied and ended up with a degree in sociology, minor in speech and drama. Of the two, what became most useful in my career, little bit of both, actually. SH: What did you think you wanted to do when you, 4  JP: I knew what I wanted to do. I was very service-oriented. And when I left Valparaiso, I was looking for a career in dealing with young people, alright, in a service capacity. And I wasn't quite sure where that opportunity was going to arise, but I really liked the idea of doing that. And, you know, come on, I went to school in 1968, so. The atmosphere then, about, you know, what you should do with your life, right? And what was important, okay? Had a great influence on career choices and what I wanted to do. I was not interested in the corporate ladder at all. SH: When you were in college, were you involved in any of the anti-war movement, or? JP: Who wasn't? Who wasn't? How could you, I mean, that was what it was. If you were, first of all, if you were in college during those years, right, you were very much aware of the draft. Okay, and the war in Vietnam. And you had to have an opinion. On college campuses at that time, there's a raging debate going on, right? No matter what side of that debate you were on, you were in the debate, okay. You were. I was part of the first lottery, right? Part of the first lottery. And I can remember, you know, sitting in the student union when, when over the campus radio station, they were announcing the numbers as they came down, you know, there were people standing up, your birthday, number one, people stand up, salute, and go "and I'm enlisting!" That's it, you know, I'm going to enlist, and see if I can't get into the Guard or whatever. SH: You remember what your number was? JP: Sure. One-oh-five. SH: Whoa! JP: Yeah, I know. And I graduated in 1972, okay, and that was when they were de-escalating, okay. My draft board was in New Jersey, they were de-escalating the war, and they went up to one-oh-three. SH: Oh, my. JP: Yeah. But I was, I was, you know, I was pretty, pretty sure, leading up to 1972 that my number was going to get called. It didn't. And that was because of a political situation, right, where, oh it was Nixon was in the White House, had to do something because it was such an unpopular war at the time. SH: Yeah. JP: So, he was de-escalating and they didn't call up the numbers. And it had to do with where my draft board was. SH: Right. JP: Right, so. I mean, it just, you know. Things conspired to keep me out of... SH: Did you, so you were in Valparaiso when the Democratic convention in '68 in Chicago. JP: I was, I was, 5  SH: Did-did you, JP: I was not there yet. SH: Oh, okay. JP: I was not there yet. SH: Not there yet. JP: I watched it on television. I was at the Jersey Shore watching it on television. SH: [laughs] Okay. JP: And people were saying, "Why are those people there?" I remember watching them and I was fascinated by them. I'm thinking, "Why don't they go home?" Yeah. I came, I come from...My family used...I'll say it this way. The majority, all of my family was Republican at the time. You know, they used to be Republican. There're some defectors. [laughs] Most of them are defectors now, but that was their background at the time. SH: Then what did they think about you being involved in anti-war activities? JP: Um... SH: On campus? JP: Well... SH: And did you, did you do any marching or sitting in? JP: I was at the November 15th moratorium on Vietnam in Washington, in Washington, D.C., yes. Yes. Did I... was I a radical? No, no. I was a college student. And I was exercising my free speech rights. But doing it within the confines of the law. SH: Did the Valparaiso charter a bus for... JP: No, no, no. SH: ...kids to go? How did you get there? JP: No. We were in a group of people, got together, there was someone who had a, who had a, at this point, I think it was an old Dodge van or something. And we went. So, we got there by ourselves, yeah, yeah. SH: And was that a great experience? 6  JP: It was, it was, yeah. It was empowering for us. But again, it wasn't, we did not get gassed, we did not try to break through any lines. We were with, we were with people of all ages, okay? We were orderly, right, and we were there to protest peacefully. We weren't part of the weatherman or the SDS. SH: In the crowd, yeah. JP: Or any of that, yeah. You know, that wasn't our schtick. Um, but exercising our free speech rights? Yes. SH: So after the, ah, after you graduated, then, what, tell me about your career trajectory. JP: Oh. Okay, so was married in college, okay. When I was twenty years old, right. So been married a long time. Anyway. But my wife's parents were in St. Louis at the time, okay. And, again, having moved, right? There wasn't a place for me, I didn't have a hometown, some place to go back to and so we decided St. Louis was fine, right, so we came to St. Louis. We were interested in not living in the city, okay. Ah, and some people thought Jefferson County at the time was kind of nice and pastoral. So, it was this notion of living in the country. Which was nice. We rented an old farmhouse on a hundred acres from a Washington University professor. He was a physicist. [laughs]. And, so we moved to the country, blew up the TV, right, and I set about the objective of finding gainful employment in Jefferson County, right. Which was a bit of a struggle, to tell you the truth. I'll say there was a lot of odd-jobbing around. But eventually ended up doing what I had set out to do. And that was working with young people in the context of the Jefferson County juvenile court. Okay, so, I became a deputy juvenile officer, right? And worked for the twenty-third judicial circuit. We were more child advocates, okay? We intervened and we advocated on behalf of young people trying desperately to keep them out of the system. And it, you know, it's cliché, but the fact is, once young people get into the system, right, it's very difficult to get them back on the straight and narrow, so. I did that for several years. We did, my wife and I did a stint within the court system of running the Jefferson County children's home, which was a cross between a residential placement for abused and neglect kids and incorrigible kids and just basically wards of the court. We worked twenty-four-seven for fourteen days in a row and then got two days off. You talk about committed people. SH: Yeah. JP: We were, yeah. So, we did that for a while. I then went back to juvenile court work because that was not sustainable. [laughs] And I don't remember quite how long we did that, but it was several years in the juvenile court system. And then looked for a change, looked for a change. And had been working with... SH: Was, was it hard, working in the juvenile court system, and did it kind of tear at your heart? JP: Of course, of course. It was messed up, because you're seeing, you know, the kids who are, who fall into this incorrigible kind of category, and they get into all kinds of trouble. And you try to deal with them as best you can, putting Band-Aids all over the place. There's all of the abuse and neglect that you see, which is very difficult to deal with. Um, and I used to tell people that in the context of dealing with the juvenile court, you figure out how to get the court to actually do what you think is right for the kid. But many times, you have, you get the court to do it, but it's not really the right reason. There's kind of ways you can get things done, but it's a cumbersome process is my point. And although you're trying to, I 7  always saw myself as an advocate for the child, okay, rather than, rather than becoming adversarial or, you know, prosecutorial. Sometimes that happens. You know, at which point I figured everybody lost. So, you can do it for so long, right. SH: Do you have any, yeah, I'm sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you. Can you only do this for so long before you're burned out, or? JP: Yeah. Before it, before I got burned out on it, yes. And I thought...and other things happened. It's not very...rewarding financially, let's put it that way. See, you can do it for a while, but if you aspire to accumulate any financial gain, it's not, it's really not there. Anyway. SH: Were there any cases that you can remember now that just really stick out in your mind that kind of illustrates the toughness of the job? JP: We had...I can tell you we had, we had situations, um, where two brothers who had been adopted ended up murdering their parents. That was the most extreme case that we had. SH: Their, their, JP: Their adoptive parents. SH: Their adoptive parents. JP: Yes. So, these were brothers who had been in our charge and we were take, we were running this Jefferson County children's home. And they would, periodically, show up because there were problems in the home. And one day, they showed up and it was because they had murdered their parents. SH: Wow. JP: We had, we had other children in the home including a young baby under a year old who had, who had been taken by the division of children and family services. This was an open setting. SH: Wow. JP: This goes way back. Goes way, way, this was a long time ago. And so. SH: Nothing happened. JP: You dealt with it if it did. The level of tension you experienced under these circumstances. SH: Yeah. JP: Is difficult to describe. And we knew these, we knew these two young guys extremely well, right? And I, it was hard to fathom what they had done. Um, I want to tell you, I considered at the time I always thought that if any, if any of my charges actually got sent to, at the time, a place called Poplar Bluff, or "Booneville," I don't even know if those places exist anymore, that I had failed. If we had to send them away, right, then I had failed. That's the way I looked at the situation. So again, we were trying to get 8  them straightened out, back home, so they could go on with their lives. But this was a very long time ago. It was, it was challenging. I have great respect for people that can do this for their entire career. I wasn't willing to do it. SH: Yeah, I would think that you'd have to either get very, very tough, or very numb to it, JP: Yeah. SH: Because it's emotionally just got to be so draining. JP: Absolutely. Absolutely. Anyway. SH: So, so from there, then... JP: So then, um, interestingly enough I, SH: Now, this was in the '70s, you were in Jefferson? JP: Um, Jefferson County, Jefferson County. Let's see, I did write some of this stuff down so we could...ah, from '73 to '78. Okay. That was the time frame. And then, um, from '79 to '83, I worked for the Jefferson County Economic Development Corporation, so there was a transition that went on. Again, it was Jefferson County government, and I was able to make this transition, because the county was starting to embrace the notion of, "Hey, we need to get in the game." You know. "Our county's experiencing some dramatic growth, you know, we need to support the population, we're exporting all our work force to St. Louis, we need businesses to support county services and city services." And they were just starting, they were just starting with the Jefferson County Economic Development Corporation. So, I was fortunate and I became the assistant director of that organization. They had also established a port authority. Jefferson County borders the Mississippi River. And they were going through the motions of establishing it for future development. So, I worked there. And essentially became familiar with some of the economic development tools, grants, and other things that would serve me pretty well as I kind of made the transition and climbed the Economic Development ladder. I also met some people from Illinois through the basic economic development training courses. That's where I met Koepke, too, at the University of Illinois Allerton House. Because the basic economic development program was done by the University of Illinois at Allerton on this beautiful estate property which was set up like an English manor. It was an English manor house, manicured garden, it was a beautiful place that was, you know, part of the University of Illinois, alright? Land grant university, what can I say? Gorgeous place. Ah, but, Dr. Koepke was one of the professors and, SH: That's Robert Koepke. JP: Yeah, Robert Koepke of SIUE! SH: SIUE. Okay. JP: Who was, um, and his name will pop up throughout this, because he was one of the national leaders, right, in economic development at the time. And when he, you know, he would basically, he was one of 9  the presenters. And he was presenting the kind of documentation that you needed in order to present your community in the right light to site location consultants, prospects, and other people. Anyway, my first introduction to southwestern Illinois, SIUE was through the basic economic course when I was in Jefferson County, okay. And that connection, that was the connection that actually led to my becoming employed in southwestern Illinois, alright. Because my first job in southwestern Illinois was with the Tri- Cities Area Chamber of Commerce. Well, it's now called the Southwest Madison County Chamber of Commerce. SH: And what are the tri-cities? JP: Ah, Granite City, Madison, and Venice. Yeah. Anyway. I lived in Granite City. So, my first job in Illinois was working for the Chamber of Commerce. SH: Now what, when you were in Jefferson, Jefferson County, JP: Yeah. SH: What was your relationship to the, uh, Regional Commerce and Growth, JP: Yeah, RCGA. SH: RCGA. JP: St. Louis Regional Chamber of Growth Association. SH: Now that, that's, is that... JP: That's a key part of this story, by the way. SH: Okay. Does the RCGA, is that the equivalent of the Chamber of Commerce of St. Louis? JP: Yes. SH: Okay. JP: Yeah, the name changes periodically, of that organization. And the best I can tell it has to do with whether or not the chambers of commerce are in favor or not, okay. And I don't say that lightly, because I mean, it's not necessarily in vogue as much as it is about the focus of the group. But the RCGA was put together to market the St. Louis region, okay, that region encompasses the St. Louis metropolitan statistical area, which includes counties in Illinois and Missouri. So, Jefferson County was one of the Missouri counties. And yes, as an economic development organization in Jefferson County, Missouri, you know, I was interacting with that organization. There was another connection there, because one of the economic development professionals working with the RCGA at the time was a guy named Alan Richardson. Alan Richardson ended up at, as the executive director of the Tri-Cities Area Chamber of Commerce. Right? And his leaving that Chamber of Commerce to go work for one of the utility companies in Illinois opened up that position. It was that position that I applied for. Okay? 10  SH: Okay. JP: So that position opened up, I applied for it. Based upon the connections I had made at that basic economic development course, right, and, I mean, I was nobody. No one in Granite City or Illinois knew who I was. SH: And, when, when was this? JP: I simply, I simply, well, it was in, it was... SH: '83? JP: Yeah, it was '83. I simply applied for the job, I guess they liked my resume, Alan Richardson, they did like Alan Richardson, I knew Alan Richardson, um, he did recommend me to them, okay, so I, that's probably what it was, actually, they liked Alan and Alan recommended me. And by hook or by crook, I got the job. SH: In eight, alright. I got a bunch of questions. JP: Okay. SH: So, in '83, was, uh, steel and refinery and all that still going great guns? JP: No. SH: It was already on the decline? JP: It was, it was awful. During this period of time, the late '70s early '80s was when globalization was being felt, okay. Globalization in the context of the Japanese miracle, okay. Basically, eating everybody's lunch. American industry had become non-competitive in many, many ways. Plants were old. The relationship between labor and management, was still adversarial. A. O. Smith, for instance, which was an auto parts manufacturer, had left Granite City. And what I was told was that they had left Granite City because of the relationship, an impossible relationship between labor and management. Some of the workers at A. O. Smith had told me that the, it was the union representatives who would not let the actual rank and file vote on a contract. Now, whether or not this was true, this is what I was told. That there was, even within the labor ranks, there was disagreement on what should have happened. But it gave management an opening to basically walk away from the plant. And the plant wasn't modernized, right. National Steel, was not doing well. So American industry was old and tired at this time and non- competitive globally. Something had to be done. SH: So, so the effects were starting to be felt when you became, JP: Oh, absolutely. SH: , the director of the... JP: Absolutely. 11  SH: ...of the Tri-Cities Development. JP: Absolutely. Unemployment was high. SH: Right. JP: What happened? This is when Nippon-Kokan, the Japanese steel manufacturer, decided that they were going to buy fifty-one percent of National Steel Corporation. Right? Of course, the facility in Granite City was National Steel. So that gave National Steel life. Nippon-Kokan came in and began investing, okay. And you know bought time. So, I think that's when investments and things like continuous casters and more modern steel-making equipment began, right? I believe that's true. But the fact is that without foreign investment, in this case Nippon-Kokan, the future of that steel mill and National Steel was very much in question. Um, things got better. Things got better. While I was there Tower Automotive came in and reopened the old A. O. Smith plant. Caufield Equipment came in, which was a pickling operation. Heidtman Steel came in, which was a metal coating operation. So, things picked up again. Industry picked up. And it was...a lot of it came off of the steel mill, right. So, things...it was an ebb and flow, what was going on. So industry was very much down and then came back, right? And so, since I've been in Granite City, I've seen this cycle repeat itself. The last time, of course, when they closed, you know, the question was, what was going to happen to the steel industry in general in the United States, in America? U.S. Steel ended up buying the assets, right, and it kept the plant open. Then closed the plant again. Trump shows up, tariffs raised, other things happen, US Steel opens the plant up again. I mean, we've seen up and down, up and down, up and down in Granite City over time. Anyway, so the stay in Granite City with the Tri-Cities Area Chamber of Commerce, which is again the southwest Madison County Chamber of Commerce it was interesting. And, and there was a lot of success in industries coming back to that community, during that period of time. NESCO Steel Barrel was an interesting one, that was an employee buyout. And that started happening back then. Right? Companies were saying, "Now, we don't want this asset," and employees were saying, "Yeah, but, but we want an engineer buyout, an employee-owned company." Which was very interesting. And that happened during that time. Then, I got another job. Which was with the Riverbend Growth Association, at the time, it was, let's see, Greater Alton Twin Rivers Growth Association. You remember that one? Maybe not. SH: No. JP: What was happening, it was the northern part of Madison County, it was the Greater Alton Chamber of Commerce and there was the Twin Rivers Chamber of Commerce. And my understanding was that many of the larger corporations were members of both of those organizations. And while the economy was good, that wasn't a problem. But things were getting tighter, and life changes, and those decision- makers were saying, you know, "This isn't making a lot of sense anymore." And, "We don't see the reason for both of these organizations to exist. In addition to that, there ought to be more cooperation among the communities and other interested parties here. What we really need is a focused economic development initiative for the northern part of Madison County." So. Some of the leaders up there, Jack Jacoby, Jack Helmkamp, I'm going to...I'll just leave it at that. Those folks I remember. Got together with, at that point, some of the cities, leaders of the individual cities, and crafted something that they called the Greater Alton Twin Rivers Growth Association. And they said, "Okay, we're going to have one organization, and all of these other organizations are part of this one organization. This is the way we're 12  going to do it from now on." And they needed someone to run that. I wasn't interested. It's the truth. I was doing fine in the Tri-Cities Area. One of the things I had done in the Tri-Cities Area at the time was this notion of "we can probably do better if we're all working together." And what I was meant by that was, that we really need to build some trust among communities, among business, among labor, and are there projects that we can do? Is there something that we can do? Is there something that business and labor can do together besides sit across from each other at a negotiating table, you know, forget that. Is there something we can do together that will benefit everybody here? And that way we'll get to know each other, and maybe that will help. Right? Anyway, so I'd been talking like this. Maybe I had, maybe somebody thought I had a good idea. In any case, they had done a series of interviews for the job up at the northern part of the county. They actually hired somebody from Mattoon. I can't remember the gentleman's name. He accepted the position. And then he came down and visited, and then he went back to Mattoon, and he said, "I don't want the job." I got a call, I think for Ron Winkler, who worked for Union Electric. Had an office up in Alton. And he said, "Jim, are" he said, "Would you be at all interested in this job?" And I said, "You know, it's a real compliment that you're calling me," I said, "I didn't, you know I didn't, I didn't apply for it." I said, "But you're calling me," I said, "and least I can do is talk to you." And I said, "Sure, let's talk." So, I went up and I interviewed for that job. It sounded really interesting to me, they were very committed, I don't remember who was in the interview, there were some bankers and they seemed very committed to trying to make this thing work. It was very consistent with what I thought needed to happen in communities to be successful. And what I believe is people need to communicate, they need to build trust and respect, that's the only way you're ever going to get anything to work. SH: What were some of the challenges, unique challenges they were facing up in Riverbend? JP: Oh, Okay, why is there an East Alton and an Alton? Why is there a West Alton? Okay? Why do these people not like each other and why do they think that Madison County is out to get them? Okay? I'm being really honest with you. SH: Yeah. JP: There are so many divides, okay. SH: Political... JP: Yeah. Oh. SH: Civil. JP: There's just absolutely...trust is such a precious commodity. And there's, there's so much history, right, and so many things have been done, okay, to you, or you've done to them, or things have gone wrong, um, there's so little to go around. SH: Okay, so, as the economy was, was depressing or was... JP: Well. It's... 13  SH: Was getting, was weakening, that made people more, JP: Yeah, we can talk the, we can talk the politics of scarcity, okay. SH: Okay. JP: That's certainly something that we see, now, we see continually. What I'm talking about is, I’m not from here. So, there is the, I do have some deficit. I can't tell you what the history of these communities is going way back. But what I can tell you is that there was a lack of trust. Alright? And so there was, the notion that our best effort would be to work together was not something that came naturally there. I don't think that does come naturally to people, by the way. So, you know, there's a real independence streak here. People have described southwestern Illinois as, you know, suffering from, you know, Balkanization, right? SH: Yeah. JP: They're very much separate. The Bluffs don't like the Bottoms, the Bottoms don't like the Bluff. In Madison County, I heard a new one. Above the canal, below the canal. I never knew that existed, right. But these are hard divisions that make, make it difficult, alright. So, what I'm saying is that, that these are the obstacles, right, that need to be overcome in order to get people to coalesce and come together to focus on issues which can help them individually, and the larger area together. And there are ways to do that, and there's things that actually have, that get them to do that. And one of the best examples of that in terms of the, what became the Riverbend Growth Association, the best example that I know is this Clark Bridge project. Right? So, you had a sixty-five-year-old bridge across the Mississippi River. That was well past its useful life. And it really needed to be replaced. Okay. And the only way that was going to happen was if you got the state of Illinois to determine, IDOT to say it was a priority, right, and to score it as such. And you're going to get a significant federal appropriation. Right? That doesn't happen, if you have one or two people, or a community that says, "We need this." It only happens if you get a coalition working together, right? You get all the local elected leadership, all of the labor people, all of the business people, all the grassroots constituents, to say, "This is what we need." And you go to your elected state leadership saying, "This is what we need." And you go to your federal elected leadership, you say, "This is what we need." And if you can get that done, if you can put all that together, SH: So, JP: Then you have a chance, just a chance of being successful. And you know what we did? You know what we did? We put it together. And we were successful. SH: So, so you're, you're, it was your job, then, to put all these elements together and provide a united front. JP: Absolutely. That's always the job. That was, that is the only job. That is the only job for an association. Absolutely, absolutely. It is to create the focus, well, it's to work with people to discover what that focus is. You know, folks used to come to me during my career, I mean, executive directors, "What should I work on? What should I do?" If I was in a mood, I'd say, "Pick something. Pick something, anything." Meaning... 14  SH: Yeah. JP: Don't do everything, pick something. But beyond that, it's, what is it that your constituents agree upon? Okay? Because that's the only thing that's going to make you successful. So, when, when we talk about, when we talk about, and let's, so let's segue into the leadership council, okay. Because, you know, SH: Okay, so what, what's the dates of Riverbend, then? Eighty... JP: Ah, Riverbend, okay, well, the, uh, yeah, '85 to '89. SH: Okay. JP: And then in '89, '89 to 2006, leadership council was a long ride. SH: Okay. JP: That was a long time. SH: Now, how did you get the leadership council, then? JP: Well. [sighs] That was interesting. SH: Okay, back up. The, so while you were at the Riverbend Growth Association, that, that was, um, the Clark Bridge project, which was the big... JP: Of all the things that we did, yeah, that's the one that stands out in my mind. SH: Did the casinos come in later? JP: Yes. SH: Okay. JP: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. SH: What other economic development projects did you try and get them to focus on, uh, while you were at the, at Riverbend? JP: Oh. Well, a lot of what you do, a lot of what you do is create the atmosphere which is attractive to businesses, okay. So, one of the things that was necessary there, and certainly appropriate, was to work with the communities to create the Riverbend Enterprise Zone. Right? Now, you know what an enterprise zone is. SH: It's like, JP: Okay, an enterprise zone is a specific geographic area within which a business that wants to build, make improvements in this case, like a building, right, gets certain tax advantages. And what they are is the abatement of sales taxes on the construction materials that would go into a new structure and a certain 15  number of years property tax abatements, you know, on the improvements, which would be the building. There are some other things that they can apply for, if the project is big enough. For instance, there can be some utility tax abatements and other things. And I don't know what of those incentives may change since I've been out of the loop on this stuff, but those are some pretty attractive incentives. You can also take a tax increment financing district, and layer over the top of an enterprise zone, and you can extend some of the benefits. So, they're pretty powerful incentives. The area, alright, because it had suffered some pretty significant losses of industry, particularly in an area known as the "Broadway Corridor," in Alton coming down through the Route 3 area along the river, was prime for an enterprise zone. To help both existing industries and perhaps redevelop some of that area. And so, we worked on putting those kinds of things in place. SH: So, you had to obviously be involved a lot with, with politicians, JP: Yeah. SH: And, and the political system. Was that, was that hard, difficult, uh, did, were those supportive? JP: Was it hard? SH: Yeah. I mean, I, I obviously don't know. JP: It's part of the job. Yeah, no. Well. It's, it depends. [laughs] SH: On the individual? Or... JP: It depends on many things. I wouldn't characterize it as "hard," I never saw it as, I saw it as an absolutely essential part of the formula. Okay? Here's the formula for success. Getting government, business, labor, and education to work together by doing their jobs effectively. Okay? That's success. Right? Is that hard? Yeah. Right, yeah. That's hard. But that's what you do. And if you can't do that, then you won't be successful. SH: Were there any politicians that stand out in your mind that were really effective? JP: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I'll tell you, Jim McPike was extremely, extremely powerful. SH: What position, JP: Well, he was a representative. SH: State representative. JP: For the Alton area. Extremely effective, okay. And frankly, you didn't want to do anything without informing Jim McPike. Okay? Um, and I, and I was the recipient of, of his...how can I explain this? Recipient of mistakes I made, alright? And recipient of good things I did. So compliments and reprimands, right. Yeah. But, you know, it was, it was always my job, right, to do my best, to try to keep those representatives from government, business, labor, and education, as informed as I could, alright, about what we were trying to do. And to ask them, right, to do what I thought was necessary. And, you 16  know, sometimes, sometimes I was great, sometimes messed up. So, you know, yeah. It was just the way it was. Was it hard? Sometimes. Sometimes not hard. But you, you always try to, always try to do the best you can. And I actually, actually I think I was pretty good at it. I think we got a lot done together. SH: And how did you get to leadership council, then? JP: Ah, okay. SH: Talked about that transition. JP: So, I was, SH: So that was in '89. JP: Yeah. So, you know, so I thought we did pretty, I thought things were going well at the Riverbend Growth Association. And who was it? Was Mary Kane, Mary Kane was at the leadership council at the time. And was Mary Kane, was Mary Kane moving on to perhaps the Southwestern Illinois Development Authority? That must have been it. I think Mary Kane was moving on, and I was interested. I was interested in the leadership council as a next step. I don't know if anyone encouraged me to do it. But I thought I was certainly capable of it, of doing a good job there. And it made sense as a logical move. And so, I applied. And I guess they liked me. And I ended up there. SH: And were the challenges at the leadership council...how were they different from the ones that you faced at Tri-Cities and Riverbend? JP: Well, it was interesting. Because I ran into an organization that was transitioning. And I don't know if they were different, okay, but I can tell you this. The leadership council was set up to focus the region's economic development initiative. I mean, the leadership council came about literally because the RCGA under James O'Flynn, and this goes back decades and decades and decades and decades, okay, was at a ribbon-cutting in Granite City...I believe Heidtman Steel, I'm not sure. It was probably at the time, Illinois Powers Industrial Park on Route 3. So, Carl Matthias was there. Ralph Korte was there. I believe this story to be true. And Jim O'Flynn said to Carl Matthias and Ralph Korte, "The RCGA is supposed to represent these Illinois counties. But with the way things are now, there's no way the RCGA can do an adequate job. Because there's all these groups and stuff, nobody's working together, and, you know, something has to happen here to facilitate a relationship with the RCGA." Now, that rings true to me. I can certainly see that as a dilemma for the RCGA. There wasn't any focus here in southwestern Illinois. It's not even a criticism, it's fact, back then. So, and I can see Ralph Korte and Carl Matthias saying, you know, "We'd like to see something happen here." One's a utility company, Ralph's a builder. Wants to build things. SH: Carl Matthias was with Ameren? JP: Illinois Power. SH: Illinois Power. Okay. 17  JP: Illinois Power. He was the vice president of Illinois Power. This was his territory. And I can see them wanting to facilitate something and they ended up going to SIUE and talking to Dr. Lazerson. Which makes perfect sense. Because at the time in southwestern Illinois, the university was very much the focal point for those discussions. For those kinds of regional discussions. You know, this is probably even before I was over here, right, because I remember hearing about this discussion when I first showed up at the Tri-Cities area. I was kind of in shock, because they were talking about, "Well, we don't need all these organizations, we just need this one," I was like, "well, wait, I just got here!" [laughs] "I just moved, wait a second!" SH: "Don't eliminate my job!" JP: Yeah, right, it's kind of doing this self-protection kind of thing. But it was interesting because, you know, as I grew to know southwestern Illinois, all of this made a lot of sense to me, So, Dr. Lazerson agreed to lead discussions about how this might work. What this really meant. Was it even possible? And he was the one, I believe, who thought that looking at the, really the political landscape in southwestern Illinois, that an organization like this would have to have labor, organized labor, as a component in order to work. I mean if you have an interface with government, state government, local government, county government, that's where this notion of, you know, business, industry, education, you know, labor, all of this came from. And so, I'll tell you, that notion was revolutionary at the time. That wasn't the way things worked, okay. These entities were separate. They didn't interact on that level at all, alright, so this was cutting edge stuff. And it remained cutting edge stuff for years. When I took over the leadership council, and I used to make that presentation, people'd look at me and they'd go, "Oh, well, wait a minute! How can organized labor be part of this organization?" Oh, you know, it works for us! And so, whereas I think initially the idea was, okay, well, this leadership council is going to attract all of these, going to go out and get businesses located in southwestern Illinois, alright, that over time the leadership council became an organization that could speak with one voice for southwestern Illinois. So, we're back to, okay, government, business, labor, education, industry. You know, the success is based upon these groups all doing what they do together. Right? The formula? So that formula kept working for southwestern Illinois. So, when, for instance, Governor Thompson had a "Build Illinois" Program? Right? These people could get together, confer with their people and we could say, you know, "That Build Illinois Program would be really helpful for southwestern Illinois in these ways." And that message would be delivered consistently. And guess what? You had a high likelihood of success in having those things done in southwestern Illinois. SH: And what were some of those things? JP: Oh, I think you, I think you would not have the success of I-255 for instance. Okay? A lot of these, these are capital programs. SH: Right. JP: So. So. SH: So, I-255. 18  JP: I-255, okay, FAP Route 413 which was the continuation by 255. A lot of this stuff is going to be public works programs, okay, so it's infrastructure. So, look around at the roads, okay? Look around at, for instance, the Clark Bridge. The Stan Musial Veterans' Bridge. You have no idea how long that was worked on, okay? How long that was worked on. SH: That you were working on back in the '90s. JP: Oh, no. I was working, well, actually, I don't have a date on that. But when I made a presentation to your, one of your construction management programs, I pulled out the original memo. [laughs] The East- West Gateway Coordinating Council. SH: Oh, yeah, I remember that. JP: That one of the county board chairmen asked me to write. Demanding a study on a new Mississippi River bridge. So, but, but you see, what I'm saying is, you see that? He was on East-West Gateway, and he said, "We need a memo to come to us," so he could call me, because that was one of our priorities, right. So, this is the way things, SH: So, what was the relationship between East-West Gateway Coordinating Council and leadership council? JP: Oh, well I sure...we, our, the, it's a governmental entity, okay. SH: Okay. JP: You have the county board chairs who either appoint people or serve, okay. SH: So East-West is a quasi-governmental... JP: Ah, it's the metropolitan planning organization, so they have a great deal to do with federal money that comes to the area. SH: Right. JP: Okay, they approve the plan. SH: Okay. Gotcha. JP: Yeah. Is there, are there politics involved there? Of course, there are. SH: Yeah. JP: Here's the thing. How can you, how can you, be involved in these things together if you, if you're not connected with the people who are sitting on these boards? SH: Right, right. 19  JP: How can, and what I mean by connect is talking to each other. Sitting down in meetings and saying, "Where are our interests best served? And how can we together get these things done and compete with Chicago?" SH: So, what were some of the big projects while you were leadership council executive director then? JP: Many, many...a lot of this, a lot of these projects, and again, stressing that there're many, many, many, many different entities involved in these things, okay, and, I saw the role of the leadership council trying to keep people informed and work with all of these people to get things done. SH: So, the, the roads, Scott Air Force Base. JP: Absolutely. The Scott Joint, what we used to call Scott Joint Use which became Mid-America Airport, which translated into, into eventually the retention at Scott Air Force Base, through the military base realignment enclosure process, which, you know, enveloped the leadership council during two rounds of, you know, BRAC which is the Base Realignment and Closure Initiative, so. SH: Right. The levees? Levee system? JP: The levees came up later, okay. SH: Okay. JP: That came up when I was at SIUE. [laughs] SH: Alright. JP: You know what my comment was then? I thought I was out of this business. [laughs] But yes. Yes. And I'll tell you this. I think that the Base Realignment Closure Initiative was, I think when that happened, because you can work on infrastructure projects, bridges and other things, and those things are important, right, but what do you do with that one? How does a region respond to that? Okay? And it struck me, what happened, because we knew nothing. There was a meeting that Congressman Costello at the time invited virtually all of the mayors, right, and county board members, the chairmen and others to this meeting. And he announced that, uh, this was I think in 1994, right, he announced that there was a, that they were going through this Base Realignment Enclosure Initiative, and that he had done a great deal of work on it, right, had done the work, but it was time for the community to respond. And I can tell you, I had no working knowledge of this process. And I don't think, I will bet you, I can't vouch for everybody, but I'm sure the communities had no real knowledge of this. And the question was, okay, it's time for us to respond. What does that mean? And how do we mobilize? What is it that we are supposed to do? And without the relationships that had been formed over years between government, business, labor, education, all of these people, the ability to trust each other, talk to each other, okay. To get out there and do what was necessary very, very quickly? We would not have been able to respond. And that's when a lot of people, I think, including myself, realized how valuable the leadership council was and how valuable those relationships were in our ability to do those things. And we did them. And we were immensely successful. Immensely successful. Both in '95 and then again in 2005. 2005 we not only stayed open, we gained new things at Scott Air Force Base. And I can tell you, I, you know, how do you 20  prove these things? I'm absolutely sure that the community's response...military's view of the community's response and support for Scott Air Force Base, among various other things, was part of that formula for success. SH: Jim, besides, um, Carl Matthias and Ralph Korte and Earl Lazerson, who were some of the, uh, the main players over the decade and a half that you were executive director? JP: Oh, people like Tom Holloway, Bruce Holland, Ron Capek SH: Bruce Holland of Holland Construction? JP: Oh, yeah. Yeah. Bruce is, SH: Tom Holloway is Bank of Edwardsville. JP: Bank of Edwardsville, yeah. Now retired. Um, you know, there were many. You know, I should have, those, you know. Who else? SH: Who replaced Carl at Illinois Power when it became Ameren? JP: Not sure. I think it, um, I think that was Ron Dane, as a matter of fact. SH: That's alright. JP: Yeah, I'm, I'm, you know. SH: You've, when you came to, to cross the river, to Granite City back in the sev, late '70s, and now on up to moving into SIUE in 2006 the head of University Park. JP: Yeah. SH: You've, you've witnessed twenty-some-odd, thirty years of tremendous change in this area. JP: Yeah, yeah, yeah. SH: Greater change than, than a number of other regions have experienced. JP: Well, I'm not sure about that. I'm not sure, I don't have that comparison. I can tell you that, that, you know, I have...my view is of basically the St. Louis region. And I can tell you what I saw personally, okay? And you saw, too. I mean, you know, the enormous advances in technology, okay, which has disrupted every facet of life, okay, and business. Right, for better or for worse have driven everything. That's just, that's just a fact, okay. So that's been, that's the overall thing. That's the macro thing. That's what's done it. SH: So, you're saying that that's what impacted the decline of the steel industry? JP: That's impacted everything. Yes. And so, what you have, 21  SH: And obviously the rise of the warehouse districts on the flood plain. JP: Absolutely. So, if you want, if you want to look at this, okay, you're moving from manufacturing to a service economy, okay. And so, manufacturing has changed dramatically. Look, when I came, U.S. Steel in Granite City had six thousand workers. They now have fifteen hundred workers at that plant. Largely through auto, we used to call it automation, we don't even call it that anymore. Right? It's all through technological advancements. Look. When I was at Valparaiso, I worked for U.S. Steel in Gary, Indiana, alright. Gary's right next to Valparaiso. SH: Right, right. JP: There were five, I think five steel mills. I believe, I want to say it, I want to say there were like fourteen thousand steel workers. We were like, we were like our own towns, okay. There wasn't anything automated. [laughs] SH: Yeah. JP: And so, that's in my lifetime. You asked me what changed. I worked in a steel mill. I saw this, okay. Everything is computer controlled now. Everything's computer controlled. SH: So that, that effected industry, technology, and that therefore effected labor. JP: Absolutely. SH: And effected the way, where people lived, and how people lived. JP: Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. And so, in southwestern Illinois, what you have seen is, in terms of where people live, right? People don't live where they work anymore, okay. So, what's happened is, you've seen this movement from the old industrial communities, many of which were right along the river, were on the river for transportation. SH: So, they moved to places like Alton and Granite City, and... JP: Sauget, yes! Yes. But they were there because of the river transportation, right? They're still there for the river transportation. That's all part of how they operate, right? But people don't, people who work in those plants today, don't have to live there, right? SH: Right. JP: And they made a choice. "Let's move away. Let's move up." And in our case, what happened was they want to live in the more suburban communities, in our case, in Madison County, it's like Troy, it's like Edwardsville, it's like Glen Carbon, okay? But it's this movement away. That's had dramatic effects. Dramatic effects. You could say, you could say positive? Although some would argue it, right, on the communities that are receiving the people, right. And deleterious effects on the older established communities. So. You know. Nobody would argue that, right, local population-wise. SH: Not every community has survived the, the decline of industry. 22  JP: No. I mean, we have, SH: Gary, Indiana, for example. Um, Granite City has suffered. Why, but overall, Madison County seems to have survived and even succeeded in a lot of, of ways. JP: Well, it's interesting, SH: Why, why is that? JP: If you look into, well, if you look at Madison County, we have fewer population. In fact, we've had overall population decline. What's happened in Madison County? Madison County's held its own, let's put it that way, but don't think Madison County has grown. It has not. Okay? St. Clair County has fewer people, if I last looked at the population statistics. Let's just put it this way, neither one of these counties has experienced growth, right. However, areas within the county have experienced growth. Okay? SH: So, change is experienced. Change, but not necessarily growth of the county. JP: Yes. Yes, yes. There's been movement within the county, but if you look at the county as a whole, you're not seeing population growth, you're seeing growth of certain communities within the county, right? And, and Edwardsville-Glen Carbon, if you take those, or Troy, right. Edwardsville has some substantial growth. And I attribute that in large part to the University. Do you know what the second largest employer in southwestern Illinois is? SH: SIUE. JP: SIUE. Yeah. SH: Right behind, um, JP: Right behind Scott, yes. SH: Air Force Base. JP: Yes, yes. Those are both public entities. Yet when you see, it's not hard to, in my mind, anyway, to figure out why certain areas have done well, right. And that university brings an enormous advantage to a community. Both in terms of education levels, I mean, the statistics are out there for anyone that wants to look at them, okay. And good for us. Good for Madison County, to have SIUE, to have Edwardsville, and these other communities. The question is how do you address the issues in the communities that have lost population and that are struggling? That's the other part of the question that needs to be addressed. SH: How do you address the growth and how do you address the decline. JP: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. What does that mean? Because these things, we are connected, again. A lot of people don't look at it that way. I have always looked at it that way. SH: When you, what prompted you to leave the leadership council in 2006 and come to work for the university? 23  JP: Come to the university? Ah, a moment of insanity. [laughs] Actually, I saw another logical transition. There were things that I was working on at the leadership council that seemed to kind of come to fruition. A lot, some infrastructure projects, there were things that were finished. You know, we'd come through another round of BRAC successfully, it was like, wow, things are good here, and you had a chancellor, alright, that I admired greatly. Vaughn Vandegrift, who wanted the university to gain a, to be known, to be an entity, alright? He wanted to put SIUE on the map. And there was kind of an excitement that he brought to the university. I don't know how folks internally were looking at Vaughn, but I know the community was looking at him, and saying, you know, "This guy wants to, he wants to promote the university, and we think the university needs to be promoted." I was looking at University Park, right, and I was thinking, knowledge-based economic development. We were all moving in that direction, there was this whole notion, you know, where is technology going, what does that mean in terms of business development, how do we marry those two things, how do we, how do we take the intellectual property, you know, as a resource in the most general sense at the university, how do we marry that with business and how do we become successful? Listen, you know, people don't remember this, but the first couple of years at University Park were amazingly successful. Yeah. We sold a building that had been sitting there empty, okay, to a private tenant. We filled, we filled a couple of buildings. I remember we put an article out that we had seven new tenants in University Park, things were going great, then the worst recession since the Great Depression. [laughs] SH: Yeah. JP: And, and how many years did we go without a budget? Oh, it was everything, just, oh. Gah. [laughs] SH: I think that says it all, Jim. JP: Oh, my gosh. I couldn't believe it. We were, we hit the rough patch, big time. SH: Yeah. JP: Nothing was happening. "Please don't leave! Please, tenants, don't leave!" [laughs] Life changed dramatically for every economic developer in the United States. It was terrible. SH: Well, I appreciate you taking the time and, and doing this, this has really been very interesting and your, ah, being an active participant in all these changes has been, is interesting to learn about. I'm, I'm fascinated by the change that's occurred or why it's occurred. And, um, so your point of view is really, it's interesting. I've asked similar questions to Gary Niebur, and Ed Hightower, and Tom Holloway, and Ralph Korte, and some other folks, and they all have slightly different but also slightly similar answers about the factors that came together, that were responsible for the kind of positive change, or able to mitigate some of the bad changes that have occurred. And they all mention, uh, education, particularly SIUE, its presence and growth. JP: Absolutely. SH: They all mention, uh, the role of the leadership council in getting all these units that you talked about to cooperate and to focus, government, labor, business, education. 24  JP: I'm glad to hear that, yeah. SH: Um, so it's interesting. Now, some of them are more enthusiastic in terms of seeing the, ah, the positive in growth. Because maybe they're sitting in the middle of it, as opposed to sitting down in Granite City, JP: Oh, it's, no. SH: Or up in Alton. JP: Yeah. It's interesting. Where you stand depends on where you sit, okay, right? So, your view is, you see life through various lenses, okay, but I don't think people, unless you get out statistics and look at them, alright? You would be, you would have a different impression. I mean, the numbers don't lie, right. So, I have said that to various people, and they go, "What do you mean there's no growth?" Sorry, but there isn't. SH: Yeah. Right. JP: There isn't. SH: I was, I looked at the census and I was stunned, too. I was really surprised. JP: Yeah, yeah. And so, when you look at it, and you start thinking, and you start analyzing it's not surprising. It's not surprising. Guess what? It's not going to get better. I mean, frankly, you know, we're baby boomers. We're the bulge in the belly of the snake. Right? So, it's not going to get better. Birth rates are going down, right? There's going to be fewer of us. That's what's happening, it's a major demographic shift, okay. Something else. You mentioned the levee situation, okay. Which was astonishing. And I said that that did not occur when I was with the leadership council. It occurred after I had, you know, come on board with the university. After I had retired from SIUE, interestingly enough, um, I want to say Bi-State. Not called Bi-State anymore. What do they call it? The folks who run the MetroLink. Metro. Anyway. Used to be Bi-State Development Agency. Metro started an economic development course. But they were looking for a case study, and I got a call because I knew some people, or they knew me. And they were very taken with the levee project. Particularly how that project came about. Not the actual physical fixing of the levees, but how in the heck did three counties get together and come together to repair several federal levees? Literally generating millions and millions of dollars through a sales tax. That just doesn't, that just doesn't seem possible. And when you think about it, um, it wouldn't be, I don't think that would be possible today. SH: Well, you know, it's interesting, that comparison is with when I was interim chancellor, is when leadership council and everyone was pushing hard for, JP: The MetroLink? SH: The National Geospatial Agency to come over, JP: Okay, alright, got it. 25  SH: , to this side of the river. And the comment from, uh, Congressman Clay over in St. Louis was that he was so envious of the east side and its cooperation and its unity in pulling for the NGA. JP: There it is. There it is. SH: So, it's the same story as the levee. JP: Yep, yep, yep. SH: I think a lot of that is your legacy. JP: Well, I will tell you, my point is that that was always something I was worried that we were losing, frankly. I had to step away from all of this stuff, for my own mental health, frankly. [laughs] You asked, you asked me what I've been doing, I haven't been doing this stuff. But I really wanted to step away from all this and take a break. So, I haven't been connected. And I see things, and I hear things, but I don't have a context to process it, okay? And I just didn't see a whole lot of unity going on. I saw a whole lot of divisiveness. SH: Well, after the election in 2016, I think, JP: Yeah. SH: I think, you know, maybe your observations are correct. There's more local divisiveness than there was before. JP: And it, and it bothers me. Because I think that's, how do you get anything done? Unless you can compromise, you can disagree on a lot of stuff, right? And that's fine, people disagree. But in order to get anything done, you have to agree. SH: Right. JP: Right? And so, SH: As you said, yeah, to focus. JP: Yeah. Exactly. Um, anyway. So, they wanted this case study, then. As I was preparing to talk about this, I was looking at it, and I was thinking, "man, this was, this was incredible." That we could get the state of Illinois to empower us. Three county boards, to declare an emergency, and institute a sales tax through an emergency, emergency vote of county boards. And the county boards were willing to do it. It's just, I mean, it needed to be done, it was the right thing to do, but how unusual that it would be done this way. Wow. Amazing. SH: Yeah. JP: Yeah. So. Good for us. [laughs] 26  SH: Again, thanks, Jim. I appreciate you giving me the time to do this, and, ah, if there's something that we failed to cover that you think of on your drive back to Granite City, send me an email, give me a call, and we'll just add it in. JP: Okay. [laughs] Doubtful, but. You've got enough material here. If it makes any sense, I don't know. SH: Well, we'll be sending you a transcript. And you can edit it as you see fit. JP: Okay. SH: And then once we have the approval on that, we will post the written and the oral. JP: Okay. SH: Okay. JP: Good. 27 
MadisonCounty;Bill Iseminger;1942;1918;Bill Iseminger 1942 1918    Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois William Iseminger Oral History Interview Michelle Ziegler, Interviewer Cahokia Mounds Interpretative Center, Collinsville, Illinois September 27, 2018 Michelle Ziegler (MZ): This interview is being conducted with William Iseminger, better known as Bill to most people, on behalf of the Madison County Oral History Project that is part of, part of the Madison Historical the Online Encyclopedia and Digitial Archive for Madison County Illinois. This interview takes place on Thursday, September 27, in 2018, at the Cahokia Mounds Historic Site Interpretative Center in Collinsville Illinois. The historic site is split between Madison County and St. Clair County, with Monk’s Mound being in Madison County. Bill Iseminger (WI): Correct. MZ: The interviewer is Michelle Ziegler of the Museum Studies program at Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville. Ok, so let’s just start at the beginning [chuckle], where were you born and where did you grow up at? WI: Well, I was born in Bloomington, Illinois and I grew up in Arlington Virginia. Went to the University of Oklahoma where I got a bachelor’s degree in Anthropology and then did my master’s degree in Anthropology at Southern Illinois University at Carbondale. MZ: Ok, so, you got your bachelor’s in about what year? WI: Bachelors in 1967 and the Masters in 1971. MZ: So, what was it about anthropology that, that drew your attention? WI: When I first got interested in anthropology/archaeology, I guess mainly archaeology, as a kid ah, my father’s brother Uncle Wendell was an artifact collector who lived in Hayworth Illinois where the family home was in McCleane County. And whenever we visited the family ah, Uncle Wendle would take us kids out to the cornfields around McCleane County looking for Indian artifacts. That is what stimulated my interest and following that I did reading on it, and I’ve probably guess I’ve known since I was in 7th or 8th grade that I wanted to be an archaeologist. So that is sort of how it all started. MZ: So, started collecting arrowheads [chuckle]. WI: Right. I never found a lot but ah, had fun doing it. Looking anyway. [chuckling] MZ: I understand. Ok, ah. So, the other areas of anthropology just never really interested you or? WI: Well, of course in anthropology you cover all kinds of aspects of human culture, including 1  linguistics, social anthropology, and physicial anthropology but my main interest was in archaeology and particularly North American and Midwestern archaeology where I ended up. MZ: That’s good. So, when did you first come to Cahokia Mounds? The very first visit. WI: The first time I was here at Cahokia Mounds was 1968, ah, I was hired on a digging crew here that was being run by Dr. Melvin Fowler from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. He had several projects at the Cahokia site at that time. And, I was working on the ah, it was called the south stockade behind the twin mounds, trying to locate where the defensive wall went around the southern part of sort of downtown Cahokia and we did indeed find that and several constructions of it... so that was my first visit and ah, experience at Cahokia. MZ: So, what, what was your overall impression of the whole site when you first came? WI: Of course, everybody including myself is always impressed at how big the site is and how big some of the mounds are compared to other mound sites. It was a really interesting experience. The dig we were on was mostly in gumbo clay really hard to dig with a sharpened shovel and it’s really hard to imagine the Mississippians dug it with stone tools, but we were able to see the color differences of the soil that showed us where several different constructions of the defensive wall were located. But anyhow, it’s always interesting to be able to work at the largest prehistoric site in America and as a first experience. It wasn’t my first dig  my first dig was out in South Dakota back in 1963 and in between my freshman and sophomore years in college and ah, almost all my other other work has been here in Illinois. In 1967 I dug at Dickson Mounds up in central Illinois and in ‘68 here at Cahokia. then while I was in grad school down in Carbondale, I also conducted some surveys and excavations where Kinkaid Creek, used to be, is now Kinkaid Lake, and then also the lower 30 miles of the lower Kaskaskia River Valley whatever straightening out the river for barge traffic we are trying to locate sites and do some excavations of sites to identify were the cultural features were in that area. Then I was able to, as I finished up my masters, work at Carbondale. I went to an archaeology conference for Illinois archaeologists and the Illinois Archaeological Survey has an annual meeting and I ran into the fella who had been my supervisor when I worked at Cahokia in ‘68 and he asked what I was doing. I said, well I’m finishing up my master’s I'm not interested at this point in going for a PhD. And he said, how would you like to work at Cahokia because he had just been offered a job to be the first on-site archaeologist through the Illinois State Museum and the state Museum wouldn't you have kind of a Joint operation here with the Department conservation which actually own the property and the little building where the old Museum was basically one small room with collections that various collectors had loaned or donated to the facility or. And there been up a couple women who had come the year before 1970 to revamp some of the exhibits. But the main part of that building was a ranger’s residence, and he moved into a different house, uh, and then we were hired to uh, sort of modify that building into a small museum. So, we started with the existing one room and then we’d knock holes in walls and created from scratch basically on a lot of other exhibits and overtime we - not only Jim Anderson who was the man I was working with and myself and other people who were hired seasonally or in permanent positions - eventually had over 30 exhibits in that small museum. And we had added a couple of rooms to it and a small gift shop and mini theatre. We rebuilt Indian houses and Gardens in the backyard and started interpretive programs, educational programs, to the public archaeological field school which I ran for a number of years and a variety of other things. 2  MZ: I remember those days. When I first came here as a second grader. Right [chuckle]. Yeah, it was a nice little museum. So, when you first came here it was a park still correct? WI: Right the first land was purchased here and 1925, it was 144 acres purchased from the Ramey family that owned much of the site and that included Monk’s Mound and part of the grand plaza the twin mounds, mound 72 area ... so sort of the central corridor through the core of the site and it stayed that way for a long time, but it was developed as a state park. So, they developed campgrounds and picnic areas, recreational equipment, swing sets, slides, teeter totters, and etc., ball diamonds. So, like most state parks it was primarily focused on recreation and stayed at that size until about the mid-1960s when they began to do more land acquisition through the Department of Conservation. And when I started here were somewhere around 600 acres and today, we have 2200 acres that the state owns. So, it was ah, it was I guess in the late ‘70s that we really started to refocus the management of the site from a park to a historic site, a state historic site and ah, so eventually they removed the campground as they developed the new campground up to Horseshoe Lake state park. The idea was to transfer all that activity up there. And then we also expanded some more land acquisition in the ‘70s and ‘80s ... and there were several attempts over time to build a new museum at Cahokia, even some funding at one point, but for various reasons...the funding fell through or people couldn’t decide where to put a museum that wouldn’t impact the archaeology too much ‘cause that was our main focus. And when we were in the late ‘70s first nominated to be on the world heritage list by UNESCO ah, we were not accepted initially because there wasn't a master management plan in place and they want to see more of a commitment from the state to what protecting and developing site and conserving and expanding protections for the site and so 1980 when there was a new, the first master management plan drawn up through the Department of Conservation and we were reentered into nomination for World Heritage status and that was approved in 1982 and it was soon after that that the state realized that had to do something more to tell the story than the little building that we had. And eventually, Governor Thompson released funds for constructing a new museum and ah, initially there had to be some archaeology done and also this area where they want to build this museum was at the end of a subdivision that has been built at the site in the 1940s ...other over 60 some houses in the subdivision. They had previously acquired a few of those properties but they accelerated that after the decision was made to build at the end of where the subdivision was and for ... fortunately over just a few years they were able to acquire all those properties save one house that the other assistant manager lives in. For a while the manager lived on the property too, but his house was in the middle of the plaza and they decided that that was not a good thing, so we were able to get some other property elsewhere nearby and the site manager then moved there. But there is still one house remaining of that subdivision where the other, the other asst manager lives at this time. MZ: So how much ... archaeological damage did the subdivisions and all the other development ‘cause ...I mean, other than I mean obviously knocking down a mound? WI: Obviously the mounds are the most obvious feature of the site. Originally, we estimate about 120 mounds of which about 80 survive today in some form or another. Very few have escaped some alternation by modern man. Some smaller ones were plowed over by farmers, some had houses built on them, others were sold for fill, ah, highway subdivisions, discount stores impacted a number of the mounds, and ah. So quite a bit was damaged, but it’s not just the mounds that we are concerned with, it’s also the land all around the mounds, eh. Because that is where the people lived, that’s where their houses were. Where their daily activities took place. Often, we learn more about them digging there than we do 3  in the mounds, so we try to preserve as much of that as we can. And we still have an ongoing land acquisition program through the Cahokia Mounds Museum Society, our support group, when they have funds available and there is a willing seller in another subdivision on the eastern border of our site, they have been acquiring properties to help protect and preserve more of the site because there are at least four mounds in that neighborhood. So far, they have acquired almost 60 properties and then turn those over to the state. MZ: So what kind of process is there when you have to demolish those houses to do the minimum amount of damage to... WI: Well, when the houses were built, they impacted or damaged the site ... some of them had basements in the subdivision between where the museum sits today and so obviously that had impact on the site...and when we acquire a property it’s the property owner that has to do the demolition um, and then try to stabilize or restore the property to stable condition. So that means that a lot of these sites, the houses didn’t have, you know, sewer lines so they had septic tanks and cisterns in some cases, so there have been a lot of holes punched into the site with this construction. When the houses are removed, ah usually the foundations are collapsed into the hole, if there was a basement, or if there’s not the slab would be removed. Septic tanks filled in with sand although we have discovered that that didn’t always happen as it was supposed to. [chuckle] But ah, there is an attempt to, you know, stabilize the land again where it has been impacted by modern construction. MZ: So, if I can just go back at little bit to the various stages the site has been through, what changes happen when it went from state park to state historic site, state historic site to world heritage site? I mean I know the latter is separate. WI: Well again, in the 1970s when we decided to reclassify the site, and again that was the department of conservation, into a state historic site as opposed to a state park, the focus being more on cultural resources than recreational resources, so that gradually involved removal of campgrounds at the site, recreational equipment, backstops from the ball diamonds, and ah, teeter totters, slides and swing sets, and eventually also, um, when eventually built the museum here, or interpretative center as its official name, or interpretative center/museum, we also wanted to change ah, how the site was being used so we wanted to coordinate with the new facility and that meant closing off park roads that used to go through the site and making some of them into interpretive trails. And so, we eliminated a lot of the vehicular traffic and related problems that that caused. Also, for many years, this was a major spot for local citizens to have big picnics on the major holidays like Memorial Day and the fourth of July, Labor Day, and so there were thousands and thousands of cars and people here all up and down the roads, sometimes parked two and three deep so all that impacted the mounds too. So, people would climb up the mounds and where ever they climb, they made trails and when it rained it would wash out, we had gullies five and six feet deep, on a lot of the mounds so we had to fill in those gullies and do a lot of stabilization of the mounds as well. And so, we tried to emphasize and develop more interpretation signage, special events, and other kinds of programs that would give people more of an exposure to the cultural side of this site and that really expanded again after we got the World Heritage nomination. Like I said the state began acquiring more of the properties in the neighborhood. They had already acquired some adjacent agricultural lands ah but again the primary goal is the preservation and conservation of the site. Now in the mid ‘80s, 1985, what had been the Historic Sites Division of the Department of Conservation was split 4  out to create a new agency called the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency so cultural historical sites aroundthe state were now a part of that new agency with a primary focus on the cultural resources, whereas conservation still managed the state parks and other kinds of natural areas. And so, it really changed the emphasis of how we were managing the site. As I mentioned it with the world heritage listing in 1982 it resulted in a new facility here and again, as part of that we developed more of these interpretive trails and special events, special events, and special cultural activities and we are involved more with the American Indian community that they had been in previous times. So, a lot of changes occurred as a result of all that. MZ: So, the site the historic site designation and the world heritage site designation is much larger than the park, is that correct? WI: Yeah. The site grounds, like I said, the state of Illinois, now we changed again, and we are in the Department of Natural Resources, about a year or so ago the Governor dissolved the Historic Preservation Agency and merged it, the function into the department of natural resources, so we are not part of the historic sites division as part of that agency, now. Where was I going with this now? Ah, so there have been changes in the ways things are done and the way some of the site has been managed. We are experiencing a transitional period right now as we go into this new agency and because they are the one who primarily focus on again, the recreational, and natural resources throughout the state, basically it is what used to be the Department of Conservation but had other things over the years merged into it as well. A different focus on how the site is run, a lot more bureaucracy with this new agency than we’ve had to deal with before. So we are learning as well as they are learning how to deal with cultural sites again. MZ: Right, well, let's see... WI: I think I got off track whatever the original question was there... MZ: Who shepherds, uh, shepherds it through the process of going from park to historic site and then to heritage center? I mean, does that come from here in the interpretative center or elsewhere? WI: Those kinds of things are organized through the agency that we are part of. So initially it was the Department of Conservation, then the Illinois Preservation Agency, and ah, with the World Heritage designation, that is managed through the National Park Service. So, each country can nominate natural and cultural sites that they think are significant enough to be on that World Heritage list...and we were the first state-owned property on the World Heritage list, almost all the others were national parks or national monuments and still are today, there are few others now who are not. So originally, we were number 10 on the U.S. World Heritage list and now there are 23 and over a thousand worldwide. So, it’s a focus on both natural and cultural site, world heritage committee looks at when they are approving sites, so now...but it done in cooperation with the state agencies that own the properties. MZ: So, I know there has been some talk lately about the site becoming a federal park or federal historic site, what are... has it gone anywhere? WI: There were several times in the past where that was examined, and the state was maybe interested in having the Park Service take over, and then the state was not interested in giving it up to the Park Service. In the past 7 or 8 years there has been kind of a movement to reexamine that possibility. The Heartland 5  Conservancy, which is a private non-profit, did a sort of a resource analysis and feasibility study ah what it would take to have Cahokia become a National Monument or part of a larger thing called a National Historical Park, not necessarily a National Park. Within the National Park Service there are about 30 different categories of monuments, parks and scenic areas and byways, etc. So, uh, but the ones that they are looking at the most closely were the National Monument and that is something that a president can nominate and push through but in all the others, whether it is a National Park or a National Historical Park - which would not just include Cahokia for instance but the other mound sites throughout the whole greater St. Louis metropolitan area and kind of an umbrella type thing - anything like that has to go through Congress. And we had hoped, you know, that President Obama before he went out of office would include it as a National Monument at least and maybe the other category would follow at some later date. But I guess it was almost at the last hour or so it didn’t quite get passed through him and now with the current situation in politics [laughs] we don’t see that happening really quickly but that feasibility was sent to the National Park Service by the Heartlands Conservancy and then the National Park Service did their own study and assessment, the local or regional out of, I think it’s, Lincoln, Nebraska ...and they submitted that to the national office and that is pretty much where it sits now and so they are examining it. But again, the atmosphere in D.C. at this point is kind of up in the air and I don’t think it’s going to be any real movement to create new places unless things start changing. But ah, so I think it will happen but even if it does, it’s a long process. It’ll take many years. MZ: Right. WI: The way it was always laid out it would be a joint operation between the state of Illinois and the National Park Service, so they would have a presence here. They would give us greater recognition and visibility perhaps more opportunities, probably better staffing. So, there are certainly advantages but there is a lot more levels of bureaucracy to deal with at the national level like that. MZ: So how do you feel about it moving on to these changes? Is it...? WI: Personally, I see it eventually happening but ah, I’ve always felt that we had a little more flexibility at doing things at the state level but, you know, the state is at such financial straits too. We have had to suffer over the years to get a bunch of cuts, personnel cuts and things. We are trying to slowly get back but ah, its a slow process and it probably, if it ever happens...could work a little better in that respect through the national level. MZ: Do we have a site archaeologist who is just doing that? WI: No, we never have, except those first few years ah when Jim Anderson and I started, we were both archaeologists. So, we were hired basically as museum curators, but we did archaeology. There is no site archaeologist, but the current site director Mark Essary and myself are archaeologists. But we don’t do the archaeology... any archaeology done here is done by other institutions now. Or universities or other groups that have a research goal they are trying to answer, and they think that digging in certain places on the site are going to help answer those questions. So, they have to be qualified they have to be able to do the analysis, they have to write up the reports and get things published... there is a permitting process it goes through currently our agency for any work that is done here. So, there is no site archaeologist per say but there are archaeologists who are here including myself. 6  MZ: So how long have you been here and when do you consider you started? WI: I started here full time in April 1971 so this coming April I’ll be here 48 years. MZ: Ok, is there a target in there, or ... WI: Well, I’m talking about retiring at the end of next year. I’ll be I guess 49 years then or almost, and I’ll be 75 then so I figure that is a good time to... MZ: Yeah. WI: When I retire, make a break, but I’ll still be here a lot... MZ: You can join the volunteers. WI: ...doing there are things I would eventually like to organize, better organize, the photographic files cause I’m probably the only one who knows what the photos are of... [chuckle] and ah, where they should be classified. We had them organized and classified by some volunteers in the past and ah, they weren’t always very knowledgeable about what some of the images were so things got classified improperly so I would like to go through all those and there is thousands and thousands of them. Mainly slides which no one, you know, uses anymore but we do have those, they are basically historical documents of what went on here, the archaeology, the activities and everything else that went on here. MZ: So, is there any plans to digitize those slides? WI: We started doing some of that, you know, we recently acquired a scanner that will scanner about a dozen slides at a time. We had some of our interns or seasonal helpers begin to do some of that digitizing...so starting with most of the archeological ah, images getting those done first and we’ll ... categorize, yeah, we are starting to do that. MZ: Ok, so right now currently you are the assistant manager for the site... WI: Right. MZ: ...in charge of interpretation and public relations and of course, you’re an archaeologist. So, what does it mean to be in charge of interpretation? WI: Basically, ah, I oversee ...what’s being said about Cahokia through our volunteers, I train them, ah, our interns. I run the intern program. Ah, I help manage any changes in exhibits, what is being said about them, updating things that are ... as we go through the years there have been a lot of changes in the archaeology, in the analysis that has been done, or reanalysis ... changing our interpretations of ideas so we gotta update the exhibits on that. I do a lot of the public speaking, ah to groups and organizations, I also do the presentations on the media interviews, radio, TV, ah film crews, managed the film crews that come here and often do interviews for various cable channels and education channels and things that are out there. Ah so a little bit of everything and make sure all the literature that we put out for the public is correct, you know, and that obviously does involve revising from time to time, so that is kinda what the 7  interpretation aspect is. MZ: So, you have a role in developing any new exhibits or, or ah, probably you have been here for a lot of them that are here already? WI: Yeah with the exhibits, I do oversee most any changes that take place in those, or upgrades or updating information. Also, and developing new exhibits, working closely with the exhibit designers and fabricators. Also, we have temporary exhibits from time to time and most of these are exhibits our interns prepare. So, I work very closely with them ahem, make sure again that it’s done properly and the information is correct. So, yeah, I’m in involved in sort of all aspects of exhibitory... [chuckle] MZ: What exhibits would you like to see here that aren’t here yet? WI: Well, one that it’s very hard to nail down, a little more information on the cosmology and beliefs based on what we know about the Mississippian culture and some of their descendants and some of the information we have of later peoples and their beliefs and how things we see archaeologically seems to reflect some of those same kinds of beliefs. On that ah, we just recently, has been almost 3 years now, put in a new exhibit on wetlands and waterways. How the Indians utilized the resources of the river bottoms and plain, the river and backwater lakes and everything else. We hadn’t really addressed that very much in the initial exhibits so there are things like that ah, there’s a few exhibits we would need to update. For instance, mound 72 exhibits because new analyses done by people of the University of Illinois are changing some of our ideas about what was there and what that represents and so we’ve got to do some updates like that from time to time. We have a history of the archaeology, the panels that we have up now kinda stopped around 2000 so we have almost 20 more years of research that has been going on...so those are things we are talking about doing and ah, in a process right now of ah, doing an exhibit on other Mississippian sites. We used to have a flip book or notebook kind of thing for people to flip the pages ... we did some of our, revised some of other exhibits and we had to get that one out of the way. Because it was taking up space we needed for another exhibit. So now we are going to be putting that information on a vertical panel that is currently blank, going to use the space as best we can. Ah MZ: What sites do you think compare the best with Cahokia? Other sites... WI: Well, there are several major Mississippian sites in the south, for instance, Moundsville Alabama which is the second largest surviving site after Cahokia, ah Etowah Mounds in Georgia, Ocmulgee Mounds in Georgia, Angel Mounds in Indiana, Kincaid Mounds in Illinois... Aztalan in Wisconsin, those are some of the major sites that we talk about, Spiro mound in Oklahoma. So there are you know, we try to ah get across to people that this was not one culture but an amalgam of many different cultures that we collectively refer to as Mississippian so I often tell people it’s like we use the term European, you know, it was a certain similarity of European culture or Asian culture but we know there is a difference in language and geography and lifestyles and other things, but there are certain shared characteristics that... these people have, the same was true with the Indians cultures especially the Mississippians so ...try to make people realize that this was a, ah a cultural system or tradition that’s covered a very broad area with a lot of interaction a lot of trade in connection with each other. MZ: So, there would have been ... multiple tribes? 8  WI: Right, different tribes, different languages basically the same way of life with regional variations. MZ: Ok, ah. WI: Another thing we would like to do with some of the recent work ah that was done for instance in East St. Louis and St Louis - talk about the mound groups there. There are huge mound centers there and East St Louis there are about 50 mounds at one time, and downtown St. Louis another 26 or 27 mounds that are right across the river from each other and probably controlling trade and traffic along the rivers. And access to Cahokia probably had to go through East St. Louis to get to Cahokia, so and unfortunately those were slashed through, they thought mostly destroyed and St. Louis pretty much is as the city built up there but what we discovered when they were building the new bridge in East St. Louis to go across the river, they encountered a huge settlement that we, much bigger than we anticipated being there that was associated with that mound complex, and just in the small area they dug they found over 1400 houses and over 4000 pits, and that is probably only 10% of that site that was there . That is a much more massive complex that we now call Greater Cahokia which includes Cahokia Mounds, East St. Louis and St. Louis Mound Groups and all the surrounding smaller communities a that were all part of this metropolitan area in prehistoric times. MZ: So, we’ve talked before about Mitchell also being at the, ahm, northern end of the American Bottoms, ah .... The so-called Big Mound on Laclede's Landing, how did it compare to ah sites that are here? WI: Yeah it was the largest mound in the St Louis complex, and I think it was about 40 feet tall, I forgot the other dimensions but ...probably was a ridge-shaped mound, and those are kind of unique to the Cahokia area. And that is right about it was eventually leveled by 1870 as they used the dirt for fill to fill build railroads and roads and things like that in St. Louis and that’s today where the new bridge lands on the Missouri side of the river is right about where Big Mound used to be and another large one in what was sometimes called was caused, sometimes called Cemetery Mound in East St. Louis, because later Anglo settlers and others used it for their burials but apparently there was Indian burials there as well. From the earlier period. But unfortunately, as those cities grew they leveled most of those mounds, used the dirt for fill and elevating other parts of the city that were growing in the 1800s and ah, a lot was lost but what we have found is that the bases of a lot of those mounds in East St. Louis are still there beneath the city rubble and so we can still see a lot of the habitation zones and mound bases beneath what’s left to the city there today. MZ: They didn’t want to dig too deep into the clay? [chuckle]... So here at the interpretive site or center, what is the message or the Big Idea that you want visitors to take away from the whole site? WI: Yeah, our Big Idea was always the urban nature of Cahokia the fact that it was an Indian City  ah, it wasn’t just a village or a tribe but it was a an amalgam of people who moved here ah, to become part of the big city...when Cahokia really grew exponentially around 1050 AD, a lot of smaller sites were abandoned as people moved into the big city, I guess. But what we’re really seeing increasing evidence of, as we do more excavations now only at Cahokia but also at some of the surrounding sites, a lot of immigration from Arkansas, southeast Missouri, and parts of Indiana and Kentucky based on the pottery and other things we see and we know come from those areas, so people were immigrating into Cahokia 9  and with the new analysis of the burials from mound 72, looking at the strontium levels in the teeth they can determine that at least 30% of the burials there are non-locals, are not from this area, from someplace else ...now a lot of those were sacrificial burials ... so we don’t know if they were local people or people who moved here, people who were captives, or if they were married into the society, ... we don’t know how they selected those people. MZ: Or slaves... WI: But we do know that a lot of them were ah, coming from other places. We are still trying to figure out where some of those places are... MZ: Or hostages? WI: Could be, ah we don’t see much evidence of what we what call slaves in Indian society...ah, there are a few examples here and there, but they often did ... captured mainly women and children, talking about of what later Indian were doing, so we assume they did too. A lot of times they were adopted into Indian society became part of the captor's society and that may well have been happening with some of those examples here at Cahokia. MZ: Ok, ah, of all the excavations that you have taken part of here and elsewhere, of the Mississippian societies, which one was the most exciting for you to work on? WI: I think probably the summer I worked at Dickson Mounds, 1967 before I came here. They were getting ready to build a new museum... up there and the old museum had over 230 in situ [in situ = in place  bodies/skeletons], still exposed in their original positions, exposed, so we knew there was a cemetery there. They were going to incorporate the burial site into one of the wings of the museum so where we were digging was sort of outside of where that wing would be, to recover and remove anything that might be there, before the new building went up... so we were digging burials which were fascinating in many ways but they were something that we don’t do much in archaeology anymore because of native people have raised objections and concerns about disturbing human remains a lot of people seem to think that, you know, that is all archaeologists do is dig up bones, you know [chuckle]...that is one of the mythologies of archaeology, I guess. It’s always been a small aspect of what archaeologists do. But we do it even less now and about the only times where we work with burials ... about the only time is where there is a highway going through and there is going to be some impact and they can’t reroute the highway for some reason. We try to leave burials in place. If we come across them, we do document them as much as we can but we don’t remove them from the ground except in rare circumstances...so for me that kind of a fascinating aspect of it... although nearly everything we do as archaeologists we think is exciting (laughing). It is very mundane a lot of the times but a lot of the focus of what I did here at Cahokia is tracing where the stockade wall went around the center of the site and part of the problem is that the site was so heavily occupied for so long that there has been reuses of the same plot of land over and over for hundreds of years ... they built these walls right through where people lived. So, we have found evidence of house and pits, as well as posts and trenches they dug to set the walls. Sometimes just digging through one 2- meter square you can see where there is a sequence of 7 or 8 activities that superimpose each and and trying to unravel that is kind of the challenge of archaeology. I always find that fascinating trying to find the sequence of activities that took place at any particular spot. And the other project I was involved 10  on here was back in 1985 ... we had a donation from a local couple to reconstruct the woodhenge ...that Dr. Ewan Withrey (sp?) .... In the early 60s and late 70s and we wanted to reconstruct one of the circles and we wanted to do it where the original was so he had identified most of the posts for what we call circle number 3 which would have had 48 posts in the circle... we were missing some in the northeast side so I had a field school out there in the summer of 1985 to check those areas and see if we could find those posts and we did. We found those three locations, so we were able to reconstruct the circle as best as best we could at that point. And so that was interesting so to be able to find something where you predict it should be (laughing) Most of the time we are surprised in archaeology, we think we know where things are but there is a lot of technology nowadays to help us narrow down where to dig. ...use remote sensing, the radar, the magnanometry...electronic resistivity and conductivity using these instruments across the ground it detects where the soil has been disturbed... where people lived, had houses and built walls and dug pits. These things so up just through these sensing instruments...and they plot maps of the distribution of these things, so it really helps us to focus to know where to dig. We call “ground truthing” to confirm what we see on those computers’ printout with actual excavations. MZ: So, if you finding 7 or 8 different layers of things how well does the ground penetrating radar or the remote sensing do for that? WI: It gets very confused...when you have certain areas of a site where the densest occupation was it will show you there was a lot of activity there, but it doesn’t really help. It is difficult to isolate one feature from another ... if they are actually superimposing on top of each, its not other not necessarily layers... its the same surface of ground used over and over again. So, it ah it’s not separated by stratigraphy shall we say. MZ: What is your favorite interpretive activity that comes out here or that you take part in? WI: There is two things I do more than other things, I guess. I do the observations of the equinoxes and the solstices at the reconstructed woodhenge and ... when we first built that in 1985 we figured after a couple of years would lose interest in it...well, I’m still doing it and its 2018...so its been a number of years and but, I still enjoy getting out there and I get up on a step ladder and have the people gather around me while we are waiting for the sun to show up and I explain how we discovered woodhenge, how it works and what we know about it. ...and hopefully the sun shows up. ...hopefully, it’s not cloudy or raining ...I’ve been out there with an umbrella and ...I’ve been out there in a snowstorm ...but sometimes on the horizon there might be a break in the clouds and you will see the sun. We usually do it on the Sunday morning closest to the actual event so more people can come out. ...we make it an educational experience ...we don’t do any ceremonies since we are not Indians ...don’t think it would be appropriate to play Indian. So those kinds of things like that ... I do the nature/culture hikes a few times a year ah Archaeology Day, I think, is always a fun experience...expose people to what archaeologists do and ancient technologies. I think those are probably the things I most enjoy working with. MZ: Okay, ah, what is the, is the most unique thing that has been found here? WI: I don’t know, I guess the most unique thing is the Birdman tablet...that has become the logo or symbol for Cahokia...sandstone tablet about 4 inches tall with a figure of a man wearing a birdlike mask holding a wing up in a dancing posture and the flip side has cross-hatching pattern... so we think what is 11  represented there is the different spiritual realms that most Indian peoples believe in the upper world represented by the bird most likely represented by a falcon or hawk ah, this world, the middle world where there are people, the man represents that, and the cross- hatching is a representation of snakeskin or the underworld or lower world. How they used that stone we don’t know and right now I’m doing some research on other tablets from other sites, as well as other tablets from this site that have been found and trying to do a comparative study but that is one of the few that has been found intact and complete and that has become sort of our symbol for Cahokia Mounds. It’s probably one of the more unique things that has been found here. MZ: Has the Cahokian design been found elsewhere? WI: There are designs that we associate with Cahokia especially on pottery. What is called Ramey Incised Pottery. It’s a bowl, or a jar is the official term we use, inslanting shoulder and usually on that shoulder there are interlocking scroll designs or several variations of that motif. It seems to originate here in Cahokia and spread to other areas, so you see imitations of it as well as the pots themselves being transported to distant areas....ah so that motif spreading. And also, we think that a lot of the figurines that made out of what what’s called Missouri Flint clay, which comes from the west side of St. Louis, ...reddish color stone, semi-hard or semi-soft, however you want to say it. It was carved into little statuettes or figurines, sometimes they were also made into pipes that were smoked in ceremonies, but we think that most of those were actually made here at Cahokia even though they are found in Arkansas, Oklahoma, Alabama and other places, Tennessee, but they have been able to identify the signature of that particular stone and that stone is coming from that one source, not too far from here, so we think that Cahokia was, the Cahokians were making those figurines and perhaps as they spread, we think spreading a new religion out of Cahokia in the early 1050s-1100 AD, or so. These are representations of the culture heroes and the mythology, and the beliefs and as they tell the story and ...as they spread this new religion, they are probably taking these figurines with them and taking them to these other more remote areas. MZ: Well, red stone like that is... not all that common... WI: Right MZ: ...elsewhere in the country also WI: It looks very similar to what’s called pipestone which is from up in Minnesota, but its chemical signature is very different and but, with certain instruments, we can detect, so it’s local or some other things... MZ: Yes, I’ve seen quite a bit of Missouri’s orange clay basically, basically when it’s still clay before it gets compressed. WI: The name is unfortunate because it’s really not a clay. It may have started out millions of years ago as a clay, but as it turned into stone it hardens. I guess when it’s first exposed it’s a little softer and the term soft isn’t very relevant here. [chuckle] MZ: You have to get a lot of rain for it to get soft. 12  WI: Similar to soapstone I guess, where it’s a little bit easier to carve but as it’s exposed it hardens as well so it’s really a type of stone even though it’s called flint clay. MZ: At one point it was clay, ok... so one thing I want to come back to ... is we talked a little bit about acquiring property. What’s the attitude of people in the close vicinity to the property being taken or? WI: Something we have had to deal with for years, it is always been this folklore rumor that the state is going to buy everybody out and take over their property and that has never been the plan for the state to do that. That may be our 100-year plan, eventually we would like to get all those properties, but it’s not going to be a takeover, or condemnation, or eminent domain kind of situation. The state does not like to get involved in eminent domain unless it’s really, really necessary. So right now the properties that our museum society buys from the local neighborhood here is always done on a willing seller basis, people who are willing to sell. And they have to negotiate the prices. We can’t buy structures, we can buy property so if there is a structure on the property, they have to add the demolition cost into their asking price, so a lot ofthem people have had their houses foreclosed or their tax due on them and they just don’t have the funds and are willing to sell, or other the house burned or if someone dies and the family doesn’t want to have to deal with it, ...so we have been able to at a fairly reasonable prices so our museum society has a land acquisition fund and people can contribute to help with that process. It was a little bit easier when we were under the Historic Preservation Agency, now witj the Department of Natural Resources they are not used to having property transferred to them like that and it’s much more lengthy process to get it done. MZ: Does the state have the option to sort of being the first buyer when people do decide to sell? WI: Not the state but museum society, their support group, a not-for-profit organization, theyare the ones that we funnel all this through and then when they acquire the property then they transfer it to the state, but the state is not actively going out at this point to acquire property... and ah. Yeah. MZ: Ok. Of all the mounds that have been lost over all the years, which one or which area do you think was the greatest loss? WI: Oh that is a hard question to answer...there was a big mound at the western edge of the site called Powell Mound that the farmer who owned it leveled it in 1931 and it was probably the second largest mound at the site at the time, and so that was a major loss, plus not only, in the center of the site, we have not only a subdivision where the interpretive center sits today that impacted the site ... plus the subdivision to the east of here, called State Park Place which was started in the 1930s. The one that was here where the interpretive center is was started in the 1940s. But so those kinds of things, residential developments and commercial developments along the highway that runs through our site. Collinsville Road used to be US 40 and so there has been a lot of commercial development so people have to drive through a lot of kind of low economic areas, thats how we say it, as they approach the site are things we would like to eventually improve if we do that through land acquisition or donations, or whatever, we would like to do that. But ah MZ: And, it’s been that way for as long as I can remember. WI: Yeah, it’s [incoherent] And there were two mounds that were destroyed by a department store called 13  Grandpas that was right across the street from us here. You can still see the bases of the mound kind of under the foundation of the building and for many years they operated as a very successful store and then they moved and then ... it was used ... (jumbled) as a warehouse, by other companies as a warehouse for a while but it’s really become run down. The state was able to acquire that property through some, a grant money, a fund that we had to acquire other properties elsewhere and what was left over was used to acquire that old, old store but not enough funds left to do demolition and get rid of it... we would like to eventually get it torn down, do some of the archaeology, recover information we can about the mounds and the occupation impacted and then make that into a green space that would be much more attractive to our site than it is today. MZ: Ah, so a lot of the discoveries in the American Bottoms have come from highway crews, or road crews, right? Ah, so what has been the response of the state, and the construction crews and the community at large to the discoveries? And to letting those discoveries be... WI: There are different levels we are talking about here. Contractors, the road builders, they hate to have to deal with archaeology. Often times they tell their labors, if you see something don’t tell anybody because its time and money to them, and that’s their profession, that means delays...ah but a different example was when interstate 255 was under construction or planned in advance of the building of the interstate, ... let me back up a little bit ...that highway was initially supposed to go through Cahokia, through Cahokia Mounds and that is how we discovered woodhenge, when archaeologists were digging where there was going to be an overpass and cloverleaf stuff associated with this new highway that was suppose to link up with interstate 55/70 that was under construction in the 1960s...the money for what was supposed to be interstate 255 was not in place yet when it finally was in place by the late 1960s there were new federal laws that made it more difficult to build through a place like this so they decided to move the highway a couple miles to the east where it runs today. But that was one of the few times when archaeologists and the federal government, Department of Transportation and others were working together, and ah archaeologists were able to dig a lot of the sites that were impacted by the highway during the advance, and during the construction as well, and they think located and researched over 100 sites that were within the right of way of its borrow pits. And ah so it’s gone about several million dollars that went into the archaeology but really gave us a lot of new insights into what was going on in this part of the world so not ...just from the past... looking at Cahokia from the inside out...we are seeing all these outlying sites that were relatedto Cahokia and how they and changed through time and communicated with Cahokia... a look from the outside in. MZ: So that is one of the few times the state really has altered a project to avoid... that I can think of... WI: ...that was back, not so much the state as the federal, it was the federal law, but yeah ...so it was a lot of money, but a lot of research and a lot of good information came out of it. It had expensive publications and research and analysis and really, we learned a lot from that kind of cooperation that doesn’t happen often enough, you know? MZ: Right, so the community was ...how did they respond...particularly to the delays I guess of the highway construction? WI: I don’t know if we know enough about how people felt about that. It didn’t really delay the 14  construction. It was going on prior to ...once they determined what the route would be... the archaeologist would start right working away but some of it was done with big machines running around them. Archaeology is a slow process, methodical and it has to be, to document everything you are doing and so I think a lot of times people who are the contractors working on the highway felt a kind of connection, you know, and in some case felt some pride about being able help to be a part of learning more about this ancient culture, others had little concern at all. As far as the local communities, the highway would certainly make some of them more accessible. It would also avoid, rerouting traffic away from their communities. So anytime there is a big superhighway built there is a changes in economy. In the ways local communities communicate with the public MZ: So, it didn’t change the timespan or the acquisition dates for the property? WI: Not really, no. MZ: So, the state had acquired the property for the highway and then ... WI: But again, that was mostly federal ...side roads and exists and access to the community around basically lead to economic development in many cases and changes the way the communities were laid out. A lot of it hasn’t happened too much in this area, but in a lot of parts of the state you can see these old downtown areas where older communities are just dead because the highway went around them and not through them. MZ: Yeah, no exit. So, how much has this site creeped into your personal life? You have been here a long time. WI: April will be 48s years, in many ways it’s become my life. I have always enjoyed working here and never thought about going any place else. ... a joke, either I found my niche, or I have no ambition. (laughing) I never really thought about going any place else I’ve survived several different agencies and several different site directors. I never wanted to be in charge because running a site involves dealing with personnel and budgets. I just wanted to do what I do. Even there was an opportunity at one point where I might have been given the opportunity to be site manager but I never really wanted to deal with that and I’d seen what the other managers had to go through and people they had to deal with, ... even when I retire, like I said, I’ll probably be down here a lot, I probably still do a lot of the woodhenge equinox/solstice things for them, I’ll still be involved in some of the organizations, support groups, so it will still be part of my life... I won’t have to get up so early...I’m a night owl anyway, I like to sleep in, in the morning and I like to stay up at night. MZ: Me too! WI: I don’t have one of those built-in clocks where I wake up at any particular time...so that is good. MZ: I seem to recall that you met someone rather important to your life here? WI: Well I... are you talking about my wife? MZ: Well yeah 15  WI: Didn’t meet here here actually...I didn’t meet her here. MZ: Ah, ok, I thought you did. WI: But soon after we meet, she was heavily involved in what I do. She helped at the old museum, she sometimes would come down and help clean, or she help with some of the experimental archaeology projects we had. It became part of her life, it became a new exposure for her, but ... I didn’t actually meet her here. MZ: Ah, ok. WI: Now Matt, the other assistant manager, met his wife, who was a volunteer here, and so they got married but ah. Didn’t quite happen that way. MZ: Ok, maybe I was thinking of Matt... MZ: I’m sitting here looking at this painting on the wall, which is a very common, ah commonly used in our brochures and so forth, and who painted that? WI: I painted that. MZ: Are any of the, the others yours? WI: Nothing that you see here. A lot of these paintings that you see here ...one to the right of mine were done by National Geographic magazine by one of their artists...another Readers Digest books did the one above it. ... so, people are always asking for pictures of what Cahokia might have looked like and so we had to send them to National Geographic or somebody else to get what they wanted. There were a few others that we were able to use... but ah, so I always wanted to something that we didn’t have to go through all those copyright concerns and other sources, something we would have ourselves. So, I decided to do a painting and I bet it appeared in a couple hundred other publications other museum exhibits, you know, TV shows and everything you can think of. so its I wanted to something because I was familiar with the site and I knew where things were, and I guess where some other things were but ah, I wanted to have something that was accurate. MZ: Well, it’s a very good painting, also. WI: Thank you. MZ: When did you paint it. I think it was ‘91 when I finally finished it. I worked on it, on and off for 2-3 years. There is a lot of detail in there and I get burned out after a while and I’d put it aside and then I’d go back and work on it some more. Once we opened the museum here ah and were getting a lot more attention and publicity... even though we had some of these others that were done for the exhibits, those fours over there, those were available for people to use... a lot of them wanted an aerial view, which mine had done, which shows the scale of the site better than some of the others do. [There are mock-ups or prototypes for all the murals in the museum on the walls of the office space. 16  Some are identical to the mural, others are larger than the murals.] MZ: So, that was done almost 25, 35 years ago then. WI: Yeah. MZ: So what would you change in that picture to make it... WI: Well what we have discovered is the west side of the stockade wall now comes in a little closer, ...probably more here, curved to go around this mound, and we don’t know where it goes here. So that is conjectural or where it is in some of these spots in the north. Those would be the main things I would change. I guess, maybe even Monks mound, we are showing that, what is called, the second terrace on the side as being a nice flat area. But we know that it was probably originally at the top of the mound and collapsed at some point. Then they modified that and added the front terrace on the mound So what I’ve, what I’ve shown here is a blending of many different centuries into one time shot, so probably not all those were standing at exactly the same time. Woodhenge we now know is between 1100 and 1200 AD, the stockade wall wasn’t there at the beginning. It was first put up maybe a little before 1200 and was there about a hundred years. So, I show all these things in the same picture, but they were not all necessarily standing at the same time. And I might show few more houses here and there, or less in certain spots or indicate the plazas a little better. Things I would change if I have to do it all over again... maybe with photoshop (laughs). I could change few things. MZ: So, is painting a hobby other than? WI: It was for many years, yeah and then since the mid-90s I really haven’t gotten into it. I used to, I just sort of got interested in painting when I first moved to Collinsville, neighbors, a lady who was taking some painting classes from someone who taught out of her house, so she invited me to go along so I did that for a while and then ... I guess probably the 3rd artist who taught out of his home that I spend the most time with was really who I learned the most from, so I never had any formal training, schoolwork or anything. I always had a sort of a little bit of a natural talent, so the painting came to me fairly easily. MZ: Most people probably don’t realize how much art goes into archaeology. WI: Oh yeah MZ: having to draw out the sights and artifacts... WI: I did a book a few years ago called Identifying and Understanding Artifacts of Illinois and Neighboring States because we didn’t have a good book...a lot of them have arrowhead types or spear point types and they don’t have all the types of artifacts and we really needed something like that. And so, I did that, and I did over 700 illustrations for that, all hand drawn, that show everything from little flakes to knives...to arrowheads to pots to bone tools, axes, you name it. So, that was an endeavor. I did that for the Illinois Association for the Advancement of Archaeology. I’m the editor for their occasional journal and we made that a special issue of one of the journal, so I didn’t get, no money for that but ah, it was a ...one of things that I’m most proud of that I have done because that is the something that people who are interested in archaeology, collectors, amateurs can learn from so I didn’t just draw the artifacts out. I also 17  explain you know, how they were made, were used, were shaped, what kind of material they are made from so it’s an educational tool as well. MZ: Sort of like a museum catalog WI: yeah...I also did a book on Cahokia called Cahokia Mounds: America’s First City... and ah, you know it was something that I had been toying with for a long time. A lot of my colleagues had written books on archaeology but a lot of them are geared more for other archaeologist and not for the general public.... My career here has been mostly in Public Archaeology so I wanted to do something that at the more general without a lot of jargon ‘cause that is the one thing I have been doing, talks and things I give on Cahokia programs and things that I do have always been dealing with the general public. I knew better than some of my colleagues how to address the public so it’s been a big seller in the gift shop, so I do get royalties from that. ... Yeah, that’s another thing I really felt proud about. MZ: It’s a good book  I’ve read it. Ok... [Bill takes a break] MZ: So, we were talking about your book... Cahokia: The First city, first American city... WI: America’s First City, so do you have any plans for future books? WI: Well, I’m working on a book right now but it’s nothing to do with archaeology or Cahokia... MZ: Ah, ok. WI: It’s a history of my great-grandfather’s Civil War regiment out of McClean County, Illinois. So, I had two great grandfathers that were in the same regiment and we have copies of their letters and diaries, so I’ve been able to track down another 20 soldiers’ letters and diaries. So, I ’ve been working on a day by day journey of these people through the three years they were. They started out in Missouri, then Arkansas, and then down to Vicksburg, and then down in Louisiana, and then they got stuck in Brownsville, Texas for 9 months and end up in Mobile Bay for a siege and battles there. and then that was pretty much the end of the war but ah.... It’s been fascinating, when I’ve tried to visit all the locations that they talk about or as many as I could, I haven’t made it to Brownsville yet. But ah, that’s my ambitious project right now. Right now, I’ve gone through all the diaries so for each day, for each week, there are all these entries for these people, so trying to summarize each of those and blend it all together and then maybe insert the letters on the opposite page that correspond to the dates and times and activities. Then also eventually get all the official records and documents and things about their travels and battles and things and sort of doing it piecemeal all at a time... it’s a long project. MZ: Time to work on family WI: Genealogy is something else I’m interested in, so I get involved in that. MZ: So, has your family been in Illinois for very long? WI: My father’s family is from Illinois since the 1830s to 1850s, that period. In different branches of the family, yeah. My mother’s family is from upper New York and Canada. Yeah, but the original Isemingers 18  immigrants were like in the 1750s in Maryland and that area. MZ: It fun to go back on those branches, I’ve got some too. OK, ah. I think we have just about... is there anything that you would like to add that I didn’t ask? WI: Yeah, I think you pretty well covered it. MZ: Ok. I think I... WI: I guess the only thing I might say I’ve always enjoyed working here, there have been stressful times, but I never really thought about going anywhere else and I like to feel that I’ve made a difference. MZ: Oh, I think you definitely have... on behalf of the volunteers, of which I am one, we are very happy you are here to teach us and someone we can turn to when a visitor has a question that we don’t have any clue. (laughing) MZ: Oh, one thing I was going to ask you, what is the strangest visitor theory that they have come here to try and confirm. WI: Well, I’ve got sitting on my desk right now, because someone else was asking about that the other day, I’ve got what I call my fantasy file and it’s about this thick, 4-5 inches think of various things people have sent or emailed or written ah and a lot of it deals with not so much aliens and things like that... [Bill gets a phone call] WI: Oh, where was I? MZ: I asked you what else you would like to add and, oh the file. WI: The fantasy file. Yeah, but a lot of people think there is vibrations or all the ... people feel the spiritual connections, others are looking for linkages between sites through what they call lay lines of power and connection to different parts of the world, parts of the country and other countries and these are people who many times are ... mathematicians or people who specialize in studying numbers and ah geometry and things like that... what they are saying will probably look very logical to another mathematician or other, but to an archaeologist, we, it’s very difficult to put much faith in some of those theories, oh... well the weirdest thing happened I guess just a couple of weeks ago...when we had artifact identification day and you know ...this couple said they had a special stone that has all kinds of pictures in it and stuff. I was expecting something carved with designs and motifs, but they had a little pebble that has a natural concretion, looks like an iron concretion, and she had taken over a 1000 pictures of this little thing and blown them up and so she was getting all these light and dark reflections and things where she could see all kinds of faces and there on one side they said they could see the Collinsville Kahawk Indian, they could see Lincoln’s assassination, they could see all these other things...and aw man, you try to be nice to these people and tell them no its just a rock. We get a lot of people who bring a rock and where see faces and things and there are patterns. And I tell people, it’s like looking at clouds, you can see whatever you want. But no, they say this has been carved and I say no this has what something looks like that has been carved, and I try to show them pictures and examples of artifacts that are actually carved and shaped 19  by the Indians. I’ve even got a little geode, that I forget where I got it, but it had been cut in half and polished and the patterns in there are really colorful and unique and I can see a pattern, I call it my cartoon rock. I tell people to look at that and tell me what you see, well they see all different kinds of things, and I put my overlay on it, and there’s Winnie the Pooh and Snoopy. So, you see you can see whatever you want in a rock but that doesn’t mean it’s there. It’s your mind that sees it there. Something that is real artifact is actually made, they are very distinctive, but most people, you can’t convince them. They aren’t here to hear what they have  they are here to tell you what they have. And it’s frustrating sometimes. MZ: How many times have people tried to sell you things for the museum? WI: Well, there are always people, you know, who, a lot of people inherit collections from their fathers or grandfathers or there selling an estate and they find this box full of artifacts. We really can’t accept anything unless we know they came from Cahokia or we they are part of a ...helpfill a gap in our exhibitor displays and things so we have to tell them no we don’t do that. We can recommend that they donate it to the Illinois State Museum and if they want to take a tax write off, they have to do that themselves, but we don’t buy or sell artifacts. I think a lot of people want to know how much is this worth. We never talk about the value of artifacts. The reason behind that is if you tell people that an ax or an arrowhead is worth $200, $500, $1000 or something, they might out and dig up the ground to find more artifacts to sell... and that means they are destroying a site. It’s part of our archaeological ethics that we don’t ever talk about value about artifacts other than to say yeah that’s valuable and its important, but you should keep it. And you should document where you are finding things ... don’t get involved in buying and selling. A lot of people who buy artifacts often buy fakes...there is a lot of people who make replicas and fakes and unless you know...sometimes it hard for us to even tell if they are real or not. In fact, the last our ID day a fellow had corresponded with me previously and had sent pictures of one of these figurine pipes, like made of that red clay, red flint clay but it turned out to be some other kind of stone yet. We don’t know just what kind, some other kind of red stone, and yet but ah it had all the right kind of basic form to it, but every time you look at it you see something that just doesn’t look quite right. You know the way the face is done, the lips are done, the ears, or eyes, the way it is polished or not polished in certain spots. Ah just doesn’t look right it just raises flags for those of us who have seen a lot of these things. But that doesn’t mean that it’s not real. It may be someone who was less skilled or tried to show something different that was we are used to seeing because each one of them is something unique... and this guy had, I guess, bought it 15 or 20 years ago from the wife of a man who died who was a collector. So, we don’t know where he got it...apparently somewhere in Oklahoma, allegedly, but you know it just didn’t look right to say yes, that’s an authentic artifact so they are going to try to do some more tests on it, but anyway you know you get those types of things quite often. Almost every week we get somebody who brings something in. Just a spear point they found or a rock that fits just right in your hand... of course, if you have it in your hand, it fits right in you hand. It’s got this indentation, well that’s a natural indentation. It doesn’t mean that the Indians didn’t pick it up and think the same thing. they picked up rocks because it was the right shape, that doesn’t mean that they made it into that shape, it’s a natural shape that someone may have used. But a lot of people just are more willing than others to say oh yeah will think that it’s just a rock and will look good in their rock garden. Others are just so sure that it is something, it’s just really hard to convince someone who has convinced themselves that they have got this special stone. MZ: So, for the record, is there anything, any structures underneath Monk’s Mound? 20  WI: Well, the vertical coring we have done through Monk’s Mounds shows that it is all solid earth. Now a few years ago when we were doing some repairs on the east, the west side of Monk’s Mound, we had some slumping occurring and we did some horizontal boring and tried to install drains to get water of the mound that is causing a lot of the slumping problems, and one of the corings, borings they went in horizontally and were in about 150 feet about 40 feet below what we call the second terrace and they drilled through about 30 feet of rocks. Now, we don’t know how fare those go beyond where they bored. or above or below. All we know is that for at least 32 feet or so there is rocks under there, and we don’t know what it is. The rock had to be brought there because there is no rock in the soil here. It is probably limestone, ah probably cobbles rather than a big boulder, and a whether it’s a ceremonial platform, or a tomb or a wall or a structure we don’t know. We know it’s not under the whole mound, just under that isolated area. The testing that we have done so far, we haven’t been able to penetrate deep enough with these instruments to get down to where the stone is where and we are going to keep trying to better define its limits and it’s still too deep to dig down to...would have to dig 40 feet down and we don’t want to do that. MZ: Yeah, you would destroy the mound basically. WI: And we don’t want to do that.... so, it’s going to be one of those mysteries. So, what we see in almost every mound we have looked at is what they seem to do first is strip the ground, strip off the sod and build the mound. Sometimes they reuse that dirt in the building of it, level the area and sometimes they might put down a layer of special soil that had meaning to them. Whether its sand or colorful or whatever, but a lot of times there had been some other building there, some kind of ceremonial building in use with that sacred spot but now with a mound over it. Where that building used to be, of course, they are wooden buildings that don’t survive but sometimes we can see the patterns in the soil and where it had been. But Monks Mounds is based a lot on the coring that has been done that the mound is pretty much the same height that it originally was in its final construction anyway and its final construction but most of the changes are on the sides where there has been erosion and slumping and other things going on. And there was a farmhouse build on the top back in the 1830s. So there has been modern impact to it as well. MZ: And is there still a modern grave on top? WI: Amos Hill who built the house there in 1830s is buried up on that northwest corner up on top, when they were digging back in the ‘60s they came across his grave from the knees down. They could see the bones and see the nails from the coffin and they just left him in place there. MZ: Ok, so in the past, we have talked a little bit, this is out of sequence I guess, about doing research on Native American remains from here. So, I know that a little bit of DNA work has been done on mound 72. WI: They are trying but they haven’t had much success yet because the preservation is very poor, but they are attempting to do some, yeah. MZ: So, and in the strontium isotopes, now what do they have to go through to get permission to do that? WI: Well now all the burials that were under mound 72 were the jurisdiction of the Illinois State Museum Collections and Research Center in Springfield where they are stored so they had to get permission from the Illinois State Museum. Now thus far there hasn’t been an official claim by an Indian tribe ah under 21  what is called NAGPRA... Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act ... ah although the Osage have sent a letter of intent that they ultimately will make some kind of claim not only to Cahokia but also to most of Illinois, Missouri and Ohio, Indiana and places along the Ohio River and places along the Mississippi River in the Midwest here where they migrated in the past but ah, we don’t really know who their direct descendants are at this point, although the Osage are some of the best candidates because they have got a lot of some of the same kind of mythology and symbolism, complex social/political structure that reflects a more complex earlier time, their oral traditions talk about them talk about them in this general area at some time in the past, but we just don’t know when  if was it at Cahokia was it in the beginning, the middle or the end, but they feel a direct connection to Cahokia and a lot of the archaeologists and anthropologists who are studying again cosmology and things like that, see similarities in the artifacts and the motifs that we see in the archaeology, very similar, almost identical to what we see in the Osage and their correlates, the Osage, the Pawqua, Quapaw, PawPaw, Omaha, and the Kansa were at one time one big group in the Ohio valley, that migrated westward in the and they kinds split and went different directions but they... MZ: So, do you think the Mississippians have more connections to the east or to the south? WI: More to the south, yeah, because there are Mississippian sites all throughout the southern states, as a far as materials coming to Cahokia, we get more looks like coming more from the south, and we have got things going from Cahokia look like they are going more northward to, say connections in both directions. MZ: Mmm... okay, I would like to thank you for fitting me into your schedule and giving me so much time, I appreciate that. And giving us your insights into this site. WI: Well, glad to do it and ... glad to be able to contribute the oral history of Madison County. MZ: OK, thank you. 22  
MadisonCounty;Ken Conrady;1932;2018;Ken Conrady 1932 2018    Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Ken Conrady Oral History Interview Abbie Schaefer, Interviewer Godfrey, Illinois October 11, 2018 Abbie Schaefer (AS): The following interview was conducted with Ken Conrady on behalf of the Madison County Oral History Project that is part of Madison Historical: The Online Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois. The interview took place on Thursday, October 11th, 2018, at the home of Mr. Conrady in Godfrey, Illinois. The interviewer is Abbie Schaefer, a history student and research assistant at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Alright, so. If you want to just start off, um, talking about where you were born? When, where you grew up? Ken Conrady (KC): Ah, I'm originally a resident of the state of Oklahoma. I got my bachelor's degree at Phillips University in Enid, Oklahoma, and had a double major in both French Horn and Piano. And then I received a, uh, assistantship to get my master's at SIUC in Carbondale in 1957. That's where I got my master's degree, and then I started teaching here in the Alton area. Actually taught at Bunker Hill Illinois Band and Choir for three years. And then in 1961, uh, moved to Alton, Illinois. I will say, too, that I met my wife when I was working on my master's at Carbondale and we married in 1959. Then after teaching three years in Bunker Hill, both my wife and I, both my wife, Jean, and I, started teaching in the Alton schools and we pretty much stayed in the Alton schools until we retired. I retired in 1989 and she retired, I believe, in 2001. AS: Okay, great. Um, so, why did you initially move to southern Illinois? KC: Ah, actually, I just preferred the climate and everything else about the arts in the Illinois, er, much more prevalent than they were in rural Oklahoma. So there was no question about where I wanted to live and work. Because I loved living in the, in the Alton, where we have so many opportunities for artistic expression. And, uh, and I, through the years, in Alton, I've been involved in the, uh, Alton Symphony, the Alton Muni Band, the Greater Alton Concert Association, and, I don't know, I have many other music organizations, but the thing that I, one of the things that I think you're quite interested in is the Youth Symphony, which is, back in 19, in the '60s, there was a music program, band and orchestra program, at all of the four junior highs at that time. But, there were not enough string students in each of the schools to have an orchestra. For instance, the smallest, Central Junior High, they might have had three violins and two violas, but it's not enough to make up an orchestra, so the high school orchestra director at that time, who was Larry Crabbs, he and I decided, "wouldn't this be great if we could form an organization and let these excellent students, the ones that want extra training, to meet together once a week to play a little bit more complicated music?" And of course, obviously, this would have benefited his high school program greatly. And so in 1969, we started with a Board of Directors of local music teachers and community leaders that were very encouraging to us. Because they thought it was a great project, and I almost have to laugh about it, because the first year, we had a budget of five hundred dollars. And I thought, that was to pay the conductor, and maybe a little bit to the manager, and I thought, "Oh, my 1  goodness, are we going to be able to do this?" And then when I have to kind of laugh about it because our present budget is close to thirty thousand dollars per year. So, you can see that we have grown through the years. We started out just having the Alton, uh, Youth Symphony, but then we found that, you know, we really need to, if we have a feeder group going into that, so we formed the Alton Junior Symphony that feeds into the Alton Symphony now, so they are both, uh, I would say of equal importance. And in addition to what has through the years, we thought, "well, you know, we can't march in a parade very well with our violins and violas, but how do we get that word out to who we are and what we do?" So, we formed a small chamber group that goes out into the community and plays at nursing homes, and senior citizen centers, and Kiwanis Club, and Rotary Club, and organizations like that so they know what we're trying to do with the children in the community. We do have a lot of support from the community. Parents are, of course, always very responsive when they see their child getting, getting a good opportunity. And what we have found out through the years that we didn't realize it so much at the time, but, we are such a valuable tool for music students that go to parochial schools. In fact, we have quite a few students that are in the organization from parochial schools. And also home-schooled students is another one, a wonderful opportunity for them. And, uh, it's just worked out great for them. And we continue to kind of move along with the support of the community. And one thing we do, we have enough support through grants and, uh, financial support from our, um, patrons, that we do not have to charge the students anything for being in the organization. Another thing that has proved very profitable for the students that we found out, well, okay, this student has the ability to be in the organization, but he needs extra help. So we've hired sectional leaders that for instance, the fall session that we have going on right now, we have I think a dozen rehearsals and out of those dozen rehearsals we will have sectional coaches that come in that are specialists with their instrument. I remember we have woodwind sectionals, we have a flute specialist, a clarinet specialist, and whatever else we have at the time. A brass specialist, we have a trumpet specialist, and a trombone specialist, or, um, whatever we need. And with the strings, of course, we always have a violin, viola, cello, and bass specialist to come in to work with the students to give them some, uh, very close supervision and very good training. AS: Yeah. So, just to define the term, you would say "sectional" here is just the individual instrument? KC: Yes, when I say "sectional," we're going to take, like, for instance, last night they had the, I believe the woodwinds sectionals. So the six flutes went out with this specialist and worked in their own classroom and then the clarinets worked in another classroom and that's the way it worked out for them. So you can see we've kind of grown from our five hundred dollar beginning [laughs] that was, that, "gee, oh gee, can we do this?" And what it's turned into. And we have a, the president of our organization is Joe Cacciatoli  he's been the president for a number of years. His wife is on the board and she is fantastic in writing grants. She is a, uh, very good money person, put it that way. That is her career though, she works in the finance with the, whatever organization she's working with. So she is wonderful in helping us get grants from Boeing and Illinois Arts Council. And another thing we do in addition to the sectionals, we have a soloist every year. And they audition in the fall and then they are able to perform, it's usually a movement of a concerto, for the spring concert. And then, in addition to offering, we also offer grants for private study if we have the finances to do it. And in addition to that, we send usually one or two students up to the University of Illinois every summer to study at the Illinois Summer Youth Music Camp. So they get additional training there. So the kids, and the parents that want their child to have extra training, we have a lot of opportunities for musical development and growth. 2  AS: Yeah. You would say, then, that, just going back to the very beginning of the organization, that it was kind of a supplemental thing to the Alton School District? KC: I would say it was...it started out that way, but, for instance right now, we have a student I know from Staunton, one from Jerseyville, and we also have, it seems strange, but a lot of students coming in from the, uh, Ferguson-Florissant area. Because some of our sectional leaders teach there, and so it's kind of a conduit for bringing those students into the youth symphony. Originally, it, in the initial stages, it really was kind of a supplement thing, but it's grown to be much more than that. Because we weren't thinking that big in the beginning, you know. And we had some wonderful community members that had worked on huge drives for building the, you know, redoing the YWCA, this one lady was fantastic in helping us get a good footing. Because, at the time, I was probably all of what, thirty years old? And pretty inexperienced compared to some of these people [smiling] that had been in organizations in their fifties and sixties and were so astute in getting finances from the community, because they knew how to do these drives, which I really didn't at the time, because all of my training at the time had been in teaching music, you know, which I loved, you know. AS: Okay. Um, so you talked about, like, the other Alton, like the Alton Muni Band, and different organizations in the city. Um, what led you to create the Youth Symphony specifically, rather than just, you know, encouraging students to join those other community bands instead? KC: Well, the, the age group that we're working with is basically what used to be junior high, now I'll call it middle school. So those kids do not have the skill yet to be in Muni Band or the Alton Symphony, although we do a joint program with the Alton Youth Symphony and the Alton Symphony, and very, very often those kids then move up to the Alton Symphony when they, because it only goes through eighth grade, so they get to ninth grade, they go to Alton High that have an orchestra, if they don't, then the other avenue to continue their music career would be to go to the Alton Symphony. AS: Yeah, so you, you have a good relationship with the Alton Symphony... KC: Oh, yeah, very good. Very good relationship, um, and that is so fortunate because both of us profit from it, you know? And then also, whenever we have a joint program in the spring, where we do a side- by-side, where the, one of the, uh, students that are, so to speak, graduating from the Alton Youth Symphony, they sit by the first chair violinist, another one sits by the first chair violist, you know, so they can see what it really feels like to play "big time," you know. And I think they're kind of shocked, probably, when they first see some of the Alton Symphony music because it's so much more complicated than, than what the Youth Symphony music is. AS: So we talked a bit about the beginning of the Alton Youth Symphony, but once it got going a little bit, and you guys were working more with, like, fundraising, and getting more into the groove of things, how would you, I mean, tell me more about that. KC: It has kind of just developed naturally over the years. As I said we, we hadn't thought at all about homeschooled students, you know, and then all of a sudden realized, "wow, what an opportunity for these students," you know. Of course, they have an organization, so once you get, once you touch base with the organization, then they immediately funnel their, uh, children in. And what we found out, too, that the 3  children that are homeschooled are usually wonderful musicians, because the parents see that they have plenty of time to practice. So they're, they're wonderful musicians in most cases, you know, so. That was a really eye-opening thing for us that we hadn't even thought about, you know, but I think also there's more homeschooling being done now than there was back in 1970 when we formed this. And you might wonder how I, uh, how we got this started. Larry and I talked about this, but we thought, well, you know, "we need to have a good plan as to how to do this," you know. So, very fortunately, Dr. Marvin Rabin from the University of Wisconsin did his dissertation on forming a youth symphony. So I got his doctoral dissertation and then we copied and copied and copied from that, you know, and there are just certain things, you know. First you want to make sure that you have good relations with your local music teachers, you don't want to think you're doing an upsmanship on them, so that's priority number one. Then you want to try to do something that's positive for the community as well as the music program, too. And, again, as I said, we have students from Jerseyville and Staunton, and sometimes get some Granite City, I mean, they come from a large area because parents get online anymore. And they say, "Oh, that's an organization that, that will help our Johnny or our Susie," you know, "become better musicians." So. We try to do just whatever we can to, uh, develop the skills of these students, you know, so when they get to high school, they have all the more skills to, to promote their program or to promote the high school program. It would really be good for any band or orchestra, because most of the students that come from Jerseyville or Staunton, they don't have an orchestra, of course, but it will help their musicianship in their band. So they profit from it anyway, even though they don't have an orchestra there. AS: Yeah. So you have all these students from outside the community. Was it always like that? Way back in, I mean, in the '70s when it first started? KC: No. It was not. No, no, I'd, I think it was basically pretty much just Alton. But then you can see how it's expanded. Not only in the outer-lying communities, but also into, like I said, Ferguson-Florissant, you know. And also, too, uh, we...I'm trying to think. We, I told you that we offer these, ah, study grants to the students so they can get private study, especially if we see that there's a financial need from this student. This Johnny Jones is, can be a really good trumpet player, but his parents just don't have the financial means to, to give him those private lessons. We've just, all of these things were not inaugurated initially. Initially, there were just the organization that met once a week, and we gathered them all together. But, too, uh, what the other communities know, for a number of years, we would take a spring tour every year. And we would go to East Alton, Wood River, Jerseyville, Bunker Hill, Southwestern, all the surrounding school districts, so they can see what, what is available for their children. And that has really helped our program due to, so they can get out into the community and see what's out there for their child. But. Just continuing to try to kind of innovate, you know. As years go by, it, things change different. It used to be the junior high, but then, then when Alton High changed to a four- year high school, then, okay, then that shoved us back a year. The literature that we do now is not as difficult as it was in the early '70s y’know when we had those extra, that extra year. And one extra year in the development of a musician at that age is really great, because they can make great progress in one year. AS: So, were you the first, in some cases, or even all cases, were you, was the Alton Youth Symphony maybe the first time some of these students were joining an orchestra? Or learning an instrument? Or was it more people that already had some, KC: No, most of these kids had, they had, they called a, they had a string program at each of these 4  schools, but most of them had not been in an orchestra. They didn't know what orchestra was all about. And the nice thing about it was, for instance, the strings, they thought, "oh gee, I get to play with my, my flute friend," or "my trumpet friend," they got to play in a mix of full symphony orchestra, you know. That's one thing that, for instance, in the Alton Schools right now, these strings do not have that experience of playing with winds together in an orchestra. So this also gives them the chance to play in a full, full symphonic setting where they can get used to hearing percussion and tubas and trumpets and whatever else, you know. So it's just another experience for them that they wouldn't have otherwise. AS: Okay. So you touched a little bit on fundraising and the grant writing and everything with that, um, could you tell me a little bit more about how that developed back when you were starting and when it was getting going? KC: Yes. Well, I think, in the very beginning and up to this date, we send out a solicitation letter for support in the fall, which we have, probably, I think this year we had a mailing list of five hundred former students, parents, businesses, that responded. And we have kept that pattern all the way through the years and we've been able to survive through that. But also we got a wonderful, uh, we were the recipient of a wonderful trust that was set up for us about ten or fifteen years ago. A rather wealthy person in the area was dying, and his, his cousin saw what was happening, and he said, "well, you know, if I give my, my estate to the Saint Louis Symphony it won't mean very much, but to a small organization..." So, fortunately, this lady came into the Halpin Music Company. Barb Kramer, who worked there, her daughter had been in the Youth Symphony, she suggested, "well, what about the, gave contribution to the Youth Symphony whenever that time comes?" And it turns out, at the time, this guy's mother was still living, so he had a trust set up so it was not to go into effect until his mother was deceased. And once his mother deceased, the trust opens up. And we, however, he was a very wise guy, we can only use, uh, two dollars for every one dollar that we raise, and it can only be taken from the interest of the, of the trust. So he was a very savvy person. But, it's, it'll be going long after I'm dead and gone, that's the wonderful part about it, too. It's one of those cases where a guy can see what he can do for the community and the music organization. And he was a music lover, too. I went to his house one time and he had all of these opera recordings and all, so he was a very serious music lover, you know, so. It was wonderful of him. And, here, his cousin comes to allof our concerts now and she can really, thinking, "Oh, what my uncle did for this organization!" You know. So it has to be very rewarding to her, of course it would've. And he actually lived for a few years after he set it up and he would go on tours with us so he got to know the organization, too, so that was wonderful for him. And wonderful for us! So, uh, that's been a real boost to our organization, too, financially. But, uh, we still have to do our work, though, he's not just going to dole out the kitty and say, "here, here's my funds." No. You show us that you're providing your support and I will supplement whatever you do with your organization. AS: So you guys, I mean, obviously, give back a lot to the community, the Alton community, um... KC: Oh, we do. Give a great back. Give back a great deal to the Alton community. AS: Yeah. Even just with the students and what they get involved with, but also putting on these concerts and bringing music more into people's homes, and stuff. KC: Right, right. Because whenever we go to Southwestern. These kids don't know what an orchestra is, 5  because they've never experienced one, you know? And they see kids playing, their age, playing right in front of them. I remember one time we also took, we went to Madison, Illinois, and I thought, you know, I don't know, when I saw the students coming in, I thought, "Gee, this may not be a good idea." But, at the time we had, hard to believe, but we had two harpists with us that day, doing the, uh, the famous thing from, is it Swan Lake? Where you have the flutes accompanied, flute solo accompanied by harps? And these kids were just mesmerized. First, they'd never seen a harp before, and there they had two of them right in front of them, you know, and I thought, "well, wasn't this a good experience for those kids!" You know? So you never know when you're going to touch on something that will really catch their hearts and do something good for them. And because we do these things, we also get support from the Illinois Arts Council, too, see. But we have to prove to them, though, every year, you know what we're doing to supplement the arts into the community. AS: Okay, I see, nice. So... Alton, of course, has changed since you moved here. And, ah, I would say, I mean, you worked as the music director for the school, right? KC: Actually, you know, as it turned out, I was a band and orchestra director for, let me see, I think...five or six years, and then the position of "Director of Music" came into being. And I was named to that position. But that's when we had twenty-five music teachers at the time. And we had a population of twelve thousand students, you know. Four junior highs, you know, and multiple elementary schools all over the place. So, of course I would coordinate festivals and things like that. But then that, those jobs were eliminated in 1975 at a cutback, so I went back into a teaching position and just taught band and orchestra from there on, until I retired. AS: Okay. Could you tell me more about how the school district changed and what you saw in that? KC: Well, the biggest change that I've seen is the, uh, is the decline in enrollment over a period of years. But, um, with that decline in enrollment, of course, it changes everything. You lose students and you lose staff, you know. Staff is always condensed as we lost students. Although, we have kept a very strong music program in Alton. I think that we, as far as the public schools go, I think there's at least a thousand students studying band and orchestra instruments. So we've, we've kept a strong music program going. But still not in quite the numbers that it used to be when we had twelve thousand students. There's no way you can kind of replicate that. AS: Yeah, that's amazing. So you have all those school orchestras, and you have the youth orchestra, so kids were doing both, you said. KC: Oh yeah, oh yeah. You know, that's another important thing that we've made sure, that's what I've learned from this doctoral dissertation, that a student must be in their school organization before they can become a member of the Youth Symphony. It just prevents someone saying, "This goody two-shoes, I'm going to be in the Youth Symphony, but I'm going to get out of my..." That doesn't work. We've had some scenes where we've had to say, "Sorry, Susie, you've got to be in your local band and orchestra before you get into the Youth Symphony," you know. That's rare, but it, but it has happened through the years a couple times. Because we want those teachers to support us. After all, they're giving us their good students, you know. Don't want to take the cream out of their crop. 6  AS: Yeah. Could you tell me more about that dissertation? That's so interesting. KC: About what? AS: That dissertation that you used. KC: Well, ah, I, I can't remember everything that I learned from it, you know, but it told us to, of course, get... we started out, and I'm sure because of this dissertation, started out with a board of twelve people that included community members that were very astute in fundraising, music lovers in the community, and music teachers. So it was kind of a split of entrepreneurs that knew how to promote things, others that were good at getting finances, and then the music teachers supported us. And we had great support from the music teachers at that time, too, because they could see what it could do for their program, you know. Just another...it was also great for the Alton community, you know, to have another organization that we're proud of to show off the community. But the dissertation...golly, it was, it was, I don't know, how many hundreds of pages thick, you know, and...we just took the main ideas from it, in that we wanted to make sure we had the support of the music teachers, number one, you know, and to try to reach out into the community to get their support. And, of course, PR was very important at that time, getting it out, getting the public relations going at that time. We had, one of our board members was Mr. Leroy Fritz, who was responsible, really, for starting the music program in the Alton schools back in the early, maybe late '40s. And he, later on, became director of Public Relations for the Alton schools, so he was very good at getting, knowing how to get public, how to get the word out about good organizations. Because parents always love to see kids doing good things, too, so. It's easier to do that...we have, we have a concert in the fall, we have a concert in the spring, and then another thing that I said, I told you earlier that we take the organization out and go to three different schools in one day. Which is a challenge! [laughs] To go to three schools in one day and have the kids back to their home school so they can catch the bus. And, invariably, there is a violin that, that's fallen off of the, of a stand or something, so there's always a little bit of a small crisis to take care of. So, we've done something differently. Instead of spending that money going out, what we do is supplement school districts to pay for their bus to bring their kids here. So we give a concert for them at Hathaway Hall. I remember last year, I think it was East Alton, Wood River came, Jerseyville came, I can't remember how many different schools, but. And also from St. Louis  a couple schools came from St. Louis. So, we don't pay a lot, but it's amazing how just paying for a little bit of their bus money helps them to accept the invitation, that way. Then it also tells the, shows those kids what we can do and what they can become a part of, you know. AS: Yeah. So you mentioned the PR thing, um, how is that... especially in developing the orchestra, when it was first starting out, what was that landscape like? KC: You know, as I... because we started out with such a small budget, at first I think everyone thought this was strictly an Alton school thing. But you know, well, that's where we did rehearse. We rehearsed at, at Alton High because that's where the director, where he felt comfortable with. And then later on we moved out to...we've rehearsed at several different places. We used to rehearse at North Middle School and now we rehearse in a wonderful facility at Lewis and Clark College. So that is just fabulous, and we're so fortunate that Lewis and Clark allows us to rehearse there in that large rehearsal room where they normally... Monday they have Jazz Band there, Tuesday, that's our evening to use the facility. So we're just very fortunate to have that connection with the Lewis and Clark. And sometimes we have a Lewis 7  and Clark faculty member on our board, too, because we want to keep that connection. In fact, for a number of years, the President of the college, his wife was on the board. So we've had a lot of wonderful connections with Lewis and Clark that are very important to us. Actually, the manager of Hathaway Hall used to be in the Youth Symphony, too, so, you know, we've got a lot of good connections with Lewis and Clark College. AS: Yeah. Those good connections with the alumni and all the businesses... KC: Oh, yes, with the alumni. You know, and with our, uh, as we talked about earlier, we are celebrating our fiftieth anniversary next year and just hard to believe how the program has developed through the years. A lot of good ideas of different people. We hope to have a lot of alumni come back, maybe play with us. And the original director is going to be directing one number, and I'm going to be directing one number in the program, and the very special part of that is one of our graduates, ah, that was in the Youth Symphony, Michael Gagliardo, who's now the director of the Gadsden, Alabama Youth Symphony, has been hired to write a composition for the fiftieth anniversary of the Youth Symphony. So he will come and direct the Youth Symphony that he was in when he was a young kid, you know. A really good trumpet player. So this is exciting for him and his parents and for all of of us, to have him come back. To think one of our graduates...many of our graduates have gone on to, one of our really good flutists is now principal flutist of the North Carolina Symphony. And I could go on and on about where...my daughter played harp in it and she's now a professional harpist, so. It's led to the career of many different people that are now...when you think, that was fifty years ago, you know, so, they're out and some of them are probably getting ready to retire now! [laughs] They were one of the first ones. AS: Yeah. That's wonderful. So we were talking about the community. Was the Alton Youth Symphony, obviously gave back to the community in that the students are learning new things and bringing it back that way, but, um, in regards to the fundraising, was that ever, like, interacted with there? Like, go out into the community and fundraise? Was that something that you ever had to do? KC: No, you know, we have not found it necessary to do that. I think whenever you're in a school music program, the funds are always so limited that every kid that's in the, at least in the Alton schools, they're always selling candy bars or cheese and sausage or something, you know, so we said, "we need to try to avoid that if we can, you know, because we don't want to replicate what they're trying to do for their own program." So we, simply, simply through the solicitation letter and grant writing, we've been able to manage it financially. Of course this trust helps us, too, you know. So. In fact, this trust, we have to use so much of the money, and because we're a non-for-profit organization, ah, we're free to take some of that money if it's a two to one. If we raise two we can take one dollar from the, or vice, it's really vice versa, if we take, if we raise one dollar we can take two dollars from the interest that this account has accrued through the years. Of course, then, right now, the economy is so good that the investments have been wonderful the last couple years. For a while it was low. Wasn't easy. But now, investments are so good that it's wonderful for us. AS: Yeah. So related to that, could you tell me more about how Alton changed as a whole, since you've been here since 1961, you said? KC: Well, ah, Alton has changed a great deal. In the, ah, there's a much larger black population, much 8  less white population. But just in general, a great reduction in people period, whether they're white or black, you know, so. That has been a major change because I think when we first came here, they had all, advertised almost forty thousand, now I think it's down to thirty-two or something, too, you know. But, ah, the arts are still very important to the Alton community, you know, when you consider we have the Alton Symphony and the Concert Association and Muni Band and the Giacobbe Arts Center is trying to everything they can to promote the arts, too, and so there are a lot of good things happening down there to further the arts in the Alton...kind of like the Wildey Theater in Edwardsville, although probably not as active as the Wildey Theater is. But, ah, the Alton community really supports that organization, too. AS: Yeah, just besides, arts, too, you talked about the population declining, do you have any more insights about that? Or anything you remember about that time? KC: No, I don't have any more insight on that. Just to tell you simply that the population has dwindled little by little every year, you know. It's gotten smaller. People want to live in rural areas, you know. I'm a piano technician by trade since I've retired, and I go out in many rural, I think, "oh there couldn't possibly be a house here," and then I turn to this winding road to find this glorious estate. So many people want to escape into the hinterlands, you know, which I'm finding, I'm kind of shocked, but how many people I find that want to escape [laughs] I hate to say civilization, but they want to do their own thing in their own private space. AS: So does that population decline, did that affect the symphony at all? The Youth Symphony, or even any of the bands in Alton? KC: Oh, I think it's, it is more difficult for everyone. You know, because sometimes, sometimes you lose a family that may not have anyone in music, then the next time you lose a family that they had a really good flutist and a clarinetist. "Oh, I hate to see them..." you know, so. It's both ways. Sometimes it doesn't affect this, in other cases it does, you know. But. Sometimes parents want to see a very strong academic situation for their child so they may want to send their, I know we had a really good little boy that was a really good percussionist in the Alton Youth Symphony, but now he's going to CBC [Christian Brothers College] High School in St. Louis because his parents want that specialized training, you know, so we lose some kids to the parents who...because most of the parents who have kids in the Youth Symphony, they are pushers. They don't want, they're not settled with a "B" grade from their child. "You're going to be an A student," you know. I mean, not in every case, but in most cases, these parents want them, in the first place, they're driving them to this extra rehearsal every week, so, "Hey, Johnny, I'm taking you there  I'm expecting you to produce," you know. So, uh, that has been a factor. But we lose some kids that way, but maybe not a great number of kids, but what we do lose some excellent students that parents want them to have an excellent academic opportunity. AS: So have you noticed changes in students' patterns? Or the way students are learning and interacting? I mean, you've been a teacher for a long time. KC: Mm-hmm. No, I don't see that happening. Now, my wife does a program called "ROAR," which means that volunteers in the community go out into the schools and they, they, they actually go to the schools between 7:30 and 8 when the kids are waiting to get into their classroom. And then they have the third graders read to them. So it's really to promote reading, you know, I forget...the acronym's R-O-A-R, 9  but "Reading," or...I don't know what it is. But it's just to promote reading. And that's gotten a really strong hold, but, obviously what that means is that the kids need help at home, or they wouldn't be doing this, see. That means the reading skills are not where they should be, so it's just another tool to help those classroom teachers to promote reading and the importance of reading. But again, if it were in a school where every kid could read by the time they got to school, they wouldn't have it, but, so, you can see it's a necessary supplement to the educational environment. AS: Have you seen that kind of thing with music students, too? KC: Not so much. No, really not so much, you know, because...no, I don't see that. I see parents still having a strong interest in keeping their kids in music, you know. It's amazing how many kids we have in the music program, it's a huge number, you know. Especially when you consider the socio-economics of our community. That has changed a great deal. Since we've moved here in the '60s, you know, because we had all these industries here, my goodness. You know, we had Olin, and Laclede Steel, and I can think of all of these...and again, those were the board members to our organization in the beginning. See, we, we were able to ask some of them to help us and support us, and of course you get the leaders in a terrific organization like they had, if they can run a corporation, then you know that they can help you a great deal in learning how to fundraise, too, so. That's been a big change, too, you lose all of those high- powered executives, you know, and their families, too, you know that, uh...has been a big change in our community. AS: So, you came here in the '60s, and you came from SIUC. Do you have any perspective on how SIUE altered this? I mean, are your students moving on through college? I mean, you seem to keep in touch in, with them, so. KC: Oh, yes, yeah, yeah. Many of them go on, many of them, in fact, maybe they're friends of yours that go on to SIUE to major in music, you know. It's a good stepping stool for them. I, there is a symphony, a youth symphony, I believe in Carbondale, or there was at one time, but, but that's the other thing, we're the, I think one of the few youth symphonies around, you know, so if a kid wants to participate in a youth symphony, then this is one of their choices, too, you know. Bell, there used to be...I think there is still a Belleville Youth Symphony, though, too, but I don't know much about it, though. It hasn't, I don't think it has quite the history that we've had, though. I think it's gone through some ups and downs, you know, but, but I don't know that for sure either, so. But we've been able to stay consistent year after year to try to grow and grow, but the key catalyst for us was the give, receiving that trust. The funds from that trust. Otherwise, we would have to be selling cookies, too, like the public school students have to do, you know. But fortunately we don't have to do that, so. And the parents appreciate that, because they know they were already, that then also, you know, our program always lists, you know, the contributors, you know, so. Let them know that we appreciate what they're doing for us financially. AS: So I read that you have a lot of, I mean, alumni that are working still with the Youth Symphony? Could you tell me more about that, how your students are going on and then maybe coming back? Or people going out of state? KC: Yes, well, you know what we have done, we've tried to keep track of some of our graduates and especially some of them that live locally and have got their, maybe their bachelor degree from SIUE and 10  are teaching in the area, then we use those students to come back and be sectional leaders. In fact, one of them teaches cello, and so she comes back and teaches the cello section, you know. So yes, it comes back, what we've given out comes right back to us in many cases. That's just one example of the...another case, we had a, used to be principal flutist of the Alton Symphony, she now is one of our sectional leaders, and to think of, I'm sure these little kids are amazed by when they hear her play. Because I think their eyes are bugging out when they hear, you know, what she can do with the flute, too, you know, just one example. And we have, we have others, actually, the manager of Hathaway Hall is our string bass coach, too, so. A lot of them come back to us in many different ways. Sometimes, I couldn't, I wouldn't even remember that they were in Youth Symphony, you know, probably because I've lost, I've tried to keep in close touch. There's a few of us that have been board members from almost the beginning, you know, and I'm one of those few [laughs], that has been there from the beginning. But since I've, since this other guy and I have formed it, I feel like this is what I can do for our community, you know. I was always, whenever I was director of music, I was sometimes kind of disturbed because I always felt like these music teachers were leaders of the community, you know, you got to find something to support, whether it's the Youth Symphony, or the Choral Society, or the Muni Band, or whatever. Find something, make our community a better musical community, you know. For whoever. AS: So we talked, back a while ago in the beginning, about how you would have students doing solos or concertos. Could you just, maybe, walk me through how a season would go? Ah, normally, naturally, like rehearsals and then concerts and whatnot? KC: Sure. Well, we have auditions in August. And then we start rehearsals the, ah, usually like the middle of September, then we have I think twelve rehearsals or so and give a concert at the end of November. We take a break through the Christmas season and then start again in January. And rehearse January through the end of April, give a concert at the end of April with that soloist, but also inserted in there is the side-by-side concert with the Alton Symphony. And then, also, at the, close to the end of the season is that concert at Hathaway where we bring in the outside schools. At least that's what we've been doing the last couple of years, and it seems to work out really well. We don't have to worry about dropped violins, like [laughs] when we get on and off buses three times. "How are we going to get those string bases and cellos on the bus?" So. It was a challenge, but a good one. Profitable for the, you know, but this seems to be physically lots easier for us, this way, to, you know. Easier to transport a busload of kids rather than a busload of instruments, you know. And instruments are fragile, you know, you get violins and violas and cellos, my goodness, they're very fragile. So you have to handle them with care, so. It's been easier for us just to give the concert at Hathaway Hall. AS: So, previously, that part in the season was you traveling outside, right? KC: Yes, we traveled every spring, right. And of course that's a big challenge, too, because working around spring testing, because there is so much testing in schools. And if we did it all set up with the Missouri schools, then it doesn't fit with the Illinois schools, so it's, it was a real challenge to do that. And it will continually be, you know. Because they have to be there for that testing, you know, the principals will not excuse, and we understand. They will not excuse students for missing testing. Because it represents their school, and their school's got to look good, you know, so. It's part of the game these days. 11  AS: So, tell me about the music that you guys were playing. I mean, you said previously you were playing more complicated things, back in the beginning when it was starting? KC: Yeah, in the beginning we were doing a little bit, yes. Because the, for instance, the winds had more, ah, more control of their instruments, especially, you know. Like, for instance, a trumpet, first trumpet player may have to play really high, you know, so the music we're doing now...I tell you, we did, for instance, this...we try to do a variety of music, and we always do like a, an overture of some type, you know. And then do a "pop" piece of some type, like music from, ah, a local music, a prominent musical, like, that is popular at the present time. Then we try to do something that's challenging for the strings, if we can, you know, Vivaldi piece of some kind that really shows them off. Or, ah, the young director that we have now, Abby Knoche, is very good at selecting things that fit the orchestra. [door closing] And, ah, so that works out well because she really knows, she also teaches at a high school in St. Louis so she's very familiar with all levels of teaching, and she's very good at picking music that fits the orchestra. But it's always a variety of music, too. And then of course the junior symphony feeds into that, they do much more [door closing] traditional things, too, but it's just to help them get used to being in an organization more than anything else. But we also have sectionals for the junior symphony, too, see, so we start the training early [laughs]. Goodness! I think back, you know, how it's changed from the beginning, you know, we didn't even have a junior symphony in the beginning, you know, just, it just evolves, evolves, evolves, you know how it, knowing how we can, if we can make this organization better if we do this, oh yes. We've had some wonderful board members through the years, too, that have been very wise in helping guide us. I remember in my early, young years as an organizer I thought that we should pay for, to send a student up to the University of Illinois. I thought it was so right to pay for the total package, you know, so that the kid would be free to, or the parents would be free not having to pay. And another lady that was, I found later out was much wiser than I was. "No, let's do it this way, let's give two scholarships and make it a half scholarship, so that the parents have involvement." And she was so right. And I was so wrong. [laughs] But that was in my early, young days before I had the experience with an organization, you know, where she had all this experience with the YWCA and all these other organizations, so. We all learn through this board, you know, we always, we had some really wise board members that guided us along. AS: Yeah, so the board was obviously very important, KC: Oh, it was. AS: Yeah. KC: It still is, you know. AS: Mm-hmm. KC: In those early formative years, you know, they'd get us going in the right direction, you know. So we didn't, we wanted to steer the ship in the right way. And we have. It's worked out really well, I think. AS: Yeah, I mean, your fifty, fiftieth year anniversary this year, right? KC: Right! Fifty years, yeah. Who would have thought, you know, that when we started that the, that I 12  would even be around for the fiftieth anniversary, you know [laughter]. Fabulous, you know, that I can see this happen, you know. AS: Yeah. I think it's just a, it's probably a testament to how much, um, the Youth Symphony has affected the community. Have you seen that in your time working with them, for sure? KC: Well, yeah, you know, it's really given back so much to the community, to, you know. And I don't know how much it's, how much it's meant, you know, but I know how proud the parents are. "Oh, my kid was in the Youth Symphony!" You know. Very proud that they can be in that, you know. That they could, more than that, that they could, it sees, they can see where it takes them, too. They can see, oh, for instance, we've got one little guy that, ah, he's way beyond what, what the school program can offer him, you know? So this is a perfect vehicle for him, because his parents want more out of him, you know. You can do more than, you know. And that's, that's the type of student, it's a wonderful vehicle for that, you know. Those parents that want their child to have extra experiences. AS: Yeah, okay. Well, is there anything else you want to talk about with the Alton, with Alton as a community, or with the AYS in general? KC: You know, I can't think of anything else, I think we pretty much covered everything about the Youth Symphony that I can, all the information that I can give you, ah. It's been a pleasure for me to just kind of follow through all these years to see what has happened. And we've had probably, through the years, maybe five different directors, you know, or maybe five or six different directors. But we keep it moving, you know. And five or six different managers, too, you know. But when we started out, we didn't have a manger, but then we decided, "No, we need someone to help that director, too." There's more to it than just waving your hands, you know, to rehearse. So now when the director walks in, the chairs are all set up and everything's all ready to go. So that manager is as important as a director, we have found, in collecting all the music, getting it ready to go, contacting parents, you know, emails, you know, so. All of that paperwork. And especially with the emails and computers, you know, that is just, that has been probably the biggest change, because we can communicate with parents now so easily where we couldn't fifty years ago. Everything was by snail mail then, you know, or telephone. It's been a big change. And a good one. A good one. AS: Alright, well. That's all the questions I had for you, but if there's nothing else you want to talk about then. Thank you so much for talking with me, Mr. Conrady, Ken. KC: You're very welcome. Glad to do it for the Youth Symphony. AS: Wonderful. Well, congrats on fifty years, um, looking forward to see, you know, where it goes next. So exciting! KC: Thank you very much. 13  
MadisonCounty;Robert Coppersmith;1965;2019;Robert Coppersmith 1965 - 2019   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Robert Coppersmith Oral History Eryn Coppersmith, Interviewer Edwardsville, Illinois July 21, 2019 Eryn Coppersmith (EC): It is July 21, state your name, your branch of the military, your rank. Robert Coppersmith (RC): Robert R. Coppersmith, United States Marine Corps, private first class. EC: And where were you, where did you enter the marines? RC: Where did I enter the Marine Corps? Atlanta, at the MEPS Station, the military processing center, I don't know what it's called. From there I went to Parris Island, South Carolina. EC: Is that where boot camp was? RC: That's where boot camp is. EC: Why did you pick the Marines? RC: Why, because they're the best. EC: Why are they the best? RC: They're the ones that see the most action in combat, and they train better than most branches of the military. EC: So you wanted to see combat? RC: I definitely wanted to see combat, that was one of the goals to go in the Marine Corps, most of the time they called the Marine Corps the tip of the spear, because usually they are first. Usually the marines go in before everybody else. They're the smallest group in the military and they're the first reaction in the military. Is that 12 minutes already? EC: But you didn't get to go... RC: No. EC: ...to combat? RC: Never went overseas. Never left the country. When I joined the Marine Corps I went into tanks, because I had a mechanics MOS, could have been a helicopter mechanic, an aircraft mechanic, a truck mechanic, or a tank mechanic, one of the four. 1  EC: What'd you pick? RC: I didn't pick any, they gave me a tank mechanic, there was no options. They give you what you get, and that's what you get. You get slotted into a group depending on your test scores, and if you don't want to be infantry you can pick, if you have a decent enough test score, you can pick another field out of the group, and that's what I got. Tank mechanic. EC: When did you enter the Marine Corps? What year? RC: 1991, November, but I don't know what the date was, I think it was November 1, but I can't be sure, maybe November 19. No, I think it was November 1, I'd have to look it up. EC: Was there a war going on? RC: There was not a war going on, the war was over, the First Gulf War was over. I've actually got a ribbon for being, for serving during combat operations, but they hadn't declared the war over, but it was over. It was a very short war. The war was over in February or March of that year. EC: Following the November that you entered? RC: What? EC: Following the November that you entered? RC: No, previous to the November that I entered. EC: Oh RC: It ended in February or March, I went in in November. But they don't, it takes the government a long time to declassify a war, so the war went on for a while. EC: Did you know that it was over when you entered? RC: Yes, it was television, it was televised. When I went in, when I signed the paperwork though, the war was still going on. EC: Is that why you...? RC: No EC: So what made you...? RC: That didn't influence my decision at all. EC: What influenced your decision? RC: Stuff, life, I knew I wasn't going to college. Wanted to get out of my hometown. See the world. Join the Marine Corps. 2  EC: What were you first days of service like? RC: What were my first days in the Marine Corps like? EC: Yeah, do you know like, what you did as soon as you got off the bus, or... RC: Yeah, you stand on the yellow footprints, and you get yelled at. Everybody, if you ever watch any documentaries about going in the Marine Corps, at Parris Island, I don't know about West Coast, there's two boot camps for the Marine Corps, Parris Island and there's San Diego. East Coast, West Coast, depending on what side of the Mississippi River you live on. And where you live, some of them choose. I'm not sure if this is East Coast, I think this might be an option. You might have an option in Illinois, depending on where you live, to go East Coast or West Coast. I went East Coast, obviously I lived in Atlanta, so, but the airport at like, probably like 10 o'clock at night, it was late. It was dark when we got on the plane. It was probably only an hour-long flight to South Carolina, get on the bus, like an old school bus, and you get off the bus, and they start boot camp. As soon as you get off the bus, you stand on yellow footprints, put your feet on the yellow footprints, and then go from there. First three days you're awake, there's no sleep. They do that to disorient you, shave your head, take your clothes, check your body, weight, physical measurements, all that stuff. You fill out paperwork, insurance, get your blood drawn, get all your vaccinations, all kinds of shots, get your uniform, get your barracks assignment, everything like that, it takes a long time. There's no sleeping though. EC: Like they don't let you sleep? RC: No, no sleeping. We didn't sleep for every bit of three days. Like briefly, I remember filling out paperwork in some barracks one time, sitting at a desk like you do in your school, and I put my head for maybe two minutes, and that was it, that was the sleep I got for the first three days. EC: When you got to sleep, did you get to sleep for a long time, or was it like...? RC: Never, never. I would guess, every night, we would go to bed at probably 9 or 10 o'clock, and we probably got up every day at 3, 3:30 in the morning every day. EC: What did you do when you woke up? [Dog barking] RC: Murphy! What would we do when we woke up? EC: Like why'd you get up so early? RC: We had stuff to do, PT run, clean the barracks, learn how to march, learn how to drill, learn the history of the Marine Corps, learn combat maneuvers, learn hand-to-hand fighting, I mean we did everything. Obstacle courses. More running, push-ups, chin-ups, crunches, clean stuff, polish boots, clean more stuff, running, yelling, all those things. EC: What did like a typical day look like? 3  RC: Typical day, just a normal day, you'd wake up, I guess at 3:30, 4 o'clock in the morning, take a shower, get yelled at probably, do probably a hundred push-ups, some chin-ups, you might get to go to the bathroom straight away. You had maybe, maybe, ten seconds to take a shower. The shower room was a big room, like you'd see in a gymnasium, probably had twenty shower heads in a big square pattern on the walls, and somebody would go through quickly while being yelled at, and turn some valves, hot or cold, whatever, they'd just grab stuff and turn 'em on, and then you would walk as fast as you could, possibly run, around the shower room as you were throwing soap and water in your face, and then you left. Then, if you had to go to the bathroom, which wasn't fun because there was no doors, no walls, just a toilet in the middle of a room, twenty dudes sitting next to you, shittin', pissin', that you didn't have much time in there. The whole time somebody's yelling at you. The entire time somebody was telling you to go faster, you're taking too long, why are you so dumb, hurry up, move faster, I don't have time for this shit. Get out, get dressed, if you didn't do that right, you got yelled at, usually, before you would get completely dressed, you would scrub brush the bulkheads, which was not fun. You took a washcloth, and you'd roll it up in a ball, and you scrub the floors on your hands and feet. Not your knees, your feet, up and down running as fast as you can, scrubbing the floors in line. And if somebody took too long you'd start that over again, and you'd do that for probably an hour. All the time doing crunches and push-ups while somebody's yelling at you. And half the guys would do that, the other half of the guys were usually cleaning windows, emptying garbage cans, not that we made any garbage, but that's what you did. Generally squaring things away, mopping, polishing the toilets, cleaning the head, all that stuff. EC: So, by the time that was over, what time was it? RC: I don't know, we didn't have clocks, there was no, I'm gonna say that took, hour, hour and a half, then we would do, what do they call, circle the quarterdeck, which was the front of the barracks, you would sit in formation, everybody's got their boots on at that point, I don't know that we're wearing blouses, but everybody's somewhat dressed and awake, because you've been yelled and spit on a lot. Then we would have some instructions about general military knowledge, movements, we would talk about old military Marine Corps battles and wars and Khe Sanh and Vietnam, and who died when and different things, just different knowledge-based things. And then that was probably half-an-hour to 45 minutes, then you would have some kind of inspection once you put your uniform on, whatever the uniform of the day was, usually it was just fatigues, and then always somebody would do something wrong, and then we would do more push-ups and crunches and chin-ups and running and stuff, fun things. Made sure the barracks were clean, and we would go to breakfast, maybe 6, 6:30, I dunno, depending, everything was by name. So that's where you would stand in the chow line, so sometimes you would get breakfast first, sometimes they would go back-to-front, sometimes they would go front-to-back, because whoever was the last person to sit down and eat didn't have much time to eat, because it was all, whenever the first person sat down, that's when the clock started. So depending on when the last guy sat down, if the first person is done eating, it's time to go. So depending on who the last ten guys were in the line, wasn't a long time to eat food. Sometimes that was dependent on, it was port side or the starboard side, a lot of stuff in the Marine Corps is navy based, because the Marine Corps is a division of the navy. So sometimes the port side would go first, sometimes the starboard side would go first, depending on where you were at, and it was all by name and stuff, so because my name started with a C, most of the time it was okay unless they flipped it, because somebody in the front of the line did something stupid, then we got to go last, and usually I would get to eat last, and that happened about 50 percent of the time. And you literally had to shove a tray of food in your mouth with no chewing while walking, there's no standing while 4  eating. So you had to eat while you sat down, and sometimes it was literally as soon as your butt hit the table you had to get back up. And you had to put as much food in your mouth and swallow whole as fast as you could. And then you got out and the whole time people were doing push-ups and crunches all around you, people screaming at you, and then we got lucky because our barracks were right next door to the chow hall. So we didn't have to run very far to get to the chow hall. Some people had to run very far to get to the chow hall. There were multiple platoons in the battalion, in the company whatever you were in, and we always carried rifles everywhere we went. M16s. So every time another platoon or company was in the chow hall, we had to watch their gear, and all their equipment, so we had to stand guard depending on the timing of when you ate, how long, what order your platoon got there, because each platoon was doing different things every day. There was was always like stations, and each platoon would go to different stations, depending on what station you were going to that day, it was when you got to eat chow, and this and that. After that you'd go back to the barracks, clean the barracks some more, get yelled at, do push-ups, crunches, you might have some more instruction time, but I ain't know what they talked about, how to tie your shoes, how to breathe, just stuff. How to sew, how to treat wounds, you know, stuff like that. The whole time getting screamed and yelled at. And then usually we'd run two to three miles after that, then you'd go do calisthenics and chin-ups and push-ups and jumping jacks and mountain climbers and up-downs and all kinds of fun things. And then you would go do whatever you were doing that day, hand-to-hand combat, sometimes we would watch lengthy videos on, you know, Marine Corps victories in battle and Battle of Belleau Woods and Khe Sanh and Grenada and Panama and all that stuff. And then you would run some more, and then you did some more push-ups and chin-ups and stuff, and then you go back to the barracks and lay some more knowledge on you about some things, then you'd get ready for bed, clean the barracks again, make your bed again, get yelled at and screamed at, push-ups and chin-ups and crunches, shower time, portside shower up, starboard side shave em' up. EC: And you said that was by like 9 and 10 o'clock. RC: I don't know, you know it could be 8, 9 o'clock, you know, it was dark out. EC: How many meals did you get a day? RC: Three meals a day, breakfast, lunch, and dinner, that was it. If you got to eat, depending on where you were at in the chow hall in line, sometimes you didn't get to eat. EC: All day? RC: Yeah, there was no snacking, you ate in the chow hall, that was the only time you saw food, ever. EC: What was the food like? RC: It was terrible, it was very bland, bread, pancakes, I don't remember the syrup, it might have just been pancakes, I don't remember any meat in the breakfast, grits, a lot of grits, some cereal maybe, and then milk, chocolate milk or white milk, one or the other, 2 percent, got a little carton of milk like a school lunch basically, and then lunch was, lot of times it was like a really disgusting peanut butter sandwich, no jelly, just peanut butter, but it wasn't like good peanut butter, it was like runny peanut butter, but like with some chunks in it. It was not good at all. And the bread was nasty too. It wasn't like good bread, it was really nasty bread. Apples, I didn't eat a lot of food, 'cause I didn't like a lot of it. But what I 5  did eat, I ate as much as I could. And then dinner, dinner was nasty, dinner was the worst lunch food you've ever had. Sometimes you would get a cheeseburger, they weren't good though. They didn't pride themselves on food. Wasn't what you were there for. EC: So how long did boot camp, or does boot camp last? RC: Three months, I believe I went in, I think, maybe it was November 19, I went in on November 19, I got out on Valentine's Day, February 14. EC: Out of boot camp? EC: Out of boot camp. What happened when you left boot camp? RC: What happened when I left boot camp? I went home on a ten-day leave, and I had ten days off. I didn't actually have ten days off, because I had to have surgery on my finger, I had an infection on my finger, so I left early, went back to MCT, which is Marine Combat Training, after boot camp. And that was in Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. After a week of that, after a week of leave, I went to Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, for MCT, which was a month or six weeks long, which was a lot of staying in the woods, camping in the woods and doing combat training, all combat training, live fire drills, learn how to set up defense perimeters, kick in doors, shoot guns, all kinds of fun things. That was interesting... EC: Did you enjoy that...? RC: ...but we ran a lot, we did a lot of force marches, we did a 22-mile force march with full gear. That was hard. We did a couple 15 and 17 mile-an-hour marches, 17-mile marches. EC: What do you mean march, like literally walk...? RC: Get in formation and walk for 15 miles without stopping. 22 miles was hard. 22 miles almost took all day. You're not just marching, you're getting yelled at, screamed at, push-ups and crunches and stuff. Some running. Fun stuff. EC: So you mentioned getting yelled at a lot. RC: A lot. EC: How did you feel about the people yelling at you, the officers? RC: I didn't like it, it wasn't no officers. EC: Oh, who were they? RC: Drill instructors. I think both my drill instructors were sergeants, and then the senior drill instructor was a staff sergeant. There were three people, there was two junior drill instructors and a senior drill instructor. 6  EC: And you didn't like any of them? RC: I liked the senior drill instructor, we didn't see him a lot. He was a staff sergeant, Staff Sergeant Brown. My drill instructors, two of them were black, one of them was white. I didn't like the junior drill instructors. Hughley, the black junior drill instructor, he didn't talk much. I forget what the little white guy's name was, I'm sure it's in that book somewhere. He was a terrible person, and I would've broke him if I wasn't in the Marine Corps. We did not like each other. EC: Why do you say that? RC: We just didn't like... He knew, I was bigger than he was, and he wasn't having it. Which I wasn't at all, by any means the largest person in the platoon, we had some really big dudes in there. He didn't like me, I didn't like him, we didn't get along. But we interacted a lot. EC: 'Cause you had to. RC: Yeah, I didn't have a choice [laughs] like I could not do it. So, but yeah, I always had a problem with authority, so, probably shouldn't have went in the Marine Corps. [EC laughs] EC: So what was, so you said that you were like assigned to the tank... RC: Tank mechanic. EC: Yeah, and boot camp, is that what you were assigned after boot camp? RC: Yes, everybody goes to the same boot camp, same MCT. And then you go to school, and then after you get out of MCT, you get another week's leave, and then you go to schooling. After, some people go to radio schools, some go to helicopter whatever, some people are, most people are 0311s, which is what the vast majority of the people in the Marine Corps are, infantry. They do more, basically Marine Combat Training, they just never stop doing that. It's always the same. They might do some exploseward and stuff. Those guys are always on the ready to go somewhere, like if they need a bunch of marines to throw at a combat situation, they throw a bunch of 0311s at them. Basic riflemen. EC: Did you enjoy being a tank mechanic? RC: Uh, no, not really. Not a lot tanks out in the real world to be fixing, so I knew there wasn't much of a future in being a tank mechanic. You know what I mean? But, I like being around tanks, just because they're cool machines. EC: What would you have preferred to be assigned to? RC: I don't know, I mean it's all the same I think, at some point. I mean, I like working with my hands but I don't know what else, any other type of mechanic I guess. Helicopter mechanic, because there's helicopters in the real world. Airplane mechanic because there's airplanes in the real world. Not a lot of 7  tanks running around in the streets. I definitely wouldn't have wanted to be a motor T mechanic, motor pool. EC: What is a motor T? RC: Mechanized Transportation, motorized Transportation, humvees, big trucks, five tons, half tons, whatever. That wouldn't have been great. EC: Why? RC: Because that's just boring, I don't know. Tanks are cool, they shoot stuff. They're big, and they go fast, and they're loud. They've got a lot of guns. EC: How did you keep in contact with your family? RC: Well that was before cell phones, so, in boot camp, there was no contact. We wrote letters. MCT we were in the field the whole time, so we didn't, I don't even think I wrote a letter in MCT, but I was only going to be gone for a month. And then after that I'd call, usually once a week on Sunday nights. I think I had a prepaid phone card or a lot of calls were collect, it's on a payphone, but in boot camp we wrote a lot of letters. Lots and lots of letters to everybody. Uncles, sister, aunts, grandpas, grandmas, all that stuff. EC: And you did that, you wrote to... RC: Yes EC: ...all those people? RC: Yeah, you had, probably a half hour, 45 minutes every night in boot camp to write letters and read letters if you got mail. You would get mail before you'd go to bed. EC: Is that something you'd look forward to? RC: Absolutely. Absolutely. 'Cause it wasn't, you know, the same old thing you'd been doing. EC: Did you travel anywhere while you were... RC: In the Marine Corps? EC: ...in the Marine Corps? RC: No, California. EC: Well that's traveling. RC: Nah, that's not overseas. EC: Why'd you go to California? 8  RC: 'Cause that's the tank division I was assigned to. EC: How long were you there? RC: How long was I in California? Right at a year and a half. Not very long. I was only in the Marine Corps for just under, just over two years, right at two years. Most people do four. EC: So you were in California for a majority of those two years that... RC: Yes EC: Did you like being in California? RC: Absolutely. I got to California in the summer of '92, and I left in the end of '93, right before Christmas '93. EC: So what did you do while you were in California? RC: Well, I worked on tanks, I was a tank mechanic. You go back in the tape, and it'll tell you tank mechanic. [EC laughs] EC: But that's all you were permitted to do? Did you get to do anything else other than being a mechanic? RC: Uh, the only other thing I did while I was in California, I was on a machine gun shoot. It was a battalion machine gun competition for everybody in the Marine Corps, and I got picked to go on a machine gun team. I was on the mark 19 automatic grenade launcher weapons team. For about a month and a half we did drills and learned how to shoot the gun, take the gun apart, service the weapon, blah blah blah, and then we went to Camp Pendleton, San Diego, and we had a machine gun competition between all the different battalions and divisions in the entire Marine Corps. EC: Well that sound fun. RC: Yeah, we won. EC: You won! RC: We won. Our mark 19 team won, about four guys, out of noncombat divisions. We were considered noncombat, because we weren't 0311s. EC: Well that's cool. RC: Yeah, we got a medal. I don't know what I did with that. I got a medal, and I got written up in the Marine Corps paper, got our picture taken with, I don't think it was the Commandant, it was somebody big in the Marine Corps like a three or four-star general, or something. There was a parade, and a thing. 9  EC: Sounds like a big deal. RC: It wasn't really a parade, we were on the parade deck, it was like a ceremony, where they took our pictures and stuff. It wasn't that big of a deal. EC: So you got a medal and you got a ribbon. RC: Yes EC: Did you get any other awards... RC: No EC: ...while you were in there? RC: No EC: And you don't know where either of those things are today? RC: No, nope. I was young, I mean I was 18 years old. I was young. I didn't know nothing. EC: So you were 18 when you entered, and you were 20 when you left? RC: Uh huh, yeah. EC: Why'd you leave? RC: Why did I leave the Marine Corps? I had a level 3 alcohol failure, which is a rehab. I didn't pass rehab. EC: What does that mean? RC: What do you mean what does that mean? EC: You didn't... RC: I got kicked out of rehab. EC: In the Marine Corps. RC: In the Marine Corps. EC: So it's something they made you do? RC: Yes, [laughs]. It was something they made me do, yeah. EC: So, like entertainment in the Marine Corps? 10  RC: Entertainment? EC: Yeah RC: What? EC: Like what did you do for entertainment? RC: What do you mean, like on our own time? EC: Yeah, if you had your own time, did you have any form of entertainment in boot camp? RC: No, what? No, nope. EC: No? RC: We did watch Full Metal Jacket and, what wasn't Platoon, it was something else on Christmas Eve in boot camp. In the barracks that they filmed Full Metal Jacket in, we watched the movie Full Metal Jacket, which was kind of crazy. EC: And that was... RC: Christmas Eve. EC: ...it. RC: Yes, we got to eat cookies, everybody got two cookies. EC: But after boot camp, when your had your own time? RC: After boot camp it was like a normal job. It was 9 to 5, do what you want at night, weekends were usually pretty wide open, whatever. I went from Parris Island to Camp Lejeune to Fort Knox to California. So, after you leave boot camp, besides MCT, because we were in the woods, you couldn't do anything. But after MCT, it was like a normal 9 to 5 job. Unless you had to pull guard duty, I was on a flag detail for a while when I was in Fort Knox, but that was only because I got out of running. So I joined the flag detail where we would raise the flag, reveille, all that jazz, folded the flag, took the flag up, took the flag down, all that stuff. Me and, there might have been six of us, did that every day at Fort Knox. And I don't know why, because Fort Knox is an army base, but because we were marines, we were in charge of shit, so we did that every day, and the army guys didn't. And they were like, probably, Fort Knox one of the larger installations in the army, I'm gonna guess there's 40 thousand soldiers there. And we might of had a hundred marines. And we were in charge of the flag for the base. I don't know why, very strange. But, they probably deferred to us, us being marines, so, they knew. EC: So when it was like a 9 to 5, you were still around people in the Marine Corps? RC: During the week yes, all the time, I mean, we hung out with Marines, what do you mean? Yeah. 11  EC: Right, so did you guys do anything for fun together? RC: Drank, drank and fought. EC: Fought? RC: Fought. EC: For fun. RC: Nothing else to do. I mean California, Fort Knox, Fort Knox we weren't allowed to have cars, so you just hung out. We shot pool, we had a pool table. I think there was a dart board there. There might have been a foosball table, and that was about it. You'd watch TV, played spades, played cards, and that was... And then, I mean it's a bunch of dudes in a barracks, where there was always fighting going on, all the time. And then, you got out of Fort Knox and went to California, that was a little bit more laid back, because I had a buddy that lived in California, we had a car, and we hung out in LA for two weeks on leave. We took the time off. Hung out with all his buddies, and then we went to Twentynine Palms. In the barracks though, no, there was no entertainment. We had, everybody had a room, you had two guys to a room. Bunk beds, PlayStation was new thing then, so a couple guys had PlayStations. But other than that you had cable TV. Not even, I don't even know if it was cable. It might have just been antennas. I don't think we had cable. They had VCRs, VHS, you know, you had, you rented movies and watched movies. You'd go down the road and rent movies from the PX, and all that stuff. EC: But you had to stay in the barracks? RC: You didn't have to, but not everybody had cars. I didn't have a car for a long time, in California, I didn't have a...it took me awhile. I guess, I had my motorcycle. I bought my motorcycle the first week I was in California. But I didn't have a motorcycle license, or insurance, or registration, so I couldn't ride my bike on base, so I had to leave it at the front gate locked up in impound, and the only time I could get there was if somebody would give me a ride to the front base, front gate, but I still didn't have a license, so I didn't. Twentynine Palms is an hour and a half from Palm Springs, and it's three hours from LA, so, and there's nothing near there. That's it, there's a Marine Corps base and then an hour and a half away there's a town. There was a couple bars, but I wasn't allowed to get in bars, so. EC: Were you like one of the younger ones? RC: No... EC: No? RC: ...everybody was my age. Everybody in the Marine Corps is young, they're 18 years old, 19 years old, everybody. There were some, I mean obviously there's dudes who were older, but they had been in it awhile. Most people go in the military right out of high school. 17, 18 years old. Young guys. Like old dudes were probably like 25. They would be considered, they were like the sergeants and stuff. Corporals, sergeants. Problem with the Marine Corps, the tank battalions, during the First Gulf War there were three or four, there were four tank battalions. After the Gulf War, they switched all the tanks over to a M1A1 12  Abrams. They used to be a 60, called the M60 tank. They got rid of those tanks, and they consolidated the four battalions into two battalions. It was 1st Tank Battalion and 3rd Tank Battalion. They got rid of 2nd Tanks and 4th Tanks, I was in 1st Tank Battalion, so they consolidated and got all these tanks together, and squeezed four battalions into two battalions, and then that was all that was left. There was no upper mobility in the Marine Corps in that tank battalion, because you had so many guys that they crunched into two smaller battalions, and they got rid of half the tanks. So it was a very weird time to be in the tank divisions in the Marine Corps after the war, because they were, the old tanks they knew they needed a lot of people to keep them going. The new tanks work a lot better, you don't need as many people to keep a tank battalion as you do. So, it was a bit of a mess. When I got in the Marine Corps, they had a tank battalion in Okinawa, Japan, and usually the new guys, all of them, went to Japan. I was on board with that. And that's what my recruiter told me would happen, that I was going to Japan. I was all about it. Well, when they consolidated all the tank battalions, no more Japan. They brought them all stateside. One tank battalion camp was Lejeune, North Carolina, one tank battalion at Twentynine Palms, California. No more Okinawa, Japan. EC: And that was disappointing to you? RC: It was very disappointing to me, and to a lot of other people in the tank battalion. But whatever. EC: Would you still have joined if you knew that wouldn't get to go to Japan? RC: Uh, knowing what I know now, I wouldn't have joined as the MOS that I was going into, no. I would've gotten another MOS. EC: What's an MOS? RC: It's your job, it's your job classification. EC: I thought you said you said you couldn't choose it? RC: You had options. You could choose fields you would go into. I don't know what the options are, but I would probably have chosen a different option. EC: So knowing what you know now, would you, you would've still joined the Marines though? RC: Probably, I somewhat enjoyed it, for the most part. EC: What did you enjoy about it? RC: Uh, it made me grow up. It made me the person that I am now. It made me disciplined. It made me realize that I was young and immature when I went in. And made me see what the world is like, for real. Real shit going on. EC: So you appreciated the lessons that it taught you? RC: Absolutely. Absolutely. 13  EC: Do you do anything today that you learned in the Marine Corps. RC: No, nope. [laughs] Not really. I do good push-ups. My discipline is a lot better, no doubt. I was a bit of a hooligan when I was growing up. And not very self-aware. I'm more self-aware now. EC: How do you mean, self-aware? RC: Well, I'm aware of my surroundings, I'm aware of different types of people. Different situations that people are put into. EC: And you weren't before the Marine Corps. RC: No I was oblivious to most everything in the world, and my parents babied me. Well, they always took care of me, so, the Marine Corps teaches you to take care of yourself. For the most part. EC: What kind of people did you meet in the Marine Corps? RC: What kind of people did I meet? Mostly dumb people, there's a lot of really stupid people in the Marine Corps. EC: Why do you say that? RC: Well because it's true. I mean, most of the people in the Marine Corps can't do anything else but be in the Marine Corps. Enlisted, not the officers, the officers have a whole different mindset, and I don't really understand that mindset, but that's because I wasn't an officer. I was around enlisted people. And the vast majority of enlisted are poor, they come from depressed parts of the country, low education. Not everybody, but I would say, 75 percent of the people in the Marine Corps were not that intelligent. Bullet stoppers, really, just all they were. It's what I'm telling you, some stupid people in there. But you don't have to be smart to pull a trigger. I mean, you follow orders, and you go forward, and you get shot at, and that's what they're looking for. Wasn't my thing, wasn't my thing. We had a lot of ignorant people. EC: Did you make any relationships. RC: Oh yeah, good friends. Good friends. EC: Any that you're still in contact with? RC: No, not really. EC: Not even on Facebook or anything. RC: No, I mean there's a couple guys on Facebook that I keep in contact with, but not really. The only talk to every once in a while, he's a bit of a hooligan, so. EC: What's that mean? 14  RC: He goes to jail still. He's doing bad things, so. He's one of the stupider ones. We ran around with him a lot, Cory Rochelle. Cory Rochelle Pigg, Pigg is his last. P I G G. Pigg, he's from Tennessee. Murfreesboro, Tennessee. EC: Did you keep in contact with them, like for a little bit after the Marine Corps? Nope? It was just... RC: Uh, Tom Herget, I met with him a couple times when Facebook started coming out, Cory obviously calls me every once in a while, but no, nope. EC: Even your friend in California that had the car? RC: Yeah, no. I don't know if he's on Facebook, I've looked for him on Facebook. I would be interested to see what he's doing. Good chance he's in jail or prison. He did bad things a lot. [laughs] EC: So, say you had not gotten kicked out of rehab, would you have stayed in the Marine Corps? RC: Oh yeah, I didn't have an option. There was no, people were really, really surprised that I did get out, the way I got out with the discharge that I got because I got a good discharge. That's almost unheard of to get out of the Marine Corps without serving the first four years and still get a good discharge. EC: Then how'd you do it? RC: What? EC: Then how'd you do it if it's hard? RC: I think, more than anything they were coming out of a war, and they were downsizing the branch, so any excuse they could do to get somebody out, they would use it. But I had a, really I probably had somewhat of a freedom of religion case, because when you go to rehab, the 12 step methods, one of the first steps that you have to give yourself over to a higher power. And that was my whole hangup with rehab, was I couldn't give myself over to a higher power if I don't believe in a higher power. So we had a lot of in depth discussions about God and religion and all those things in rehab. We debated, and they chose that because I couldn't believe in a higher power, that I didn't need to be there anymore, and I said, "I get what you're saying, write it up." EC: So you think that your lack of belief influenced your good discharge? RC: I don't know, I don't know. I don't know why. EC: You don't know why you got a good discharge. RC: No, I mean I do, because it was no, the separation wasn't, there was no animosity. You know, I didn't really do anything wrong, they couldn't point to the fact that I did anything wrong. There was no, no disciplinary measures that got me out. With most people, you either get a good discharge, or you don't. Dishonorable discharge, or I don't even, there's five different levels of discharge. There's only two good 15  ones. I got a general discharge under, general under honorable conditions, was the discharge I got. The other three, all the way down to a dishonorable discharge, become somewhat, felonies or misdemeanors. Well I hadn't done anything that was illegal, but, to per se. And I think the fact that I had a problem with the whole religious hang-up was a reason for me to get out without them... EC: So you said that, a lot, all of you drank. RC: Yes. EC: Did you know anybody else that was made to go to rehab? RC: No EC: Then why were you the only one that was made to go? RC: 'Cause I think I told the truth too much when they asked me about things. And I actually told them how much I drank and stuff, and they were shocked. So the lady who did the evaluations and stuff, I don't know. EC: So you think other people lied? RC: Yes, I think so. I know so, when I came back, and they were like, "How'd that go?" And I told them, and they were like, "Why'd you tell them that?" And I was like, "What do I care, why am I gonna lie to 'em, I've got no reason to lie to 'em." We got, I had a, we were cleaning the barracks one night. Something happened, we got in trouble somehow, like the whole platoon. Somebody didn't pass inspection, or something was messed up. We had a new platoon commander, he was a dick. Something happened, and we got confined to barracks, and we had to clean the barracks. But I was drinking barrack beer while I was cleaning my room, and one of the sergeants who I didn't get along with, little bitty black guy. Coleman, Sergeant Coleman. I don't know what his deal was. He didn't even say nothing to me. The next day I was called into platoon commander's office, and he asked me if I was drinking beer last night underage, blah blah. And I was like, yeah. Started a whole process. Next thing I know I'm being evaluated. Told her how much I was drinking. That lady was blown away by that. She couldn't believe it. Said I needed help, and I said I didn't. The next thing I know I'm in a naval hospital in San Diego. And we're talking about God, higher powers, and stuff. And I wanted to have no part of it. EC: So this was in California? RC: Mmhmm. EC: Do you regret telling the truth then? RC: Uh maybe? Maybe. But, no, I mean. You gotta be honest, right? I'm not gonna bullshit somebody just to bullshit, I mean what do I care? I knew it wouldn't affect me that much. I knew I had a leg to stand on if push came to shove. You know what I'm saying? If they really wanted to make a big deal of it, I could have went with religious liberty, religious freedom, whatever, but nobody's gonna do that. I wasn't 16  going to compromise my position just to appease their mind, you know what I mean, their whole thought process. Their whole position that they were on. Whether they're willing to compromise. EC: So did you not think that being kicked out was gonna was a possibility? RC: Absolutely. I knew that that was definitely a possibility. I mean I knew that going into it. Level 3 alcohol failure is a reason for discharge. Not every time, but it is something they can use to discharge you with, yes. I was kind of surprised when they told me I was getting kicked out of rehab. It was very weird. I was a little bit shocked. But I understood where they were coming from. EC: So you were kicked out of rehab because you were not willing to comply with their... RC: Yes EC: ...and that ultimately is why you were kicked out of the Marine Corps? RC: Yes EC: 'Cause you were kicked out of rehab. RC: Yes EC: So had you successfully completely the rehab you would have stayed in the Marine Corps? RC: Absolutely, yep. But I would've went right back in there because I was young and dumb and drank all the time. That's why that lady was blown away because we were drinking a lot. I mean, we were drinking a lot. EC: But you somehow hid it from... RC: No EC: Well then why were they surprised, did they just not... RC: Who was surprised? EC: The evaluation lady. RC: Oh she didn't know us. She had nothing to do with us. EC: Was the rehab like, it was just like an actual rehab, or did it, or was it through the Marine Corps? RC: It was through the Marine Corps. Through a naval hospital. San Diego. EC: I'm just confused as to why she would be surprised about the volume. 17  RC: 'Cause it was a lot. She was in Twentynine Palms, she wasn't in the rehab. She was just a person who worked in an administrative office and was asking me questions on a form. And as she was writing, I think the numbers might have overwhelmed her a little bit. [Phone rings] RC: I will pause that. EC: What was your last day like, do you remember your last day? RC: Last day? Hectic. Packing, loadin' up, get all my shit together. Get my discharge papers, go through admin, turn in all my gear. I probably turned in my gear the day before. Drove out the gate. EC: Did you say goodbye to everybody? RC: Uh, yeah, somewhat. I think I left during the day, so everybody else was doing their stuff. Working. But no, not really. I mean we went out the weekend before. I knew a week or two before I left that I was leaving. Why do you keep tapping your phone? EC: How did your service experience affect your life? RC: How did my service experience affect my life? I dunno. It made be a little bit more disciplined than I was. More mature, I dunno. EC: Did your military experience influence your views on war or the military, United States military? RC: I mean, obviously yes. EC: How so? How is it different before you got there from leaving? RC: Uh, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know that my views, I mean my views have changed because obviously I've gotten older, and I paid a little bit more attention to geopolitical things. But I'm still somewhat a fan of war, if war is used properly. I didn't realize what war was before I went in, what combat, and I still don't know combat is, obviously, because I've never seen combat. But I've gotta think I have a different take on what combat would be like now, as opposed to prior to going in. It was a little bit more glorified prior to going in than it would be now. EC: Glorified how? RC: You know, patriotic, rah rah rah, Uncle Sam type shit. Whereas it's not that. EC: What is it? RC: I think it's a tool that the government uses now, that I didn't really realize before, you know what I mean? You're just oblivious to the fact that it's just a lot of propaganda being thrown at you, but, I dunno, it's a hard question to answer. 18  EC: So when you say you're a fan of war, if war is used properly... RC: Yes. EC: What does that mean? Under what circumstance? RC: Well I mean obviously like World War II was a justifiable war, when you say we had to stop fascism, and then obviously it's, we don't have that anymore. EC: Necessary wars? RC: Yes, we don't have proper justification for using military forces anymore. We really don't. The First Gulf War, you could say we did because Iraq invaded Kuwait, but we kind of forced his hand into doing that with the sanctions that we imposed on him before the Iran-Iraq War. But in the same term we gave him all the weapons of war, so it's a bit of a conundrum that you get yourself into, you know what I mean? It's just a mess. But you can't let other countries go invading other countries, but like Russia right now is invading Crimea, and we didn't stop that, so. That's really no different than the First Gulf War, except they're a big superpower, and we don't want to do that. EC: So you think the last justifiable war was World War II? RC: Uh, yeah, I mean unless something else happens, you know, I don't know, I don't know. We'll see if we get another four years of Trump, good chance we'll have to defend ourselves against somebody, 'cause he's such a terrible person. That'll be justified if another country attacks us, but yeah. We're the ones committing atrocities today, so, we're okay until somebody decides we're not. Nobody spends the money we spend on defense, so, that'll be a bit of a stupid thing for anybody else to do. EC: Okay. RC: Okay, that's the end of the conversation. 19 
MadisonCounty;John Cunningham;1948;2018;John Cunningham  1948 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois John Cunningham Oral History Interview Stephen Hansen, Interviewer January 24, 2018 Steve Hansen (SH): This is Steve Hansen, I'm ah, talking with John Cunningham today is January the ah 24th of 2018. Ah, John thank you for agreeing to the interview and maybe we can just start by talking about your background a little bit. When were you born? Where did you grow up... John Cunningham (JC): Mm-hmm SH: ...and some of your experiences of growing up? JC: I was in born in Columbus, Mississippi on August 4th, 1948. And um, I did a few years of my early childhood there went one summer in Oakland, Alabama when my parents had ah, gone North seeking work the plant in Mississippi the Moss Type plant where my father worked and we lived in those houses around the plant closed down, they decided to go North and left us with his aunt in Oakland, Alabama and we stayed there, and then when they found work, after several months of a year they came back and got us and brought us to St. Louis, we stayed. SH: Excuse me, do you remember roughly when that was? JC: It's all pre-school I wasn't in school, so SH: Okay JC: So it's somewhere between the time a fella goes to school, I started my schooling in East St. Louis, so all of this happened before ah... SH: So it would have happened before 1952? 1953? then? JC: mmmhmm that's right! And uh, and we moved to a place called Rush City right outside of East Saint Louis, um, you wanna know what I remember about the South? When I was little? You might find this irregular, but one of the things that stand out in my mind was I had a cousin he was in his 20s, very muscular guy and one day I was in the backyard and you know they used to have clotheslines and sometime they strung wire for the clothesline rather than rope. Well we would, somehow I was in the yard and I look up and see him draped across the clothesline. He was bleeding cause he had been cut and so we ran in the house and I remember this very vivid, screaming and hollering and they got him down and they and they asked we asked what happened and eventually our parents told us that a white man had cut him and so - it didn't make sense to me. ‘Cause I knew the white man, he had crutches so, we trying to figure out how this big strong guy could get cut by this white man and so finally they told us that he had been gambling playing dice he was accused of cheating and other men held him down while the cripple man cut him with a razor. So, that's one of my vivid memories from Mississippi as a child, you know? 1  Um, but you know, that's that stood out and then of course in Oakland, Alabama I lived on a farm my father's aunt and uncles farm and so I got a taste of farm life there. Saw ‘em kill chickens, cut their heads off, wring their necks stuff like that. Um, so, Rush City, it was like going back in time while we were in Mississippi living in those I just call them row houses, outside the plant they had running water, bathrooms and stuff like that when we got in Rush City, there was no toilet in the house they had a outhouse there was no water in the house there was no electricity in the house so we went back in time. We had ah, lamps, kerosene lamps for light, um, a wood burning stove to cook and heat the house with, and you have to a have a night soil pot if you used the bathroom at night and of course in the cold of winter you didn't want to go out there. And I had not been exposed to that type of living before it was a completely cultural shock. Then we went to Washington Elementary School you could catch a bus or you could walk across the railroad tracks or hop a train to get over there [laughs] um, but I was educated in the East Saint Louis school system all the way up until 12th grade and I went to I had one white teacher during my entire education in the classroom that was I started out in Washington School then I went to Webster School - these are elementary schools, and then at Webster it's in the third grade where I had my first white instructor and then I finished my elementary years at um, Franklin Elementary School and went on to Hughes Quinn and then Lincoln High School which is pretty closed now in East Saint Louis. SH: What were the schools segregated? JC: Webster was the only integrated school that I attended. SH: So Lincoln High School was ah, you would have graduated what? 66? JC: 66. It was at that time that ah, segregated. They divided the city you lived on the south side of ah, one of the streets eventually they let some of us go to ah, East St. Louis Senior High School, and others but when I started at Lincoln it was segregated. SH: So East Saint Louis was a bustling city in the 60s and the 50s and the 60s? JC: It was on the decline. SH: It was already on the decline? JC: Yeah, the um, there the businesses the stock markets and all that stuff were still there but the hiring was starting to decline a little bit so the stock markets and all that stuff was still there but African American employment was starting to decrease um from what I understand from what I know about it. Um, I remember when I was a I came home my first year from college looking for a job in the summer at SIU Carbondale and my girlfriend was um, a senior in high school and we both applied for jobs at the packinghouse at the same time took our physicals and she got hired but I didn't. And it just messed with my mind a little bit, I'm a guy, we were both looking for summer work, um, but then of course they were trying to I guess hire a minority and a females fit more than one category of minority ah, race and then gender when they hire a female. So she's making money and I'm not. [laughs] Very frustrating but I made it. SH: Did you finish your degree at Carbondale? 2  JC: Yes. SH: What was it like in Carbondale in the 60s? JC: Well we had one of the largest African American populations on a major university at that time, and so, for a lot of guys that could have been a little culture shock but I had - I was in the Boy Scouts and I had been the only black at Senior Patrol Leader Training one year so being around or working with white people and we see ‘em at camp a lot and of course we see ‘em in athletics um, it didn't set me back but Carbondale was known for being a party campus. And Delyte Morris was President at that time. And there was a lot of activism going on on campus. You might recall the riots occurred while uh, I was there and they closed down the university. It was pretty rough if the - many of the African Americans were not involved in the issues that the students were protesting against and we didn't understand least I didn't the severity of what was going on on campus. And so, once they passed these rules about how many people could congregate and stuff you know they had rules could no more than 5 people congregate or they would intervene, um, so, when the rioting started, not being attached to it you would see a crowd rushing towards you and you say, well I'm not in this, so you keep going in the direction that you want to go - you think you're going to class, but behind the crowd are the authorities and they don't know you from anybody else. And a lot of my friends got struck by the police and so forth and they would course we would meet and they would tell us I'm not even in it. Because we really didn't know what the issue was. Eventually, you know, we found out that ah, SIU Carbondale had an office where they were training Vietnamese to go back you know it was called a Vietnamese Study Office they were going back to Vietnam and the students felt that America was taken advantage of the Vietnamese population by sending these people back to the country, so, but that's what was going on, and National Guard came in, state police came in, I got tear gassed, you know they just come into your - I lived off campus, they came into my um, apartment area we lived in trailer homes, the state police said it's curfew time go into your apartment, trailer, or whatever, and then they said it, and afterwards they just start throwing tear gas, none provoked them, but that's what they did and so you know if you know anything about tear gas it leaves a residue so a couple of weeks after they have gassed us you touch the counter in the house and then rub your eye you know get burned so, that was just one era of Carbondale other than all the parties I went to and ah learning how to study for college I majored in Math Education and minored in Physics. And there were only 3 blacks in the Math Department. So when we got ready to storm to form a study group there were 3 of us sitting there and ah we managed the best we could um, on our own. The other kids didn't want us to be in their study group probably because they didn't think we had anything to offer, you know, but that's just the way it was at that time. Some of them were meeting blacks for the first time, as well they came from communities where there weren't blacks and some of us came from communities where we didn't interact academically with whites and um, there was no anger we got along well, it wasn't didn't anybody do anything to you, but that's just how everybody was living at that time. It was okay for me I lived in an integrated dorm and eventually, you get your own place because you want to do that. SH: So how did it make you what was your perception you talked about with the rioting and you weren't participating but you were still swept up into it? How did that make you feel? JC: Frightened. Because you realize you could be ah, could be hurt and you don't know where the um, rioting is going to take place you have no idea you could just be walking and then all of a sudden something would break out and as you know um, you go to Carbondale campus they build some 3  buildings down there that's supposed to stop rioting with all that crazy design I was on campus when Old Main burned down you know one of the traditional buildings at Carbondale, but I found out a lot of our problem was we didn't know the issues and we weren't informed. We were there for our education and really didn't understand the dynamics of college. Least I didn't why the uh students didn't want Delyte Morris to be President. Eventually, it became obvious why some of them objected him to being president you might remember he built the uh the house for the President. He had heated driveways, and the students just felt that was inappropriate use of funds and that he was taking advantage of his office and living like royalty so they just kept protesting him. Also, what the university did that I thought was unfair I told you if there is some students rioting I just use that word because we didn’t' think we were rioting, in front of the university center there was a big glass window. We had no idea that they had a camera up there. So if you were just there standing around in a group talking, they were taking pictures and they were IDing students who they saw in a group and they were accusing you of being a part of the people that were activists and doing these things and you could get ah, disciplined on campus so it was rough time on campus. SH: When you were on campus did you did the African American students form communities through fraternities and other associations? JC: All of that was there. Fraternities, sororities, very I didn't join one first of all I went through a couple of smokers, uh, I'm ah more of ah individual. This is what is what I felt, now you might say that this is a bunch of malarkey, at the time when African American minds are ripe for learning, we polarize ourselves in these fraternities and sororities. And so we started alienating each other when we should have been coming together. So these groups I never understood em. They always tried to sell me the bill of goods about the Pan-Hellenic Council, they come together but I never saw it. I never saw the service that I thought they should be giving to the college community. Now that's my opinion of course. Ah, so and I wasn't attracted to them, and plus I didn't have the money they wanted in order for you so that might be another reason. SH: How is it that you um, when I grew up, my parents were exactly the same age, I was born in 1948 as well, graduated high school in ‘66, but my parents always told me I was going to go college, in retrospect, I don't think I ever had a choice, ah was that the case growing up in your family - or do you remember making a conscious choice of oh I'm going to go to college. JC: Actually, I had a girlfriend who was adamant about me going to college, um, so someone has to be the motivating factor, it was not family because ah, I had a sister that had who's a nurse who had gone to college so I knew about college, I would go, but I didn't have a burning desire to go. But after you know, friendship motivated me to go ahead and then my best friend went and we were trying to be roommates so, and then I admired my two high school teachers. My math teacher, and my physics teacher, so they made a big impression on my life and ah, I was in an honors society and of course all those kids in those type of organizations tracked I was on track team people expect you you know in our community to do something with your life so I had all these forces pushing me. And I was a little tentative but I stepped out you know after their encouragement. SH: What do you - looking back on it, what were the forces that um, that shaped your life do you think as a child and family, church, what institutions ah do you think had the greatest influence on you in the 4  community? JC: Church and Boy Scouts. I was - I believed the Scout Oath. I believed the Scout Law. I'm still a Scouter. [laughs] Right now. I'm on the council, executive council I've been ah Assistant Cub Master, Cub Master and Scout Master and Boy Scout and growing up I had a unique opportunity to my good friend's father was a minister so they had to go to church. He knew our parents he was a minister so they go through the week. Well, I didn't have to to go but I went. And I listened, I had a different perspective than him. They were being forced to go I was choosing to go. So I listened how they griped about it. And my father died when I was 12 so I got to see how they felt about their father managing the family and I listened to all that things they said but I felt good about having something to do, being with someone and then my friend's fathers, whenever there was an event like a father son dinner one of those men would come up to me and say - don't worry you mine today. So, I believed um, in the Bible, you know, and a lot of the stories made sense to me, uh, course I when you go to college everything gets challenged if you're not careful the ideas on campus can cause you to go astray or take a different path maybe for a while for some people other people get lost I heard all, I heard God was dead, I heard God created the world and left, um, my one of my favorite professors was Professor Ship philosophy professor and you know they take you through all those hedonism, externalism, I listened and all that, some of it sounded good some of it didn't. So, and I liked philosophy you know although I was a mathematician so you know the it's a side of you if you a mathematician and a scientist that believed in cause and effect you look for it but eventually you discover you can't find it in everything um, that's called faith. SH: Was um, we're both Baby Boomers and we both we grew up in America that was expanding economically and [clears throat] excuse me, socially and do you feel like um, that like you were part of that American Dream of of of of upward mobility? JC: Not for a long time I didn't. I graduated from college with a degree, education degree. So when I got ready, now I did my student teaching in Belleville, um, I was one of the first blacks to come into Belleville School District and do student teaching. To my knowledge, and um, I had a great ah teacher to work with me. John, um, lemme see, Mr. Wademiller - John Wademiller, and um, he kinda shielded me from a lot of the um, insensitivity that was there I had a - I only saw the principal once my whole experience when I first arrived he wasn't personable at all. I just leave his name out of the conversation, I listened to ah going to the lounge and listen to them nasty jokes they try to tell em about black men this German man - I ignored it and I wouldn't comment on it I was taught not to do that. When I got it ready to put an application in Cahokia they told me they were not accepting applications, never heard of that before. Usually, you can put an application in anywhere for a job same thing up in Belleville where I had done my student teaching. Couldn't get an application from them and later on I got visited by the uh I didn't know even existed til IBI - Illinois Bureau of Investigation asking me is was I discriminated against or something like that in something they were doing and of course I had to say well, I never got the application, I never got an interview from these communities so you know I couldn't do that I went to work in East Saint Louis where I had grown up so I went back to my city that I grew up in and eventually got hired. SH: In teaching? JC: Yep. At my high school. 5  SH: At Lincoln? JC: Yep. [laughs] I was there for a year. SH: Explain about then, so you felt frustrated during these years but you said for a long time you didn't feel like you were part of the the American Dream? JC: No, it was, well, we are led to believe and I think it's true that this country, is probably the closest thing to Zion that you're going to get it right here on earth. America. Where all people regardless of their ideas, their race, you know all of the things that we discriminated when we look at someone or learn about that that really wouldn't matter, but I felt that it did. That the color of my skin. None they didn't know whether or not I was a good mathematician or what - but - how do you feel when none even give you an application to fill out to apply for a job. They could have given you the application and put it in file 33 and never called you but at least you got the paperwork, you know, I went back to where I came from and waited on an opportunity to get hired and I was welcomed and eventually start working and so, I was because of the subject matter everybody thought I was smart. [laughs] You teaching math they think you're smart. SH: When did you start your job in Lincoln High School? JC: 71. September of 71. Stayed there a year. SH: So you must have been ah, you avoided the draft cause you were in school and then you got a teaching deferment? JC: Course I got the deferment as long as I was in college, so I was called up when I was in college and I got my deferment because I was a student 1SA, and I was told when you graduate you may have to report. Then, the lottery came, and I lost that. [laughs] and my number came up in the lottery so just so happened fate would have it, I had an ulcer. So when I went to the ah draft board my doctor gave me my X-Rays I had a duodenal ulcer and so everything else was alright with me but they decided because I had the ulcer I didn't need to go to in, and I left running. [both laugh] and a lot of my friends had been drafted in St. Clair County and several of em died in Vietnam War. Ahm, we always felt but we didn't know that African Americans were being ah, more of us were being pulled than other races, we don't know, but that's what we believed. Bout the war. SH: Yeah, that was a special time for us um, I remember sitting around the radio listening to them draw the lottery numbers and everyone calculating their chances and I think all of us had friends or knew people who died in that action. JC: Somebody up there liked me. When my number came up I didn't have to go so that's what happened. I had my feelings about that but I didn't like the idea of being college educated and then having to go to the military and be a subservient perhaps to someone who wasn't. It just didn't set right with me, but I understood it you know that's the way it's set up. SH: So, in 71 you began teaching and um, kinda talk about your career then. 6  JC: Um, I have had one of the I think is a unique opportunity to return to the environment that educated you. So, I was lookin' cause I was right out college um, to the you know I would be embraced because of ah the training that I had by my people who had taught me uh, and then when I had - I didn't realize the principal made the schedule and I had all practicum I all practicum math classes that's high school arithmetic and um, I went back to the chairman and I said look um, fresh out of college I remember trigonometry, calculus, and all this stuff and so I said Kenny I look at this schedule it's very frustrating and he says well, whatchu wanna be? Jack of all trades and the master of none? you know he was saying I wanted a schedule with all these challenges but you know it's I didn't know the work world. The work world, low man on the totem pole, gets the bottom of the rung so I eventually convinced them to give me an Algebra class with all those high school arithmetic class. Then, the second semester, they in the district started subject area coordinators. So, the chairman of the math department who had been my high school teacher was promoted to a position they took him out of the classroom and I got those classes that I had been uh wanting to get. So I'd have first year the first semester I had all those arithmetic classes and then the second semester I got a good sprinkling of the type of subjects that I wanted to teach. Then the second year they did a reduction in staff, and I went to a junior high school, Clark Junior High School. Um, I carrying the physics and the math they gave me a split subject of science and math and I made the decision my own choice, cause of my mix with the staff and uh, I chose to take most of the science classes. General science, earth science, stuff like that. um, and that was that was ah a decision that affected my career in that school district. Eventually, I became chair of the science department the retiring chair came to me said he'd like me and he was going to recommend to the principal that I get his room which was a lab with gas and running water and all that stuff and so, I got that position at the school and I kept three science classes and two math classes so that I would have my vote would be in the science department eventually the assistant superintendent was looking for someone to be the science coordinator. She had been my high school English teacher, so she came in my room several times watching me teach. Um, before that, I had wanted to be the Dean of Students cause I was working with all the kids in the school, club, over the Student Council voted the most popular teacher by the kids, so when the position of Dean came up I didn't get it. The principal - I went to him because I was upset I'm putting in all this time I wasn't doing it for the job but when the job came up when I looked at the staff I felt I should have been first guy popped up in his your head but I wasn't. And he told me don't get upset, you just beginning your career, get your Masters, and your time will come. Well, I was angry but I took his advice, and when I had got that Masters in Administration and Supervision when the lady came looking for a Science Coordinator, one of the qualifications was to have a Masters in Ad you know so that you could evaluate staff and it wasn't but a couple of people in the science department that had their administrative certification his - if I had gotten that Dean's job, I might not have gone back to college as quick and gotten my masters, so you know, sometime you have to listen and get the good out of what people saying to you. SH: When um, when and where did you get your masters? JC: 1976 SIU Edwardsville. SH: And, what was the trajectory of your career then after, after you got your masters? JC: I start teaching in 71, got my masters in 76, and 78 I was a science coordinator in East Saint Louis and I had the option of staying in the classroom or coming out of the classroom part of the day. So I 7  decided to stay partly in the classroom cause I still I was trained in teaching the gifted and I liked the gifted classes although I would take some that weren't in my career. Now, it became frustrating because from I get promoted in 78 and all the positions that came open between 78 and 94 I was never interviewed by the East Saint Louis uh, HR. I was in the building, my I had an office a desk and everything space - office space in the central administration I'd hear about vacancies so one day I went to the secretary, I put my resume together and I gave it to her and said I wanted to see the Human Resource Director because there was a vacancy that I was interested in. The position was Principal of the Math and Science Academy and I felt that I had the credentials to do that job, and in my career, I had been at the same when the math coordinator retired, I had been both math and science coordinator I had done both jobs without additional pay so I set out there from 8:30 til about 12: something the secretary came out and just told me he's not gonna talk to you. And so, you know from that moment on, I realized there's no upward mobility. This was in the 80s about 86, 87 something like that I guess - I'm just guessing and then one day a friend of mine told me of an assistant high school position in Alton, and I had to make a decision if I would stay in East Saint Louis, or if I would take a chance and ah, interview for the job in Alton, and I did and I became Assistant High School Principal in Alton for 1 year the next year I became middle school principal, had my own principalship uh, next after 4 years, I got an opportunity in Alton to become human resource director, then after 4 years in human resources they decided they wanted to reduce the directors they chose to reduce human resources, which I told em who's gonna do it? They said the superintendent was going to run the human resource department I said it won't work, human resources is the most accessible position in the district, the superintendent is the least accessible so I don't know how you think he's going to do it. So it looks like I'm out of the central office, as fate would have it, um, one of the other directors had a health problem and he had to retire and I moved into that position and became Title I Director for 4 years, and then, I was asked to go back to um, Human Resources my last couple of years, so I did you know, 15 years in Alton and it was a very rewarding career. SH: Tell me about the changes that you witness in education over your career? How would you characterize those changes? JC: Um, the classroom used to be closed and teachers pretty much did what they wanted to do. Decided what to teach, and they the book but they taught what they wanted to. But that that changed everyone um, had to get on the same page that's one thing. So you begin to function better as a department, some of your ideas and things you like to do you had to give them up because content became important, passing these tests became important I felt they stifled the teacher's creativity because there are some things that people do well with students that impact on students and help em make a real decisions and a lot of that had to go cause we had to start following and taking these test which I didn't think did what people wanted them to do because I've been on state committees, and um, I remember one year when we gave the state test, we found the school that had the highest test score for that subject area, I've been on the committee to develop the test for some for certain subject areas so we went, sent a group out to see what this place was, and it had none of the characteristics that you thought should exist in order for the kids to it wasn't a hands on classroom, we don't know what he did so great to cause the kids to score so high on the test, so you couldn't emulate what he had done with the students and so eventually, this testing started driving education. I think it was pushing it in the wrong direction but, there are some things that education demanded that children be able to do. There was some legitimate concerns from employers that kids were coming out of high school, but yet when they come into the jobs they couldn't use cash registers and they were poor mathematicians, poor writers, um, that's true that was true. Um, but now I 8  think it's just out of hand. And unfortunately, they took physical education um, we lost a lot of that in the curriculum we lost the arts turn in the curriculum so, it doesn't make sense um, to try and push solely academics, but, because America has this unique system where communities control the education you do have kids coming through school with different exposure but they are meeting the workplace so they were trying to get some consistency um, with that. Illinois almost made a mistake of saying that students that employers could look at the test scores of the students in Illinois, and decide whether or not they were hirable so then we raised the issue you can't see the test scores from people that come from other states, so how you gonna discriminate against your own students? Um, based on the test? So they kinda dropped that. But remember it was the employers that thought this was a good idea as well to start all this testing and education. SH: Having spent your entire life mostly well, certainly your adult life in this area, how would you characterize the social and economic changes that have occurred that you have witnessed? The, everything from factories closing in East Saint Louis to factories in Alton to um, Edwardsville, Glen Carbon growing the shift in the population? What have you witnessed that strikes you? (45:23) JC: Probably the fact that um the purpose of public education is not associated with employability. You know if you go and all of the things that would make you employable, after high school education certain forces in our country try to prevent young people from receiving that type of training I mean it's you know, you go to college the first two years of just they just get preparing you to learn how to learn but you already have gone through that in high school so high schoolers used to be able to come out or drop out or people used to be able to come out and drop out of high school and find a job that gave me a good living um mostly males mostly Caucasian males ah, but then the education system didn't respond to that that faded back and we didn't push important things into education that prepared people to be employed but in and other jobs in those areas began to shrink so it's like a pyramid. The jobs at the bottom, the unskilled jobs started going away so then the semi-skilled group that above it it dropped down to that same level that the unskilled labor people were at. So it forced everybody couldn't figure out where all the jobs were and so they thought somebody else was taking a job, but they weren't it was automation, the jobs were leaving the country, and people weren't watching, but that's capitalism and now we're trying to blame somebody for it and it's just it's not possible anymore to have a high school education and think that that alone will enable you to have a good economic track in our country. So now we trying to blame somebody. People blame the education system, well they say that the private and parochial school now over the years I have remember ACT and SATs and all that I said if that was true, if the private schools were doing better than the public schools when the Post-Dispatch used to put out the student performance you should see the ah private and parochial school students at the top but you still see the public schools at the top so I would tell people if that's - you know look at it, don't not what you think but look at academic achievement in the public schools and in public institution. We have - we still had a problem that young people aren't prepared for school in many communities. America doesn't look at the effects of poverty and want to do anything about it. Poverty leads to unemployment leads to crime. Everybody wants the same thing ah same assets, same ahm you know things that make life good for them but we all don't make enough income to acquire those things so we do other things to acquire them. SH: When did you become involved in the NAACP? JC: In the 90s, I became at that time it was secretary of treasurer and eventually they split the two 9  positions so I've been in it in office been in it a member for years but I became an officer when I got here in Edwardsville and now I'm President this is my 4th year as President, my second two year term. SH: And, what kind of has African American man growing up in this area, what kinda challenges and frustrations have you dealt with? JC: Well, it - first of all people don't understand NAACP - National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. They think that because when I was young we were called "colored people" and I've gone through the transition African-American Afro-American, Black, Black-American, um, they think it's that people of color, Caucasians and other groups don't have any ah, won't receive any value from associating the average person on the person on the street thinking say - black organization that's true cause you make it that. Now we have - there have been years when majority of our members not so now were Caucasian they would pay the dues but they wouldn't come to the meetings they wanted to see the organization's successful. And of course, a lot of the financial support you get is from people who have it together and a lot of times that's Caucasian organizations run by Caucasian men and women although we do have African Americans that support the NAACP with their funds too. And matter fact they start ahm, strangely enough, the organization people don't look at it as being powerful although it is um, we do things we advocate you might say well what the heck does that mean? I'll give an example. There's a lady who was in the senior citizen home who was about to be put out because she violated one of their policies. So who does she call? NAACP? And we have to go in there and advocate for her you know, and try to get them to understand what has happened to her, why she might have did what she did, but the truth of the matter is she needs a place to stay. So we end up, we do stuff like that. Then all these criminal cases that go on around here even the issues that come up on campus we call the Chancellor's let em know we're available. We try to put you know we say we'd rather work with you then to be around here trying to disturb something. We've been welcomed by Dr. Brown and you at the time and by ah Dr. Pembrook. So we try to interact but we try to stay back we do voter registration several of our members are deputy registrars and ah election work the polls, we purposely advocate and ask people to take on those roles. Um, let's just from the perspective of what's challenging us now, we have never gotten past the nightmare of race it's part of who we are as humans as we look at each other and discriminate and decide who we wanna associate with. And we still carry a lot of myths about people what they thinkin but they haven't even asked em, but you know we have our own biases and so the NAACP is trying to work through that and with people on both sides of the table that understand that other than what you can physically see about a person. Skin, hair, eyes, things like that all the other parts are interchangeable. The intellect has - doesn't stop because it's a brown head, there African Americans who have done things in all areas of academia successfully but people don't sometimes know these people exist you had an astronaut come here May Jemison and having another one come um, Dr. Buford. But you know people still have all these ideas and disenfranchisement is occurring with the vote through you know the political parties have gotten so polarized they've lost their minds, they've gerrymandered in order to stay in office doesn't matter what the population looks like um, we are going through another period. I didn't live I wasn't conscious of McCarthyism, you can read about it our country is taking a step backwards and um, I think if I was to say something about it I would say um white America is frighten um, because the opportunities that they think they should have are no longer there. Base on how they present themselves in the country, so we're making all the classic errors that you read about I guess you could say that Germany did, you know, they found somebody to blame for what was happening to the country. So how do I feel about it? What do I tell the people as President of the NAACP? I say don't be the seed everybody knows the 10  history of building walls. They don't keep anything out. That's a false sense. You can look at the wall around China, you can look at the wall they put up in Israel, um, it's crazy that a group of people would want to build a wall, they wouldn't want to pay the same dollars for insurance for the citizens in the country. But what we think is going to happen - I do - once they get the wall up, and they say they gonna keep people out, they gonna do like Germany did and they gonna look internally and start pointing at groups and blaming them and trying to disassociate and trying to prevent them from having any opportunity. You know, this is this is madness that America is in a situation where you either gonna have to decide if you're going to be white and evangelical or if you're going to be multicultural and multi- racial, multi-religion, and it looks like right now we're going towards ah white and evangelical and they don't even know what that mean. So, when we meet now in the NAACP we're trying to do things that touch all phases of this community, you know we work with Edwardsville School District we try to give education grants to both Caucasian and other minorities we just don't give out funds to minorities which people think we would but we know we have a choice to do that we want to promote your own as well but we can't say we one thing then do another. So, we're challenged too. Does anything I said make sense? [laughs] SH: It does. It does to me anyway. And um, when - I guess what I'm trying to one of the things I'd like to get your perspective on is um, whether or not um what kind of challenges you personally faced as a black man in developing in this region your career and as an adult? Um. And not just the challenges but also I think the perspective on the African American community in this region? Um, what's the glue that holds it together? How does it survive against this majority that surrounds it? JC: Well, for me, you know I told you when I was first looked around we were called colored. Then we went through identity crisis but the people around me the decisions I made at first my head was kinda low then eventually I listened and I began to believe I'm black and I'm proud and then I raised my head up. Well when you raise your head up you can see a lot more then when you walk around with your head kinda down. So you have to find self-pride. Um, that's what we try to help people to understand. But strangely enough, I don't know enough about the forces that keep people in poverty. People tell you it's education you get a good education then you can compete but if you listen to what I said that's not always true. If no one would give you an opportunity to have a job and so, we keep encouraging people to put their children in daycare rather than keeping them at home so that they would be able to function because everybody doesn't listen. We have um, we try to have and have had become in the past in some of our meetings we've brought in the employers from down here at the job site where Amazon is and all those guys telling people if you want to learn how to get a job here is this opportunity. Well if you advertise it, Facebook and everywhere else in the newspaper but when people who come in there's not enough of the people that you want to touch in the room. You know the people that are in there are folk already working. So, we're people who get locked into poverty and I keep talking about poverty it's hard to get em out of it. It's a lifestyle of it own. If you listen to the news, sometimes I wonder do white people die? Cause you don't hear about the crimes and stuff that they're committing they're doing it you can find it in the newspaper but it's sensational black crime is sensationalized on the news media and you'd believe that's all so when you getting all these negative messages about yourself not saying they're not true but there's not a good balance even in the news. So there are still people who are first-generation college students we have programs that we try to encourage the kids to get into make their life better because we still believe that you're better off being educated and trying to survive in this world if you don't. But people want the same thing and they don't want to go down the same avenue to get it and so they will try 11  to take yours if they haven't gotten theirs ah I lived in East Saint Louis for several years but I became you know victim of crime, my home broken into, we put bars up on the house which made me very uncomfortable because now my home look like a jail which I was trying to stay out of, no bars on the doors no windows around the air conditioning and then services I'm start raising children, and I wanted access to services and they weren't in that community and they aren't in the community in poverty either. Edwardsville, the city of Edwardsville there aren't um, a lot of low-income housing and if education is one of the basic factors for a person becoming upwardly mobile in this country and in its taught it that Edwardsville has one of the best education system in the area. But it doesn't have room for some of the people who the education system could help come up out of poverty because they don't have the housing for em. So that's very ah, it's difficult for me to I've talked to people about it, you know what does the city want to do? Where can the poor people live? There just isn't a lot of place for it and of course remember that's the idea. Education is important [beeps in background] and so people tell you that, they must believe it. And if you look for it where can you find it? And then my sons taught here in the Edwardsville School District and I met some of the kids and their idea of the kids in East Saint Louis, and I'm one of the kids from East Saint Louis it's negative. But they don’t realize they're doing the same thing going to the same places and having accomplishments. They look at their accomplishments differently than when they see the black kids in East Saint Louis. And then the black people have I just want to say this without um, maybe somebody might be offended. Doing well, living in homes with 2 and 3 cars, got good jobs, incomes over $100,000 dollars but we're not stakeholders in the community. We isolate ourselves we're not on important communities we may not even we'd be sending our kids to school but we've many times don't go with them. Pursuing careers and trying to get stuff but it's equally important that a person invests in their community ah be on PTO's PTA's at the schools. Get on boards, become active, and um, you know, I've ran into this that sometimes the establishment or whites who are in power recognize a few blacks that they think have something to offer and every time they need somebody to be on a board or fill a position, they go to these small group of blacks. And then if that person is not available, then they psychologically believe they have satisfied involving a minority. And then the black person who was asked and turned it down feels some type of I dunno what you call it, gratification that they were asked and weren't able to do it. So what did I do? I've been trying to tell the white people that are looking for black people to be involved I see what you're doing you're going to the same old don't come to me every time, you know I'm not going to be on every board cause I'm President of the NAACP but I want you to - I'll say if you're earnestly looking for somebody a minority to be a part of what you're doing then you ought not stop and ought you oughta recognize you're going to the same people. You're going to the same people. That's just how things work. And then, I told the blacks if you were asked and you can't do it and sometime you honestly can't then you oughta have someone else that you can refer the person who's seeking someone and then I've tried to encourage blacks to become more involved in politics um, voter turnout is depressing sometime in the African Ame - you know when we look at population and what we do at the polls we told it isn't as well as it should be. SH: Sorry JC: It's alright. Um, it's a challenge, um, we work with the ah police in the area I'm on the Madison County coalition we've seen minority hiring. When I say minority hiring we're not just talking about blacks we're talking about females, we're talking about bi-lingual Hispanic people because some of the communities are around here better off when they realize it that they need to look at minority employees and this university has been doing a good job recently and realizing they need to have some minorities on 12  its staff, police force and things like that we talk to these people and they attempt to respond and we talk to some of the police chiefs and mayors in the area and they are responding with opening doors for people but the problem is and always will be, you have to make a concerted effort to get a good mix of different people in whatever you doing. It just don't happen you know. So, it's all kinda things that challenge you in the NAACP. SH: Is there anything you'd like to talk about that we didn't cover about your life or your career? JC: I think what bothers that I'd like to say that concerns me the most is when people reason that I keep getting up and getting involved, when people see injustice, people who you believe who are good people and they don't say anything about it. They don't challenge it. When the truth is not told when people allow it to continue to be the menu it's gonna cause a problem. Um, I don't want to I've walked down the road when um, I've seen the you're now entering KKK County, I've seen been told that you have to be out of town or out of sight in town after dark in the surrounding - you know they call them Sundown Towns Sun-Down Towns. They exist in this community you know, I've been exposed to ah, universities in the area that the kids that come to the university have not had any involvement in their education with minorities it just everybody doesn't think of America like that but we still have these pockets. I hate for us to go down the same road that we um have come up looks like we're going backwards in society. People won’t admit and now we're seeing it that some people were very unhappy when the Civil Rights bill was passed. We're seeing legislators trying to pass laws to take away voting and make voting difficult in our country when we send troops over in the other countries and try and liberate people and these people believed that voting for a democratic government is going to give them a better way of life and we're over here in this country taking that right in any way we can from our own citizens it's frustrating. To wonder why these people would want to do this um, and so that's why I get involved and that's why I'm voter registration, that's why I'm at the polls I got my assignment to be at the election doing the election but a lot of people want to enjoy what's good about America but they don't want to work to keep it that way and they put it in other people's hands and they don't even realize sometime they're doing it. It's just I don't know where we're going to end up because the millennials are more they integrate among each other than any other group. They love each other they have mixed marriages and all these things that many of these other groups are still fighting against so the country is evolving even though you've got people pulling one way and people pulling the other way the kids are walking right down the middle and then I want to say this. If it weren't for women, we would have more problems than we've got. Now a lot of the legislatures are men and you see how they are they refuse to work with President Obama and did all these nasty tactics and Congress and whenever the Democrats tried to do the same thing they did they call foul. So I don't know what motivated these men not to see the country move forward, I don't know why the ah Congress on Obama didn't get the infrastructure done and now now that ah Trump is president they aren't even talking about rebuilding the infrastructure and that seemed to be something that they all should be able to agree on. Most Americans, most voters are not informed about the candidates that are running for office. That's a shame. That's just the way that we've letting the vote um, not be as important as it was when the African Americans talk about people who died to get the right to vote and then many of us don't vote and then the other group is trying to prevent everybody except the folk they want from voting so it's unbelievable that in 2018 we're fighting the same old battles just don't know what to do about it. SH: Well very good. Thank you I appreciate you giving me the time. Who else do you think I should interview? Should I talk with? To get the history of Madison County? 13  JC: Well, if you want a know about some people that grew up in this kinda remember, I'm both St. Clair and Madison uh, there's Dr. Carl Jason, there's Herman Shaw, Carl Jason Sr., Herman Shaw, these are African Americans. Herman is a President of the Lincoln School Alumni Foundation you know the group that advocated to keep the uh site over here where Mannie Jackson Center is. Mm-hmm SH: Okay JC: So they grew up in Edwardsville, and they went through the period where you had to go away to go to high school. I know Dr. Jason did, he went to Lincoln um in Missouri, that's where he had to go to Jeff City for his education. SH: Is he ah Amal Jason’s...? JC: Brother SH: Brother JC: Mm SH: I knew Amal pretty well JC: He was one of my mentors SH: Was he? JC: Worked with me, yeah. He helped do some staff development. 14 
MadisonCounty;Thom Swain;1958;2016;Thom Swain 1958 - 2016  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Thom Swain Oral History Interview Brendon Floyd, Interviewer Edwardsville, Illinois October 14, 2016 Brendon Floyd (BF): Hi, this is Brendon Floyd, I am interviewing Thom Swain about, uh, his musical experience here in Madison County. Um, so to start off, ah, as a teenager, growing up in the area, I know you did not grow up in Madison County, but growing up in the area you got involved with music at a very early age  fourteen. Thom Swain (TS): Right, yeah I was about fourteen years old. BF: Can you expand on what got you into that, did you have an older brother who was influencing you? Did you start going to shows at a young age? What? TS: Well, I loved music, I went nuts on music when, when the Beatles came around I was like seven years old and was a fanatic at seven years old. I was outside of Busch Stadium. We were poor people so I couldn't go to the show. But I stood out in the rain outside of Busch Stadium and listened to everybody scream and, uh, you know, later on, I just loved music and had zero talent. [laughing] BF: Ok TS: I tried to sing before and, at my best, I would have been below average, and I loved music too much to do that to it so. BF: So yeah, so you mentioned that, so you got into the behind the scenes? TS: Yeah BF: Now how did that work out? You became a bouncer working at clubs, and you just got interested? TS: Oh yeah, later on, when I was, you know, in my late teens, early twenties, I worked as a, well I started working at concerts in St. Louis for Contemporary and Panther Productions. I worked security down there and started just watching out, the goings ons of the music business and it really just interested me a lot and, um... BF: Ok TS: I just really enjoyed it and started in clubs, you know, just clubs I hung out at listening to music and I was always in Illinois, over here in Madison County, Alton, um, you know, just all over the whole area over here. There was a lot, a lot of clubs, Edwardsville, later on, owned a club there and it was just 1  interesting, you know, it was, it's always a, uh, it was kind of wild back then but the whole workings of I just loved. The effect music has on people and BF: So there was a very vibrant music scene here in Madison County, TS: Oh yeah BF: In the sixties and seventies? TS: Yeah, up through the nineties. Uh the live music scene in St. Louis was a lot better than in other cities, like Minneapolis use to be real strong. I had more Minneapolis bands playing down here, it was they had a, uh, a big hair factory up there or something and spandex and they would send them all down here, and uh, cause we had such, so many venues to work with that were open during the week and not just Saturday night places. So... BF: And so did that start teetering off...towards the nineties? TS: Yeah, yeah, the drunk driving laws I think had the biggest effect on the large clubs because the large, the larger clubs, like Stages, and Fat Cats, and, ah, Grannies, places like that, depended on people coming, you know, they depended a lot on the St. Louis crowd also, along with Madison County. BF: So that's interesting, the drinking laws, you think... TS: Yeah, it was... BF: Correlated? TS: It got real politically correct to bust drunk drivers coming out of night clubs because, you know, they knew those people couldn’t, couldn’t argue much. When they come out of there, they know they have had too much fun and the police would, ah, would sit on the side of the road and especially look for Missouri plates and pull them over. BF: Oh, wow... TS: Because even though we loved coming over here, I don't think the, the law enforcement loved the St Louis people coming over here. BF: Now there was a lower drinking age here? TS: Yeah there was nineteen when I was nineteen, at which, of course, didn't really mean anything cause, [laughing], Illinois was also famous for, um, door people with bad eyes that couldn't read driver license real well. BF: So it was almost a free for all? TS: Yeah, if you had three dollars in your hand you were usually old enough. 2  BF: So that, um, so let's go right into the Fat Cats thing, at twenty-five, you opened a club, here in Edwardsville, called Fats Cats. Um, why did you see a need for a local club here in Edwardsville? TS: Well, actually I got involved with it just, um, a few months after it opened. Well, I got involved when it opened, I ran into some old friends of mine that know me from back in seventy-eight when I worked in a place called Rico’s in Granite City. Which was a, it was a, very popular club, big club, real, kind of rough, rock and roll club... BF: Ok TS: and, um, I was a bouncer... BF: Like a little punk in there? TS: No, no, they were just, it was, back in those days they would have, like on Wednesdays and Sundays, we had beer blast, was they called it. And it would be three dollars and fifty cents to get into the door for the beer you could, all the draft beer you could drink. BF: Wow TS: So, you know, obviously a lot of bozos showed up, and it was, they had need for people like me to help get them out there, and... BF: And how old were you when you were doing this? TS: I was, let's see when I actually started working in there I was probably twenty-one. BF: Ok TS: About twenty-one, I guess. And, uh, worked there for a couple of years and got married and thought "oh, I need to get out of this," and quit doing it and then these guys tracked me down and, uh, I was working for Madison County at the time as a supervisor for tax assessors in Madison County. BF: That is quite a change in, uh, [laughing] in careers TS: Yeah, it was a, yeah, you know I was in charge of the guys that went around and did the assessments, and it was a, during the time I was there, there was a lot of investigations going on and news channels chasing us and all that stuff. It was kind of exciting and when I ran into these guys we were at the courthouse filing papers for their liquor licenses and stuff. They, they talked me into coming to work for them and, uh, I was working at a little bar in Granite City, and I was working a second job to help pay for my kid cause my wife was pregnant and we didn't have health insurance. So, back in those days you, you know, it was a good idea to pay the kid off before they were born. And, so I was working in a place, I somehow convinced my wife, at the time, that it would be just the same thing if I went to Edwardsville and helped them work the door and was a bouncer there. And after two or three months the two partners, um, split ways and I took over the one guy’s, that I use, that was a friend of mine, that got me in there. I took over his part of it. 3  BF: Ok TS: and, um, that was kind of a hard sell to my wife when I came home at about four o'clock in the morning half-drunk once and said uh: "hey guess what we bought?" [laughing] BF: So, that must have been kind of exciting, though TS: (7:02) Oh, yeah, for, and it was, um, it was, exciting, crazy, dangerous, for a twenty-five-year-old guy to own a rock, a part of a rock and roll club and to be running it. It was, um, yeah, my poor first wife, she, um, [chuckles] she would have probably have liked to burn the place down and should have, with me in it. But, um, yeah, it was, it was, really cool and we worked at that club, we worked with the bands a lot and we, we encouraged bands to do original music which, you know, nobody ever wants, wanted to do in the St. Louis area at the time. Most of the clubs wanted nothing but copied material. And we had the majority of ours was, but we also encouraged, we had a group, um, used to be out of St. Louis and they relocated New Orleans called The Sheiks which were real popular group back then and they would come in town and play at our club for three nights in a row and did nothing but originals and we packed the place every time they were there. And we had another, like a new wave band called Fool’s Face. And, um, quite a few, um, original groups that came in and actually did well. And we kind had a different way of working  we worked with the bands and we were strict with them, but we also treated them great. BF: Like what do you, what do mean, like what are some of the challenges you found working with bands of Fat Cats, like what do mean, strict? TS: Well, they, you know, they were real easy for them to have too much fun.[laughs] When you become a local rock star it’s, ah, you know, they party a lot, the drugs, alcohol, all that kind of stuff. And, um, you know, they would, they would try to you know, get away as much as they could, take breaks for forty-five minutes instead of a half-hour, um, you know, sometimes just do stupid stuff that bands do when, ah, and I was real strict, like I use to have a sign in the dressing room that said if you play, I forget what the songs were, Cocaine, My Sharona, and something else I would fine you fifty dollars. [laughs] It so a lot, it kind of became a joke. Somewhere out there I think there is a picture of that sign in the dressing room that had all my rules on it and all my fines on it. They didn't, so, but most of them knew, you know, they knew how we treated them. We treated like stars when they came, and we really took care of them, and in turn, I think we had, you know, a band would play there would do one of their better shows there. Just because of the vibe and the place and the way they were treated and, you know, they were treated well, paid well, and so, you know, they did a really good job. BF: Can you describe Fat Cats for me? In uh ... in the sense of, like what, what did the building look like? How many people could be there? Um, you guys took over for the Grannie? TS: (10:01) The Granary BF: The Granary, Ok TS: (10:03) Yes, yes, it was the Granary, and it was actually a granary at one time. 4  BF: Ok, ok TS: (10:06) It was an old granary that they had converted. It had a lot of different levels. You entered in the basement, and in the basement, we had a deli, down there, and then we had, like, video games. And then you went upstairs, was the room which had, let's see, one, two, three, four  four different levels up there and about five separate bars scattered around the place. BF: So this is large... TS: (10:31) Yep BF: This is very large... TS: (10:33) Yeah, it was a good size club, and our fire code was, I think, like five-fifty but serval times we had like fifteen hundred in there one night when we got shut down. BF: Wow TS: (10:44) We had Leslie West playing there, from Mountain... BF: Yeah, yeah, absolutely TS: (10:48) and, uh, we had cops, ah cars lined up and down one-fifty-nine. It used to be a little two-lane road, at the time, and we had cars lined up all the way down there and the, what was his name, Dickman, was the chief of police. Him and the fire-chef showed up and came in and started busting my chops about, "We know there are way too many people in here" and "what are you doing" and, you know, I said, "God, I just found it hard to turn people away", you know, I wanted to make money tonight. And just about had him calmed down and then my partner came down, who was a short guy with that Napoleon complex. And, uh, he, uh, they were just about ready to leave and then he walked out and "what the hell do you guys want" and he was a real smart ass guy. And, uh, he told them, he said, "well, if you notice, I got my shark coat on tonight" and as soon as he said that I just cringed cause I knew what was coming. He looked at him, and he said: "that so you can kiss my ass." And so, right then they said, "shut it down." We had to go up and stop Leslie West set about half way through his set and tell everybody they had to leave. So, we, fortunately, got everybody out without a riot. So it was, um, but we had put a lot of people in there. BF: Well, that leads me, leads me, what was the relationship with Fat Clubs with the overall community? Was the community excited to have you guys here? TS: (12:22) No, no, I don't think so, the neighbors were differently not excited, I felt sorry for them. We tried to patrol the parking lot as much as possible. But, like I said, it was the early eighties, people were just nuts, [laughs] and you know, after they come out of rock and roll club that neighbors complained like people sex in their yards, and urinating in their bushes, and... BF: Oh god. 5  TS: (12:42) and you know, a little party going on out there. So, I don't think a lot of the locals were real thrilled about us, the establishment. But we did contribute a lot of tax money cause, you know, a lot of money went through there. And, um, but the, you know, they also seen it. We had a large St. Louis crowd and they, you know, they were never crazy about all the St. Louis people coming over here to get stupid and, uh, you know... BF: I could, I could understand that... TS: (13:13) I don't blame them, I, uh, I completely understand and it was, uh, but we had a good relation, relationship with the police department most of the time. There was, um, Scott Evers, um, was a patrolman back then, he later became, I don't know how far he went in the department but pretty far. He just recently retired. And, there was him and gosh, I can't remember the other names but they had a real good relationship with us, and they knew we were, we would try and talk people out the door rather than beat them up and throw them out the door. Cause that's, at the Grainery they had a bunch of think neck wrestler, jocks in there and they liked to fight and beat people up. BF: What happened to the Granary? TS: (13:57) Uh, they just, they just ran their course and, you know, just started slowing down for em’ and I think he had probably made enough money to last him a long time. BF: Were they also a music venue? TS: (14:09) Yeah, yes they were, and they were real popular. I, as a matter of fact, it was funny, when I worked, during the time of the Granary was there was when I worked at Rico’s. And on Thursday nights we were dead and the Granary was packed so we would, the bouncers, we'd go out there and party and get in fights with the bouncers from Granary for entertainment. [laughs] So it was, um, pretty crazy. But they, um, yeah, I don't know what was the final straw with them, but I think Chuck Morris, the guy that owned it, I think he just had enough and, you know, he had it for quite a while, and it was a, it was a legend. The Granary was really a, it was of them biggest main night clubs in the whole St. Louis area. BF: Really? TS: (14:58) Yeah, it was really a real popular place. And, uh, you know, we, we wanted to get in on their, you know, their reputation and stuff. Well not on their reputation but their popularity. BF: Were they bringin’ in the same type of music as you? TS: (15:12) Yeah, yeah, a lot of the same, you know, in the music, music, business at that time, there would always be like five really hot bands, and you had have them. You know, to keep your, because back then people would travel long distances to follow a certain band which they just don't do that much anymore because of the drunk driving laws and all that. Which, which eventually put the end to Fat Cats. BF: Ok, and was it a smooth transition from the Granary into Fat Cats? TS: (15:45) Oh, yeah 6  BF: just one, kind of one week it was the Granary... TS: (15:49) No, they were closed for a little while, I don't how many months they closed before we took over but... BF: Why, and you guys picked Fat Cats as the name because? TS: (15:57) Yeah, they were, well um, my partner was sitting around, him and his wife and a couple of friends, probably enjoying some alcoholic beverages and things at the time and they had a cat called Fats. And, it was a giant cat, it was just an enormous cat, and they said something, the, um, Shari, Lou's wife said something about "You fat cat" and everybody went "Fat Cats" wow... [laughs] BF: That's it... [laughs] TS: (16:26) and they were, they were all over that, and, um, you know, it just stuck, and we came up with a very cool looking logo there that everybody liked and so that helps sell t-shirts and jackets and that kind of thing. BF: Absolutely, so, um, describe to me, um, what was one of your best memories of Fat Cats? What was something, when you think about it just pops into your brain? TS: (16:48) We use to have, um, these all day, we would have an anniversary party every year. Which the grand opening, we did on the same day as the grand opening, the first week of August. Every year we would do an anniversary thing, and we had Mama's Pride, which was a big act in the St. Louis area... BF: Mr. Liston, right? TS: (17:08) Yeah, Pat Liston and Danny Liston and I had been friends with them for a long time. They played there, a group, a country group, that was big back in the day when there was not really much country music going on, and there was a group called Aero-Memphis(?) and, um, they played. A group called Foustous(?) which was probably, probably the best cover band that has been in the St. Louis area. BF: And were they just randomly cover or they were decided to a certain band? TS: (17:41) No, they did everything, they did a lot of, a lot of stuff other people couldn't cover. They did Bohemian Rhapsody... BF: Wow TS: (17:49) which Queen does not even do live without taped vocals and stuff and they used to pull that song off... 7  BF: Wow, that is some talent TS: (17:57) that's a tough song to pull off and, um, you know, these guys, like I said, they were, it was Danny and Larry Hagley were the two brothers that started the band and they were just they did like David Bowe, Genesis, that type of music, A little more complicated than three cord, bang your head rock. And, um they were always giant draw. Giant Draw. BF: Ok, so they sell out every night, kind of... TS: (18:27) Uep, and then, same was with Mama's Pride and the other ones but when you put them all together, for an all day party, it was, it was, epic. BF: You guys did this once a year? TS: (18:36) Yeah, we did that once a year, and we just had, there were so many good times there, you know. We did a lot of, ah, we worked real close with the radio stations. We use to go over and make our own commercials, and they did a lot of KCD and KWK at the same time did a lot of big promotions with us and concerts. We had a group called the Zebra which was a big rock band in the early eighties and, um, the first venue in this place they every played was Fat Cats and they promoting their album and came in and about blew the doors off the place. BF: Um, what was one of um, your hardest memories at Fat Cats? What was one that kind of sticks out? TS: (19:24) God, just the, um, well the closing of it was probably the worst, the worst memory of it because it was you know it all kind of politically motivated. You know they just kept putting the thumb on us harder and harder with the drunk driving laws. Which I understand because it is a horrible thing and later on I had a taste of it personally, my ex-wife and two kids were hit by a drunk driver... BF: Oh, that's terrible, I am sorry... TS: (19:55) and we received really serious injuries and, um, son ended up dying over his mental issues from the accident. And so it's, you know, I understand the importance but they, they just kind of cherry picked certain places and picked on them, and you know... BF: Were you guys one of the larger... TS: (20:15) Yeah, we were one of the larger clubs in the area, and so we were a good target, you know, and I get it, but it was sad because we also, you know, we also did stuff for the community, did benefits and stuff like that, and when, you know, we wanted to show them that, you know, we may be crazy rock and rollers, but we still care you know. BF: You wanted to give back a little bit... TS: (20:38) Yeah 8  BF: Uh, so did that happen really fast, like they kind of started coming down on the law and within a month it was like... TS: (20:44) Yeah, it was about, it was about, probably about, a year. I guess it just started to get worse and worse and it was, people were just afraid to come there, you know. And so it just fizzled out and then we had a guy that was going to put some money into the club and become a partner and do some big promotions, and he was one of those that was dreaming, and you know, it never happened so when ended up having to shut down. BF: Oh, and today it is where the Plant Fitness is, right? No TS: (21:14) No, it is where quick trip is BF: Oh, where the Quick Trip is... TS: (21:17) Yeah, Yeah BF: Ok TS: (21:17) Yep, there use to be railroad tracks right there, by where, um, Lowes, or um, Home Depot is, there use to be railroad tracks that went through where, right about in the middle of that place I guess, and we were on the other side of the tracks. BF: Now I have to imagine that you guys were a big draw for the college, right? The college had been around at the point for about twenty or thirty years right? TS: (21:41) Yep, yes, we have a lot, we'd have, you know, special nights where they got in free with student I.D. and stuff like that BF: Did you pull a lot of musical talent from the campus? TS: (21:50) Um, not a whole lot really and I don't know why it was, you know, we were using, like everybody else, like I said, all the top groups and the in the St. Louis area and there just wasn’t much coming out there... BF: Ok TS: (22:07) You know, as far as rock bands in the area... BF: So, once Fat Cats closed because of the all the issues, uh, what, did you think about opening another club? Were you wanting to, where did you go from there? TS: (22:23) Well, we had talked about it, and we're going to do it, and then I think that we were both just really burnt out, probably on each other and the business. And I did nothing for about a year [laughs] cause the hours you work when got a night club is, it's just, just, you're there, it's all twenty-four seven, 9  you are always there, you are always working and, and I took off about a year and then a guy that I use to book bands through Ike Haislar, out of Collinsville, um, talked me into coming to work for him. BF: Ok TS: (22:57) And I started out, I was managing a group called USA, who were, there were guys out of some of the top bands around here, they had gotten together and, um, they were really talented but not real smart. And so, I got involved with them and said: "Hey, give me three or four months and see I can get your money up and if I do pay me." And, um, within about a month they started paying me and, um, they grew into it a really popular band. BF: Was that still under the umbrella of Haislar? TS: (23:31) Yes, yes they were working for Haislar and that how I kind of got, well actually, the first time I meet Ike, um, the booking agencies used to be really dishonest. And they would book like I was talking about earlier, Faustus was a great, great band, a great draw, they would book Faustus into three different clubs and then the week before they would call and say "oh, my god we just seen we messed this up we are going to have to move your date", and then that they way they could put one their crappy bands in there. BF: Oh, oh, so they snuck bands in that way, oh, that's sneaky, that, uh... TS: (24:08) and I went up there, I was ready to go punch them in the nose, and I went up there really pissed off and went in and within about twenty minutes we were friends and I left patting each other on the back and, I don't know how he did it, but he was a great bullshit artist and, um, he got me turned around, and we became really good friends and are still friends to this day. And, uh, so, it was interesting. BF: How long were you there for? TS: (24:35) I was with Ike for, I am thinking about two years. And, um, like I said, the thing, the dishonesty stuff that went on, I told them that has soon as I started, I said: "you can do this without lying to people, it can be done." And, it was funny cause there was three major agencies in St. Louis at the time. There was Buckman Productions, there was Haislar Productions, and then there was Contemporary which their local strand of their business was called Continental. And it was funny because everybody thought they were in competition, but every day all three of them were on conference calls all day talking about how they were going to screw somebody. And, um, I told them, I said, "I’m not doing this and it ain't going," and they laughed at me and they said, "Oh, you will get over that honest shit, don't worry you'll get over it." Well, I never did, and I left Ike's and started Swain Productions and pretty much ran all of them out of business. BF: Really? TS: (25:38) Yeah BF: So it was just the dishonesty of the business as far has taken advantage of venues... 10  TS: (25:43) Yeah, they took advantage of the venues and the bands. They decided who could play and who couldn't play and it was all, you know, too, a lot of the wrong motivations. And I just, being a club owner, I knew what that felt like from that side and then working with a band and managing a band I know what felt from their side too. And so, you know, it took a while to, cause these clubs were, it was just like my job now, I sell cars, and people look at you, and the first thing they think is, is this guy a crook. You know, right off the bat you are a crook. And that was the same way with the, with the booking agent. You know, they automatically classified you as dishonest and, but I would spend a lot of time with the club owners, going in there and hanging with them and just letting them know that I was on their side and, you know, that we could do this together and be successful, everybody could be more successful. It, you know, over a couple of years’ time I had the exclusive booking agreements with quite a few, you know, of the clubs all around the St. Louis area. And so it kind of got to be, you know, where if you wanted to, you wanted to play in St. Louis you had to, you know in the St. Louis area, Madison County area, you had to go through me cause I had most of the good clubs I was booking and, um, it was rough at first. You know, other agents got their feathers ruffled and didn't want to... BF: So they were not very happy that you went out and started this and that you were fomenting these relationships that, were they feeling like you were on their territory, you needed to get off? Or.... TS: (27:24) Yeah, I was a new comer that, you know, they didn't, they didn't care for what I was doing cause it was eliminating their bullshit and, uh, and, but it worked great, you know, it was, I enjoyed that so much because we, you know, everybody made money, everybody was happy, had some good times, and it was, we did a whole lot of benefits and stuff like that and gave back and just tried to prove to people that, you know, we are idiots, but we’re nice idiots. BF: So, what was, if you could say your mission statement for Swain Productions? What would that be? TS: (28:03) Well, just, just, honesty and have fun. It was always my, like right now, what I do with Swain Productions, I tell everybody, every band that I work with, I said: "If these isn't fun, I am not doing it." It just becomes a thing where I have to have a little pissing contest with you, see yeah. Cause I do this now cause I want to not because I have to. BF: Absolutely TS: (28:28) And so it's, ah, it's kind of one of those things where, you know, and for the most part it works great, you know, if you just keep that in mind of this has to be fun and no need to deceive people or pull any crap, you know, just go out and put on the best shows possible. I like to work close with the bands and, you know, make sure they are doing everything they can on their end to make it better for the crowd. BF: Absolutely TS: (28:56) and, because the people, I use to get on bands that would, if there was only fifty people in the club, they wanted to screw off and clown around and I said, "Hey, look these fifty people paid to see a show, so I don't care if there is one of them there, give them the show." You know, you want to act goofy, 11  do it afterwards and, um, it was – and it was funny because a lot of, one of my bands, um, was called Broken Toys, they later went on to get a record deal has King of the Hill and when they were off touring with Extreme and bands like that they all said, "Man, you guys, are so polished and everything, how did you" and they said, "well, the guy that we fok for would work us like twenty-eight days in a row without a day off, and he would show up most of the time making sure we were doing what we were supposed to be doing and it, uh,you know, it paid off for them." And they had an edge on a lot of bands they played with because they were, you know, they had went out and did the work and, uh, took it seriously. And it was, uh, it was good to see it happen, they had a couple of videos on MTV and so, it was, it was, back when they use to have videos on MTV. They use to actually play music on music television. BF: Um, when you started Swain Productions, you said the first couple of years were difficult? TS: (30:18) Well, they weren't real difficult, but it took a while to get everything built up because I had two other agencies coming after me, you know, trying to trip me up everywhere. BF: What would that look like? TS: (30:30) Well, they would try to, they would try to block me in clubs, and they would try and, you know, they were trying to do what I was doing, but it was not working for them, so they weren't happy. And so they, they had some bands and then one by one they just started dropping off and coming with me and, um, Buckman, he voluntarily got out. He was, he wanted to go to California, so he took off. Continental not so much, I use to have them, um, a letter from their lawyers and I had framed, hanging up in my office of them threating to sue me. BF: Really? For... TS: (31:11) For tortuous interference of contract and... BF: Really? TS: (31:15) Yeah, stuff like that, they were, you know, they thought I was a gangster or something like that, and they thought I had heavies out there getting all of this and, you know, I don't know what they thought, but they, you know, said I was saying bad things about them and I just, I just, a lot of my clubs that were, it c would cause problems when, if they would have been honest about everything we could have worked together. And, you know, I worked cause, I have worked with a ton agencies, like of town agencies and stuff would book through me, and I would book them into clubs and it worked great. They made a little less money but they got into places and it was, you know, it was fair. But they didn't, they didn't particularly like that and, um, but I had a lot of clubs that I just made an agreement with, of, I will give you all the best bands that I got and, you know, take care of you but I want to book your club exclusively. And I will get you, anybody, you want, but you just book it through me. BF: Now was that something the clubs were interested in because it just mainstreamed things, like make it a little easier for them? TS: (32:26) Yep, it was, they just had me to deal with and they, most of them knew I was not going to lie to them, and then I had great bands and that I actually followed up all the time. I have out six nights a 12  week, you know, five different clubs a night, checking on things and making sure everybody was doing what they were supposed to be doing. BF: Working has hard as the bands were... TS: (32:48) and the other agents, they would, a lot of them, never even seen them in person before. Like Ike Haislar, he was, was one of the biggest ever and most bands had didn't even know what he looked like cause he would never go see them. You know... BF: So one of the charms for Swain Productions was that you were right there, very accessible, very... TS: (33:06) I was very hands on with everything, with the clubs and the bands... BF: Now you created a band too, I read, um, within Swain Productions, I think it was a Ted Nugent cover band... TS: (33:17) Silver Bullet... BF: Silver Bullet, yes... TS: (33:18) The Bob Seger one, that's, I kind of got out of everything for a while and, um, well, I guess it was about twenty years ago I got married for about the third time. And I thought, maybe I ought to get out of that business so that I will stay married for more than five or six years. BF: Do you think your business had a lot to do with... TS: (33:36) Oh yeah, yeah, I was a wild manic and, um, the women, sex, drugs and rock and roll, you know, I specialized in all of them. And, um, so it was, so I kind of got out and was just doing a few things part-time. And, um, but I, you can't get it out of you once you have that in you. It just tugged at me all the time and so a real good friend of mine, one of my best friends, he could sing exactly like Bob Seger. I mean he sounds just like him. He was only in one band for most of his life and he just a bass player, he was never a lead singer. I kept trying to talk him into doing this, and he was scared to death. He had only played with those certain, I said, "Just let me put a band together for you and we’ll get together and play about six songs and see if it gels." You know, and, um, so there was a band I was booking occasionally called Arbagast. They had some great players, and, I mean, these guys... BF: And were they from Madison County too? TS: (34:39) BF: Ah, he would be another good interview, too TS: (34:59) Oh, yeah, yeah, a great one. He has got, he has compiled such a collection of all the bands, the clubs....  No, they were, where were all those guys from, there was, well the drummer actually from  Madison County  Greg Bishop. Who is a guy that would be a great person, I don't know if you have seen  his website, STL yesterday, stlmusicyesterdays.com 13  BF: He is he the one the runs website that has different club in St. Louis, and you can get the pictures...oh, ok TS: (35:13) Yep, yep, that's Greg, he is the drummer in that band, and I and him have been friends for thirty years or whatever, and, um, he was kind of my friend in that band. You know, we, we got started in the, and it was kind of funny because none of them wanted to do it. You know, they said, oh that's not going to work, and we don't really care that much for Bob Seger. And I said, well I think this will work, he has got a lot of hits songs and, um, so they got together and rehearsed a few songs and then I took Steve out, the singer, to one of their jobs and had him sit in with the band and do it and the response was just insane. BF: It was just magic they just ... TS: (35:51) Um, yeah, they just go crazy over him and, and they've been together now for about five years, I guess. And, uh, just, it's funny, up north, up around Chicago, there is a city up there, Ottawa, that I mean they drag in seven thousand people for a show up there... BF: Really? TS: (36:09) They, I mean, there are just, I guess, I don't know if it's because it is close to Michigan or what it is but they just love them up there. And, um,... BF: So that, that was the band you started managing after you took, like, a hiatus... TS: (36:21) Right BF: Right, so I want to jump, really, back before the hiatus, so what drove you, was it just the overworking that got you into the hiatus from Swain Productions? TS: (36:29) Um, no, just wanting to stay married, and get myself... [laughs] BF: Your family, who could blame you... TS: (36:34) I, I thought let's try this way this time and I quit drinking, and drugging, and all that crap that I was doing because it was just, you know, you get to the point where it is no fun anymore. And I was a serious drug addict for about seven years. Freebasing cocaine like maniac and thought I was a rockstar... BF: Is that a big problem here in Madison? TS: (36:57) Yeah, it was at the time, know it is all heroin, is the problem now which is even worse, I think. But it was one of those things where cocaine opened a lot of doors for you in the music business. You know, if you had all that you could go talk to the guys in Fleetwood Mac or whoever happened to be in town that day... BF: Come on in... [laughs] 14  TS: (37:20) Come on, come on, you know, and so it was stupid, but it was just part of the times and you know I finally figured out I wasn't going to live if kept doing that. [laughs] So I, I cleaned my act up, and I just wanted to stay away from the environment for a while. I had actually quit drinking and still out working in the clubs and drinking seltzer water for quite a while... BF: That must of been difficult... TS: (37:45) Well, you know what it was actually, it was, it was kind of weird because I had been addicted to just about everything you can be addicted to, but for some reason, if I get pissed off [snaps] you know, I just like to, I was freebasing two ounces of cocaine a week... BF: Jesus TS: (38:01) and quit... BF: Just like that TS: (38:03) by myself. BF: Wow, no rehab.... nothing, hats off TS: (38:07) And I had been to rehab before and did, I went straight from rehab to my buddie’s house to get some weed. [laughs] It was like, it didn't work well with me, but I was able to do it, and it's, it's kind of funny because I always think God must have had a hand over me because all of the things I did that were so ridiculously stupid and dangerous and I had been shot, I had been stabbed, I been run over by a car, you know... BF: Holy cow... TS: (38:33) a lot, a lot of crazy stuff and, um, you know, I always made it through and never went to prison, which I should have cause I was doing a lot of things I shouldn't have a been doing. Should have been dead several times, I would OD on the stuff and have seizures and it was insane and, uh, I finally, that's how I ended up dealing with music in church was, uh, after I quit doing it all and then I started thinking, man this is still screwed up, you know, I am straight now, but there is still something missing. And I accidently ended up in church [laughs] ...and of course, I wanted to change them too... [laughs] BF: So was that kind of a spiritual conversion that happened? TS: (39:18) It was, it was kind of a funny thing because the music was such a, it was funny how music can just, is involved in everything that I do parctaully because I had a friend and, you may want to cut this out, but it was, I went one Wednesday night, a friend of mine called me, said what are you doing, I said, oh, sitting on my ass watching TV and enjoying the quiet. He goes, where are your wife and kids? I said, they are at church, and he said why are you not there? I said, did you hear what I said, I am at home, sitting on my ass enjoying the quiet and I said, why would I want to go there? And this guy goes, "that's 15  bullshit." And then he started making these Bible quotes, and he said “You are the leader of the family, what kind of example are you setting and he was a friend that usually goes along with “everything you said, and I was like what the hell and he kept saying it over and over  “Bullshit”. All, that whole week, this is the weirdest thing ever, was I don't keep hearing the Bible quotes over and over, I kept hearing bullshit over and over... BF: Like a broken record? TS: (40:27) Like a broken record in my head and the following Wednesday, it was funny because, I was, we were sitting at the table here eating, and I said: "I am going to church with you guys tonight." And they all freaked out  they were like, "what are you going to do? Make some kind of seen or something? [laughs] We don't want you going." I said, "No, I want to go check it out." I walked into that place, and it was during their praise and worship, and people had their hands in the air and they playing this music, and I thought, oh my God what a mistake I made, I can't handle these people, they’re freaks. [laughs] And, um, the music is horrible, [laughs] you know, I was thinking, god I can't stand this music. And, um, I was about ready to turn around and walk out, and I stayed and then the pastor there, Derek Carson, come out and started talking and we just had an immediate connection. And, gosh, like two weeks later I was there running sound for them, and he asked me about, you know, “What do you think of the band..” and just kind smiled, and he said: "No, really, what do think of the band?" I said, "Well they kind of suck." And he said, "Well do you think you can fix them?" Cause, actually Daren had been a customer at Fat Cats. BF: ok TS: (41:37) He knew my name from Fat Cats and knew that I was in business and stuff and so, you know, I started working with the bands. And then we, we, um, just became real close and I ended up being their director of corporate worship. They were trying to open another campus in O'Fallon, IL at the time and so we went around, and it was like a one-night stand. We took, I put a band together, and we would go set up and play church on Sunday at some banquet hall or something. BF: Now did you pull from the bands that you knew? Or did you pull from the congregation? TS: (42:10) Uh, no, well there was one guy in the congregation, and the rest of them just had auditions and found these guys. Put ads on social media and stuff and, uh, and we found these guys and, um, you know, it was, these guys were good because every week I would make them learn like five songs every week. They come in and... BF: That is a hefty, uh, for, for, a band. I have played in one or two, and that's... TS: (42:36) Yeah, I had five songs a week, and we come in about two hours before the service and run through the songs and get them done. And these guys said, there was a guy, in particular, the keyboard player, he said, "You stretched me further than anybody ever has," he said, "Hell no I can learn five songs and get em together..." But they did, and they were... BF: How did you pick the songs? 16  TS: (43:00) Um, I would try and find out what his message was and I would try to find songs that went kinda along with that and something interesting that I did was, during the time that I was doing this was, every week I picked out a secular song, that would go along with the, with the message, and I thought it was a good idea because I remembered that feeling I had when I walked in heard that shitty music [laughs] and wanted to leave. And I thought, you know cause when you walk in church, like me, you know because I hadn't been there in my life, you know, and I was like fifty years old when I walked in there and, you know, I had always thought if they heard a song that they could actually relate to and would relax them a little bit and say, "Oh hey these guys are so bad." You know... BF: Ok TS: (43:46) You know, and so, you know, we would have songs like "Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow" or, you know, songs like that, that just had a good message. BF: Uplifting and positive... TS: (43:56) And, uh, I think it really helped a lot of people, a lot of people use to come to comment on it  "That really was great." BF: Have you seen the congregation grow since then? TS: (44:03) Oh yeah BF: Quite a bit? TS: (44:05) It’s grown quite a bit BF: How long ago was this? That you started this? TS: (44:05) Um, God, when did we start doing it, six, probably six or seven years’ age, I am guessing. I am really bad with time [laughs] but when, they, it got, when I started in the, uh, you know, I worked there, every, you know, running sound for the bands and doing the thing in the O'Fallon campus and then I got into the cars business five years ago and that kind of put the breaks on everything. BF: Ok TS: (44:32) Cause you work so many hours, I am like sixty hours a week there and twenty hours a week with Swain Productions. So there is not much...time BF: So, are you the only one working in Swain Productions? TS: (44:44) Yes BF: Like, it's, it's, all you? 17  TS: (44:44) It's all me right now. [laughs] So it is a little bit, you know, it is so much easier now with, um, you know, with the technology. Cause it used to be, I had to be in the clubs, all the time, talking to them, being their friend, bring them pictures and posters and all that. And now no one wants to talk to you...it’s all BF: Just email... TS: (45:06) It's all text message and emails and send them electronic press kits and, you know, so, I can do a lot more... BF: Not so much leg work? TS: (45:15) Right, yeah. If I had to go out and, I don't do a whole a lot night clubs now, I mostly do places like the Widely Theatre and, um, the amphitheaters around the area and stuff like that, and, you know, outdoor summertime gigs and stuff like that, where... Cause I like this tribute band thing, is, it's so nice because the shows you put on, like in a bar the mean reason people are there is pick up women or pick up guys or whatever they are into and, and, its all about that, and they got screens all room with football games going on and people are not really paying that much attention to the band. The band will be up there playing, and everybody is cheering and think they did something and you look over, and somebody got a touchdown, you know. And I just hate that, I hate that whole thing, that's, it's gotten so bad over the years.... BF: So that is a big change you have seen? TS: (46:08) Oh, yeah, it use to be, your stage was up here, and the lights were on the stage, and there was no tvs around playing stuff. You know, and then, they, it slowly came in a little bit at a time. Somebody having a TV over here and over there and then, God, now you walk in a lot of clubs and TV's everywhere you look, and to me it's so much more enjoyable for the bands and most of my bands that do this they -- are doing because they want to, and it's, they don't play all the time because a tribute show, you can't play six nights a week. You know, cause who want to hear the same guy over and over again. And so, but the shows are shows, like at the Wildey is probably one of the best venues around... BF: This is perfect because I wanted you to tell me about the Wildey... TS: (46:59) The Wildey... BF: Cause there is history there, this is... TS: (47:00) It is so cool, it's a great, I just had a concert there last Saturday... BF: An Elton John cover band... TS: (47:06) An Elton John Tribute and it is such an awesome place because it is a beautiful theater, everybody is there sitting in a seat, faced at the stage and they are there for the music. They are not there to watch the football game or try to pick somebody up or, well, most of them aren't anyway. And it’s kind 18  of funny too because I was used to being the oldest guy in the room, not no more with these tribute bands, you have people from eighteen to eighty. I mean it is incredible when I see people coming in walkers and, I am like, "holy cow." BF: Absolutely TS: (47:38) and then you see these young kids, and they are singing along with every song and they were not even born when these artists came out. BF: Yeah, again, I am a Grateful Dead fan, within the past ten years the proliferation of tribute bands to the Grateful Dead  Dark Start Orchestra, obviously being the most famous, yeah, you get multiple generational... TS: (47:58) Yeah, right BF: By managing these cover bands, you, do you feel like you are introducing music to a new generation? TS: (48:07) Well, yeah, well, I don't know, because like I said, these kids are singing the words to the songs already and its like, what the hell, [laughs] you know, and, uh, it's, it just goes to show that classic rock has such a longevity and such a, you hear in movies and stuff. You know, their playing Guitar Hero, taught a lot of kids’ old songs and, there is a lot of young kids that listen to classic rock. And it very non- offensive and you can do family orientated shows with... BF: Absolutely TS: (48:37) You know, unless you are doing the /// Ozzy Osborn tribute, you know, they got to... BF: Do you, you, you know an Ozzy Osborn tribute band? TS: (48:46) Oh, yeah BF: Really? TS: (48:46) Real good friends of mine BF: That must be interesting... TS: (48:49) Yeah, they are old friends of mine that I have worked with for years and they, you know, have to do the Ozzy routine and say fuck every other word, so it is kind of hard to put them in a lot of places. And, uh, but it’s just, uh, and these tribute bands, like the Bob Segar group, he sounds better than Bob Seger does, cause Bob can't hit the notes anymore. You know, he has had, you know, hell he is like 19  seventy or something, and you know, he can't sing that high anymore, and it's, it's funny because we had a guy came out and seen Silver Bullet, the first show they ever did... BF: Was that at the Wildey? TS: (49:26) No, it was at Pops, actually, over in Sauget and it this guy was an old friend of mine that played in a bunch of my bands back in the old days and, um, he's a college professor at Lewis and Clark College, music professor out there, and he said, "Man, if you ever need a keyboard player", he said, "these guys are great," he said, "I just seen Bob Seger two weeks age, you guys sound a whole lot better than him." [laughs] BF: Oh, that has to be one of the best compliments you can get, right? TS: (49:55) It was great, and he ended up in the band. So, now he is in the band, and he is also in the Elton John tribute. BF: ok TS: (50:02) and, um, and there a lot of guys, from my guitar player in that Silver Bullet Band, is in, probably in seven other tribute bands. BF: Is it, is it, is there a culture of that here in Madison County, kind of like, it seems, you got a lot going on with that, so is there a lot of musicians here in Madison County? TS: (50:20) Oh, yeah, yeah there is one, um, Red, there are all from Madison County, it is Sammy Hagar tribute, um, there is just a lot of them out there now, and it is kind of cool cause it is a lot of, you know, once I started doing this Silver Bullet thing I started getting calls from all my old musician friends when they heard I was doing that. "Well we got a tribute band too and, you know, you got to come see us" and I was like...... BF: Kind of like Pandora's Box? Kind of thing and it was just... TS: (50:47) I was like, man I was just doing this for like a little hobby and something to do on the side and then suddenly I got like twelve bands on the book... BF: So was Silver Bullet the first tribute band, is that what... TS: (50:57) Yup, that was... BF: Were you thinking, "Is this going work, is this not going to work." TS: (51:00) I thought, I always believed, it would work... BF: ok  20  TS: (51:02) You know, I always believed because we did it right. We put two backup girl singers, a sax player, eight people in the band and it really sounds exactly like Bob Seger. And, you know, he’s - he’s an artist that has over two hours’ worth of hit songs that everybody recognizes and that is the hard thing to find, is an artist that has a couple of hours of music that can keep people interested the whole time. Cause some of these tributes  they have to get into the album cuts and B-sides and stuff like that... BF: To come up with enough material...You got one that is Tom Petty and Johnny Cash, right? TS: (51:36) yeah, yeah, BF: Which is... TS: (51:40) Petty Cash Junction BF: Yeah, that is a pretty interesting, I would not have thought about it before but now that I have thought about it, I can see how those would meld very... TS: (51:49) Yeah, and they did some kind of concert together before BF: ok TS: (51:48) and, um, they are awesome, great band, um, the guitar player, guitar player from el monstero is the guitar player in that band and, um, is probably the most successful tribute band in St. Louis area is el monstero BF: Ok, I will have to check them out TS: (52:07) They sell out five nights in a row every year at the Pageant... BF: Really? TS: (52:12) There in December, yep, I think it is the week, the day after Christmas, I think it starts usually and um, they play for like a week and sell it out every night. They play at Verizon, er, Hollywood Casino Amphitheatre, now, the place I use to call "Riverport." [laughs] BF: So, what, um, with these bands, a few years ago, you started to revive the benefit, the Help concert, right? TS: (52:38) Yep...I BF: Is that what it is called? And you pick a new...um... a cause TS: (52:42) What happened, so years ago, it was in '85, I had this idea for a help concert, and I went to some friends, there was a guy from a group called Uriah Heep, Ken Hensley, he was a big rock star back in the seventies, that had moved to the area and me him and Ike Heisler, Kevin McCarty, um, a DJ from the St. Louis area, we were the main ones that got it started and we said it would be neat to do a benefit 21  and so I approached a guy that owns Stages, Bill Benjamin and I told him my idea, I said ... I want to but on ten bands in one night and do a big benefit and... BF: Wow TS: (53:22) and at the time I did not even know what the benefit was going to be for... BF: You just wanted to, to do a benefit... TS: (53:26) I just wanted to do one, just to, you know, just to do, too, try something like this and, you know, kind of help the musician’s image out BF: and what year, what year was this, that, that, TS: what's that? BF: What years was this? TS: (53:38) '85 BF: '85, ok TS: (53:38) and so I talked to Bill Benjamin who owned Stages which was the biggest club around, and he said, "Well, God, that sounds like a great idea," he said, "but there is no way you going to pull it off," he said, "you can't put ten bands on in one night." And I said, "Well, I think I can." And he said... BF: That's ambitious... TS: (53:55) And he say, "Well, go ahead," he says, "It's not going to work but go ahead." And so we went around and got every radio station involved, um, KZK, 103, KC, who else was in there at the time, was KWK still around? I don't know, but we got every major radio station involved in this and so, before, right before that I had to come up with a charity and it was really funny, at first I had thought about doing something for abused kids. Well, I started researching, and every charity out there for abused kids was incorporated, which means, they can use like 80% of the money for administrative fees and I was like, "no"... BF: Ok, kind of like the Red Cross got in trouble for... TS: (54:42) Yeah... BF: couple of years back, ok TS: (54:43) Yeah, and I said, "No, I'm not doing that." So I kept looking, and I thought, well homeless people. So I called Larry Rice, he calls me back, and I told him the idea and what I was doing and he said, "I'd rather not be connected to people like you" and I said, [laughs] "really" and I said, "what kind of people is that," and he said, "you are doing this in a bar with bunch of rock and roll people and it will 22  probably be lewd" and said, "yes, some people will probably say fuck" I said, "but what does that have to do with anything, you know, they are trying to do some good and help you out." and he was wasn't interested, so I don t remember what I told him... BF: That's, that's really interesting, so he did not want to be associated with you guys because you guys were rock n’ rollers TS: (55:25) Rock and rollers and, uh, I forgot what kind of colorful thing I said to him before I hung up, [laughs] but I hung and I then, um, got a hold of, um, St. Louis area food bank, and they take every dollar and put it towards meals for people. And well, we did, we pulled this thing off, and I had, got about all the biggest cover bands in the St. Louis area, all ten of them. Had the best roadies in town, had equipment off and on, where our switch over time was like ten minutes... BF: Was this hard to organize? TS: (56:01) Oh, yeah BF: Like um, is it harder to organize a benefit show or a regular show, I mean like... TS: (56:06) Well, um, a benefit show because everybody is working for free... BF: ok TS: (56:09) But it is amazing how these guys, in St. Louis, get really involved in it and really work hard when it is a benefit. They seem to work harder than they do when they are getting paid, and, so, me too, I work a hell of a lot harder when I am working for free then I do when I am getting paid. [laughs] And, um, but we put this thing together, it was a huge success. I think we, God I can't remember how much money, it was thousands and thousands of meals and a truckload of food. It was a great big thing, we down to, downtown St. Louis and marched down the road with Help Concert banner and a but of long hairs and we went into the studios and, I think it was, it was still KSLQ at the time were Kevin McCarthy was working, and we went and, a few of us went in there and got on the radio and made the donation to the St. Louis area food bank and so it was really cool and then, um, another thing that kind of got me back into the business before the tribute bands was, there was someone, a guy named David Lewis started a Facebook page called "I use to Party out at Stages", which sounded like a really dumb thing but...... BF: Actually, I think I came across this website.... yeah TS: (57:28) And, I, uh, yeah I am an administrator on that now and, um, me and him have become real good friends but I got there, and there were people chanting on there and couple of guys I knew, Darrin Boyd and, um, Adrain Vesper, were on there talking about and I chimed in and I said, "We ought to do a reunion show with some of the old bands." And they both just started blasting me with, "Come on, come on, you can do it, you are the man, you are the man..." and I had done anything in ten years at the time. And I was like, I was driving a bus for Madison County ACT, the ones pick up disabled people. BF: Ok 23  TS: (58:05) So I am working full time there, and these guys get me all jacked up and it, I think it was on vacation or something, and I said, "I can do it, I can do it" and after I took it on, I thought, "Well, what the hell was I thinking," cause the one in '85, I had all these guys helping me, well, this time I had to do it all myself.... BF: And this time you were bringing it to Edwardsville, right? TS: (58:28) No, this one we did at the Pageant BF: The Pageant, ok, so this was the first one you did...in '85 TS: (58:32) The first one was at Stages, it was the first one in '85, and then after the Haiti earthquake we did the one in 2000, God I can't even remember what year it was now BF: That was, what, 2004? The Haiti earthquake, 2005? TS: (58:50) I think so, I think it was around there, and I can't even remember, I'd have to look it up. BF: And that was at the Pageant? TS: (58:56) Yeah that one we did at the Pageant, and it was kind of funny because you know the first one Larry Rice told me to take a hike. Well, this one, um, the church that I belong to, Enjoy Church, which was called NTF at the time, they sponsored it. BF: Ok TS: (59:13) and so it was kind of funny that, you know, I got told I was a devil before and then this time I had a church sponsoring the thing, and it was a big success. We had, we put bands together that hadn't played together in twenty years, you know, and so... BF: So it was a joyful occasion for everybody, everybody was just... TS: (59:33) It was, it was some much fun, people, you couldn't wipe the smiles off people's faces. I had more fun that night  all the old Stages employees showed up cause we called it a Stages reunion. And, um, all the old employees with their silk jackets showed up, and it was, um, just a blast. And, like I said, it was hard getting some of the groups together cause they hadn't played together in fifteen, twenty years and some of them didn't like each other anymore and, but I just called in a lot of favors. BF: Oh, nice... TS: (60:04) and I said, just do this, you know, and uh pulled it off and did the whole thing in like twenty- eight days I think... BF: That's it? Pulled that off that quickly? TS: (60:14) [laughs] yeah, yeah 24  BF: That's, that's, hats off... TS: (60:16) And most of it was all social media, you know, we, we pretty much advertised that a lot but I did get some radio involved again and they, you know, talked it up on the radio and everything, so it was, um, and that was kind of what started me and then the tribute, that was right before the tribute thing.... BF: And, this wasn't your your, even the '85 show wasn't your first dive into benefit shows...cause at Fat's, because at Fat Cat's you, I read a story where guys had surprised a nun? TS: (60:47) Oh, no, that was at Grannies... BF: Oh, that was at Grannies...ok were you involved with that one? TS: (60:53) It was great, we did, um, I use to have, well, as a matter of fact, tomorrow is my birthday, and it is also Pat Liston's birthday, the guy from Mama's Pride, we're real good friends BF: ok TS: (61:04) Well, like three of the other guys at Mama's Pride had birthday's that week. So back in the Fat Cats days, my partner was crazy, and he used to get, put radio ads about Thom Swain's birthday batch and, um, he would make goofy comments about me and everything, well it became a really big, crazy party every year. Well, after Fat Cat's closed several years later somebody was, "Man you should do your birthday party again." And I was like, "Ok" and back then when we did it, it was just a regular night. And I thought, "Well, I don't want, you know, it was my birthday, and I feel weird about making money so I will turn it into a benefit." So, we, uh, the first one I did, I think it was at Grannies in Alton, and we put on, I don't know, six bands, or something like that, that night. And raised money, and um, we gave it, we went down to the Alton food crisis center, and there was a lady, Francis Jackson, who's passed away since, but she the one who kind of ran the thing and we went down there and gave her a check and, I don't remember the exact, it seems like seven thousand or something like, it was, it was quite a bit of money and a lot of food, and she was just crying. [laughs] When it was really cool, and I got so mad at the newspapers around here because I wrote a pretty shitty letter to them when they were, when they are working on shutting Grannies Rocker down. BF: Uh, the papers were? TS: (62:38) Well, they, they went along, it was MAD, the Mothers Against Drunk Driving BF: Ok, yeah... TS: (62:43) Um, one of the ladies in there had a nephew, I believe it was, who was at Grannies Rocker earlier in the night, they had a thing, a barber chair there, a dentist chair, or something and they had this scam where they would put you in the chair, lay you back and they put a funnel in your mouth and poured some liquor in your mouth and spun you around in circles and if you survived you could get a tee-shirt. And was really, actually, it was kind of a scam because there was not that much alcohol, you know, they would just get dizzy from spinning around. Well, this guy was there and did it, got a tee-shirt, well he went to like five other clubs and some time after midnight, he went to the police impound, got somebody 25  else's motorcycle, I don't know how he ever did it and was driving down Broadway in Alton, on the wrong side of the road and got killed... BF: Oh... TS: (63:35) and his sister placed the blame on Grannies Rocker cause he had that tee-shirt with him. And she just was incredible, she apparently had some kind of political power around here because she was on, every time, anytime anything happened at Grannies  if the police were called to get rid of a minor or something, it was in the papers. And, she was had her nose in there griping, and I wrote them a big letter, and I said, you know, it was really ignorant that, you know, you, you want to report on anything that happens there but when we go and do benefits, and we did quite a few benefits there, they never wanted to report on those.... BF: So it was just very unfair reporting...just TS: (64:18) Yeah, it was really bad and they finally, it was funny because they finally published one of my letters to the editor later on after they were already closed down. They published it, and I thought, "Well that was really nice." And, um, it was just ignorant, and it was just totally ignorant the way they did that and, um, you know, they, I just thought it was unfair. BF: Yeah...so, um, the benefit shows, um, you had some experience in the eighties with them and then you brought it back at the Pageant and, in the mid-2000's, 2004 or 2005 and then that went off wonderfully...it sounds TS: (64:59) yep, yep BF: Um, did you, that, that, the point did you, let's do this every year or did somebody have to come along, "Hey, why don't you do that again?"... TS: (65:08) Well, we have done a few others since, um, we do one at the Train Wreck every, um, every August with um the Seger group and Elton John group and this year it was Journey tribute also for the, um, Rock for Relay for the cancer association. We do that every year, um, 103.3 sponsors it, and we do a big thing. And, we are going to be doing something around, around, here soon too cause everybody’s...uh BF: So, have you done one every year, has been an annual thing? TS: (65:48) No, no, it has not been annual, it used to be with the birthday party, it became, became kind of a joke cause it was my annual 30th birthday party... BF: Oh, ok, maybe that was where I was getting confused on, ok... TS: (65:51) And it then it was the third annual birthday party, and I think we got up to like seven or eight something like that .... [laughs] that we did every year, and we did em’ a lot because the club owners loved it, because they knew that they were going to sell a lot drinks that night it has always been pretty 26  successful and, um, we did it up in Edwardsville too, so... BF: Have you seen, um, a revival in music here or is it, from what was in the eighties because it sounds like you guys had a real nice, Vibert, hopping scene and, in the seventies and eighties and it kind of fell off, the drunk driving, the clubs closing down. Um, you kind of seem like you have your finger on a finger on the pulse, right? Are you seeing a revival in it? Are you trying to work with Wildey to get more going on.... TS: (66:43) Yeah, I do a series at the Wildey every year, a tribute series and, um, it's usually eight or ten shows a year there. And, um, we’re working, I'm working on some ideas for benefit right now that I can't really say cause it is not all together yet, but we, that's probably going to be there. I can say that much. [laughs] And, um, you know, we want, we want to start doing some stuff in the summer it really hard because of everybody so busy in the tribute world, that's when you work the most, with all these outdoor events and stuff. And so winter time it slows down, and that's when we have more time to do stuff like that.... BF: ok TS: (67:21) So, oh, we're going to do some of that and um it's really weird because the, I don't, I don't think the music scene will ever get back to what it use to be. You know, because there use to be, gosh, I would have, in the heyday, I would have twelve or fifteen bands playing every Friday or Saturday night and, like Wednesday and Thursday probably five or ten and then you know, a couple on Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday. You know, so there was a lot of venues and...lotta BF: A lot going on... TS: (67:55) You know, you could make a living playing music then and now not that many people make a living at it anymore. There are some  there are some out there that do but not a whole lot... BF: Now, do think that has to do with the change of the culture in, in, Edwardsville or Madison County? TS: (68:14) No, it is everywhere... BF: It's everywhere... TS: (68:16) It’s everywhere .... It's just not, well like, you need a big club to support big bands, you know, that are, and it's all kind of changed now to a lot of duos and acoustic acts and, and small bands that just in over here and Wigglers and Laurie's Place and small room like that they play. And it's just not the, you know, they only do bands on the weekend, and nobody, not hardly anybody does it during the week anymore. There's a few but not much but it is just the lack of work and being able to, you know, it seems like, from what a lot of people have told me, after I got out of the, out of the booking business, that there is couple of guys came in and tried to take over and do stuff. There is one guy out there that's fairly successful, Dave Calles, he’s a friend, he plays in the Petty Cash Junction, he also has an agency. And, um, they, uh, they just got to where there were so many independent bands out there and they were, 27  they drove their money down because you know, they said, "Well, we'll play for six hundred" you know, "and we'll play for five hundred" and they worked themselves right out of work. But, lowering all the prices and not getting the money they use to get, so it was, it was tough on the, you know musicians had to go get jobs and be happy with playing on the weekends. [laughs] So, they all had to eat, and they were all growing up, and it's kind of funny because the era of musicians that I came up with are still playing, they are out there still playing, and there is a few of them, I guess, has the Wild Hungarians, Dr. Travagus, some of those groups are making a living playing. You know, so there are some out there, but all the rest that are playing part-time and stuff are the same guys that were playing thirty years ago. They're still out there playing, and which is great, you know. I think it is awesome and I wish there were more places for them to play but it's, you know, it's just one of them things you got to go with the times and.... BF: Absolutely, um, before we wrap up is there anything you want to add to the interview that I did not touch on? Is there anything you want to, ah, um, elaborate on? Anything like that? TS: (70:38) No, just support live music has much as you can, you know, that's, um, that's the most important thing, um, yeah, that is probably the most important part, is when you, when you see a band somewhere sit down and watch them. [laughs] You know, pay attention to the band a little bit and, um, we've got extremely talented musicians in this area, Madison County there's tons of great musicians and, um, like I said, it always, Madison County has always been viberent nightlife for years, years and, like I said, now there's not so much of it but what's out there if everybody supports it....maybe it’ll...maybe it’ll will turn around some day, I don't know.... BF: Awesome, well thank you very much, um... 28  
MadisonCounty;Valorie Childers;1966;2016; Valorie Childers 1966 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Valorie Childers Oral History Interview Kayla Kroder, Interviewer Collinsville, Illinois December 11, 2016 Kayla Kroder (KK): This is Kayla Kroder and I will be interviewing Valorie Childers. The interview is taking place at her home in Collinsville, Illinois. Valorie lived in West Alton, Missouri during the 1993 flood. She is now working as a Home Healthcare Aid. Thank you Valorie, for doing this interview with me. So the first question is: Where were you born, and what was it like growing up? Valorie Childers (VC): I was born at Missouri Baptist in St. Louis. What was the other question? KK: What was it like growing up? VC: I had a really good childhood. My parents were really good to me. I liked where we lived before we lived – before we moved to West Alton. KK: Where was that? VC: I lived over off 367, over in North County. And, the reason we moved was Dad got a letter stating I a - I was going to be bussed to the inner-city schools, to go to school, and he said, "Nope. Not sending my daughter to a city school." That's when we moved to West Alton, when I was twelve. A big change for me because I had a bunch of friends in North County  then I didn't have nobody I knew in West Alton. KK: Whenever you moved to West Alton, what was it like? What were your initial thoughts since you were twelve? VC: My initial thoughts was I don't know what my parents were thinking. [laughs] Moving me to hill- billy hicksville, if you want to say so. I hated it. There were no stores around, all you seen was farmland and houses. And the bus ride to school, was alone, was at least thirty-five minutes. We were out in the middle of nowhere as far as I was concerned as a twelve-year old. KK: Where were the schools located? VC: In St. Charles. So it was like a thirty-minute ride up there, and a thirty-minute ride back. And, to top it off, the bus ride wasn't very good cause I didn't get along with my bus driver. I couldn't stand her. KK: Why? VC: She was a smartass. Pardon my French. But any time I could be mean to her, I did it. I admit. I shouldn't have. But that was my way of, I guess kind of dealing with the fact that I was moved somewhere I didn't want to move to. So, I hated it there. Hated it. It wasn't until I got a little bit older, I 1  guess, when my brother, Danny, was little. I guess he was about three or four, and I finally started meeting some friends, and I actually really adjusted to it okay. I met some friends and, met my best friend out in West Alton. Best friend. She's not here no more, but I was thankful to meet her. Changed my life. So West Alton was, I dunno, it wasn't as bad as I thought it was going to be. Until...we had a lot of scares with the flood before then. People'd have to move everything. Move in and move out. And there's a lot of time you get water around you that you didn't get water in your house. I think I was, oh, fourteen at the time. We had water all around us but we could still, you know, people on 94 had water, and there was water on several different spots on our street where traffic couldn't get in and out. But you could still live in your house cuz we had no water there. And we had to walk across the field, and down the railroad tracks, through town to catch the bus at Pit Stop off of Highway 94. And it took us at least 35 minutes to walk that. And then an hour ride to school, round about. Then a walk back home. You know, and we did this when I was a kids several times. Cause the water had come up. But I dealt with it. Because that's what my parents...I guess in a way it was a good place to raise your kids cause you was just like -you wasn't in the city loop-we're being raised, for the lack of a better words, being raised better than they are in the city schools. Or in schools period, these days. Cause people, neighbors cared about neighbors out there. Whereas in the city they could care less. So, I don't know. Just a different time in my life. KK: So whenever you're talking about walking through the fields and on the train-tracks and the water. I mean like how ... whenever you had to do that how deep was the water, if you had to guess? And how many days did the roads get closed when that happened? VC: I know we had to walk the railroad tracks at least a couple of weeks for the water to recede. How deep was the water? In some spots, depending on how low the houses sit, some – where we lived there was a little...I guess I called it a little gully in between...it sat lower than the rest of the houses did. When the flood water come up, that was the first spot that got water. Right down there by mama ... It came back through the field and go into that gully and then it would spread out from there. And go into mom and dad's yard, and the Schroder's yard, and then it would eventually go across and filled the ditches, and the fields across. But we was always pretty much out of, out of that area before it started getting that deep. Like I said, there was a couple of times they'd had floods before, but never got as bad as '93. '93 was, in '93 when we had the '93 flood, I lived in town about, oh I guess, two-miles from mom and dad's. Maybe a mile-and-a-half. Me and my daughter, Cassie, lived in town. And, the Missouri and the Mississippi were both coming up and the Army Corps of Engineers said for everybody in town to put their stuff up 4 feet. What you weren't moving out or taking with you, to put it up at least 4 feet. So, I went and got me a bunch of little milk crates and put my furniture, what I couldn't take with me, on milk crates. My refrigerator, my stove, my washer and dryer, and my couch. Stuff like that, I put up at least four feet. I had a lot of milk crates. But, they said we shouldn't get no more than maybe four feet. Maybe not even that. But the gentleman down off of highway 94 decided to bust the levee. And when he bust the levee, it flooded town too. So I was caught between this river and this river, and, when the water first started coming in, I remember standing on the railroad tracks, right there in the front of town, and mom was standing on one side of me, and Cassie was in the middle of us. And were holding her hands, and that water was just meeting, and just rushing and rolling underneath that, what you call a train track trussle? That's what we called it. And that water's just rolling and hitting these stop signs and moving stuff all through town. Logs, trees, just...and I could see the water coming up. And going into my apartment. And I'm thinking to myself, "There's no way I'm going to get four feet in this apartment." I lost what I had left behind. And then, come to find out, the Army Corp of Engineers had said that everybody in town, I 2  talked to one of them, he said that people....I asked him about my specific home, because I lived lower level from someone else, and he said, not only did it fill my apartment, but it got four feet above me. And this like a town home, so it filled the apartment downstairs and got four feet upstairs. So that water was really deep. I don't know. It just changed things for me. Everyone moved back to West Alton. So...anymore questions? KK:Yes. Wheneveryouweredescribingthewaterrushingunderneaththetrussles,wheneveryousaw the logs and timber being picked up. Did you see any houses or anything? VC: I didn't see any houses. I seen trees, I seen cars. Never seen a - I didn't see houses come under the trussles, but, on farther down, you could see some of the roofs. And there was one house, in particular, on the other side of the railroad track that wasn't coming through town, but it was rolling, like right in front of the trussles, right in the field there, and the house was just rolling. And it was going under, and the roof coming back up. Going under, and the roof coming back up. So all you could see was the bottom of the house, then the roof, as it tumbled. KK: That would be very, very scary. VC: Yeah. So like I said, when the flood waters went down, I went out with my mom and dad, the first time the waters came up and went down, they went out there. The Army Corps of Engineers took them out there. And the floors had caved in. They said, "Okay. I can fix this." Flood waters come back up again. Water went down, dad went out, ceiling caved in. Dad said, "Okay. I can still do this, I can still rebuild." Water went back down. You see, it went up and down for awhile. Even after that. After the big rush of flood, it went up and down for awhile. Flood waters went down, tornado come through there, tore the whole back of the house off. Dad went back out there, after the water went down and everything settled, took a look at the house, and said, "Alright. Alright, Lord. I got your...I got what you want me to do. I'm not coming back." You know, because it was just, I think it was a sign. I think it's time for you to move on, to bigger and better things (laughs.) Yeah it was scary. Because I'm really scared of water. Getting in over my head. And standing on those trussles, when I was younger, with my daughter in my hand, I had a tight grip on her, I'm just thinking, "That water's gonna come up over that trussle and take me and mom and Cassie with it." It was scary. KK: Whenever the water was coming up, and people were staring to you know evacuate, and what have you: Did you still stay in contact with those people? Did the come out and help one another? How did all of that work?. VC: There was several people that I knew out that way that I have talked to. I guess are you trying to say if we kept in touch? Is that what you're trying to ask? KK: Well yeah, that. VC: Or help move? KK: That, and when the waters were coming up, and everything. Did you help one another as well? VC: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Neighbors always went to...what was his name...Jimmy and Carol Grimwald. 3  They were our neighbors across the street. And when the flood water come up and hit and went back down, that time, and everything was said and done in the flood of ’93 , Jimmy asked mom and dad, when he seen what happened....Mom and dad's house was basically just a shell. You know, there wasn't hardly nothing to... It was like having a hundred-thousand dollar house be destroyed a tornado, and a flood....when that back...the brick. The back of the house was just a brick wall. And when that was gone, you could look you could just see two-by-fours in the back of the house. And you could look straight through the house. It took out picture...Mom had a real pretty picture window in the front. All the windows were gone. The doors were floating. No one knows the doors or the windows went. But it was just like something had went through. I don't know quite how to explain it. Instead of just the water, the water had come through, true. But it also the tornado in itself. It'd go down, it'd come back up, it’d go down, and come back up. So, as to make sure it had destroyed the house. To where he'd have to gut the house, and know it completely down to redo it. And that was just something my dad wasn't wanting to do anymore. And that's when...he moved to Blackjack for a couple of months. And then we ended up, he ended up moving in over here. And I ended up moving in with them. I've went different places, but I've always come back here. KK: Whenever the flood waters had finally receded, and you were able to go back into your house, can you describe that for me? VC: Oh, my apartment? Yeah. Flood waters had went down and we had.... I rented the apartment and the.. my landlord asked me to meet the adjustor there, because he couldn't meet him. I went in and I looked all around the apartment. I wouldn't go in. Something couldn't bring me to go into the apartment. So I stood outside and looked inside all my windows and went around and looked through all of them. And the adjustor showed up and said, "Okay." And I had boots on and he said, "Okay, would you like to walk through the apartment with me?" And I said, "No." I said, "What I just seen in that window there, I do not want to walk through that apartment. You can walk through it by yourself." And he said, "Why don't you want to walk through it with me?" And I said, "I just seen a snake slither through the living room into the hallway, into the kitchen." I said, "You can go in there by yourself." Yeah, no, not going in there where the snake's at. It was an experience. KK: Did you ... Was there a lot of mud? VC: I guess there was about, I know at least half a foot, to a foot of mud in there. If not more. So, it was...it stank. Oh, awful smelled so bad. And there was nothing left of my apartment. I mean I had my washer and dryer, you know I put everything up on those milk crates, but it didn't help anything. The water was too strong for the crates to hold anything. It just knocked everything through the apartment. Knocked out walls, and windows, and doors. And somebody asked me one time, after this, if I would do this again. And I said, "Would I move back to West Alton?" And they said, "Yeah." And I said, "Nope. Couldn’t pay me enough." I wasn't going through that again. No. KK: Cassie, you said that she was a child. Really little. VC: Yes. And she was, I guess after seeing the water run through under the trussles, and...I mean the water wasn't there any more, but I think that the thought run through her head. Her being so little, when it happened, she was scared to even walk into that apartment. Or to even go near mom and dad's house. For 4  thinking that, okay, if she turns around, that water's gonna be right there coming at her again. But I thought for years, that after she went through the flood of '93, that this child would be scared of water. She was for a while. She's not any more. I am, still. [laughs] My mom one time, before the flood hit, they were talking about a flood, and she went down the street, down the road to Red Schoolhouse Road, which is a street that kind of joined, connected with Salle road, where we lived. And the water was already up over there. And she said, "Lord, just how much water are we looking at?" And she said, everything just went black. So she said she went back to tell dad, and you know, that. You know, that she asked, "How much water are we looking at, and she went black." And they talked to our neighbor, Ray, they all thought my mom was crazy. We...the first time the water come up there at mom and dad's house, I remember her telling me that, when they went out to see the house. They went out with the Army Corps of Engineers by boat to see their house after the water had settled, started to receded, all they could see on their house was the top part of their house, and it was black. So. That just, to me, I...when she told me all she seen was black, and I asked, well what do you think that means? She said, "I don't know what it means. But I know it's going to be bad." I don't think anybody, honestly, I don't think anybody thought it was going to be as bad- even the Army Corp of Engineers, I don't think they thought it was going to be as bad as it was. I mean why would they tell you to only put things up four feet, if that's all they expected? You know? I do know that the guy that busted the levee, out in West Alton, to save his property, ended up taking refuge at the Salvation Army, in downtown St. Louis with Harbor Light. And the reason I know this is because, I guess about three or four years later, I married my husband, and he worked for the place, and I remember his boss telling me about a guy that, you know, had ruptured the levee in West Alton to save his house. And he was taking refuge up in the church there, where the police couldn't come and get him, and nobody else would come and get him. I don't know even know what happened to him. If they ever caught him, if they ever did anything to him. I just know that he was up there in the church, and that was the last I heard anything of that man. I don't even know if he ever got caught for doing what he did. Cause, when he ruptured that levee where he lived, that caused the town to flood. The town in West Alton wasn't supposed to flood. Only people out in like West Alton, or people out off Salle Road, highway 94, Red Schoolhouse Road, those were the ones that were in jeopardy of getting water. Town wasn't supposed to get it. Until he ruptured the levee in town, down where he lived. And when he ruptured that levee to save his house, the town flooded. So where I was at in West Alton, we were getting it from the Missouri River and the Mississippi River all at once. Mom and dad had already pretty much got flooded. I hadn't even got flooded at the time, yet. So I thought I could just stay where I was at, you know? They said four feet. Ah, I'll move out for a little bit and that'll be it. I thought, I'll be able to go back. We'll paint the walls and pull up the carpet, and I'll help my landlord do all this. Cuz my landlord was a older gentleman, you know, him and his wife were...and they were very good to me and my daughter. And I thought, well I'll just help him repaint and do what has to be done to get the house back, the apartment back in order. I'll move in. After that happened, I wanted no part of it. I didn't want to go back. KK: When you were talking about the man who busted the levee to save his house. Did he save his house? Or did it end up going underwater as well? VC: No. He lost his house too. Turn about, I guess, is fair play. He lost his too. He thought he was going to save his property, and his neighbor's properties by busting the levee. He took a boat too. He ran a boat into the levee. Which ruptured the levee. But I remember standing there talking to one of the Army Corp of Engineers, when I got flooded out, and he said, had the guy....basically what he was saying was, whether he ruptured the levee or not, we were looking to get quite a bit of water in town, anyway. He was 5  just, relieving the stress. Because...he didn’t' come right out and say it, but he said the levees out in West Alton wasn't the best levees to have. You know? They weren't really strong enough to hold on to something like that. 'Course now, they've redone them. They're better levees that what they were before. I know, as rough as it sounds, being through the flood and all, if it wasn't for the Salvation Army, and Goodwill, and some churches and stuff...which brought me and my daughter, you know, clothes, stuff like that that we needed. I'd be in a lot worse shape than what I was. I mean, that's when the Salvation Army, Red Cross, they come through for people with disasters. KK: So during the flood you and Cassie, your daughter were living in the apartment. And your mom and dad were still taking care of the boys. From an older sibling perspective, how were the boys doing? Were they scared? Nervous? Dan was probably a teenager. But Tim and Kevin were young. VC: Kevin was a baby, so I don't think. He's only.... my daughter's only fifteen months younger than my younger brother. My baby brother. So him and Cassie were both really kind of young to understand what was going on around them. They were both scared, but I believe the one that was most scared out of all of that was my brother Tim. He was, how old was Tim? I can't really remember how old Tim was. What was he, five or six? And he, I think he honestly thought, when the flood water come in, that no matter where he went, this water was going to get him. Where it was going to follow him no matter wherever he went. To this day, I don't think he talks too much about it. I know, I haven't given it much thought for several year. But it's always in the back of your mind when you go through something like that. You don't quite know how you're going to deal with something when it happens. I did a lot of crying. My mom did a lot of crying. We did a lot of praying. Cuz we didn't know, when the water was up, we didn't know what we were going into. When the water went down, we didn't know what we were going to find. There was some people, like my parents, lost everything they had. You had to rebuild. And there's still several neighbors that got flooded like we did, that still love it and still live in that area. I have, oh I guess this is a couple months ago. I went over to get gas, was right over there by the Pit Stop. I was over off Highway 94. I drove down through there. Where mom and dad's house used to be. Where the apartment that I used to live in. The apartment I used lo live in is gone. it's not there, they tore it down. The tavern in town is not there. They got rid of the post office. The Post Office is sitting in a trailer, a make-shift trailer, up there sitting on the parking lot of Pit Stop. They never rebuilt the Post Office there. My friend Tammy's house, they tore it down. Mom and dad's house is gone. But, the Schrader's rebuilded. The Grimwald's across the street rebuild theirs. There's several people that I knew in that area, had went back and redid their house. But, I do believe that if my mom and dad's insurance company and told them what they should have told them ahead of time, they told them after the fact. Mom and dad had so much money on the house, and so much money on the contents of the house, it would...when they come up to adjust it they had just redone their kitchen floors. Beautiful floors. Just did their hardwood floors in the living room. They were working a little bit here and there to replace things, you know , to update the house, basically. And when the flood waters receded, the insurance company agent, after the fact, had told them they could have got up to a hundred thousand dollars worth of flood insurance on the house. They only had forty-five on the house. And twenty-five on the contents. And when that guy come out to adjust the house, told them just the house alone, to rebuild the house they way they had it before, would have cost them about eighty grand. That's money mom and dad didn't have. I mean they had the insurance, and the contents, but that wouldn't have redone the house the way it was, before. Things are too high. So mom and dad got a loan, and ended up getting this house over here. 6  Everybody likes this house. There's a real estate agent that sends her a letter every year, telling her to let her know if she ever wants to sell the house. There's a lot of people that want this house. I liked the house we had in West Alton. But would I move back? No. Can't put myself through that again. KK: When you were saying things about, around the house, being built, and things like that. Were there anything special outside? That was built? Or anything for, family gatherings or something like that? VC: No. I mean, they had a nice size yard. Dad had put in a big garage to put his truck and stuff in. And when I was younger, my mom had this Suzuki 125 motorcycle, that I just put a rut in her driveway-in their backyard Just riding it back and forth, back and forth. See, you can't do things like that over here. Back out there in the country you could burn trash, could can ride dirt bikes on the road, you could... horses. There's stuff out there you could do out there, cuz there was never a cop around to stop you from riding out there on a four-wheeler with no driver's license. No tags or anything on it. Here you have to have tags on everything, and stuff. I remember, when we first- I guess this was right before the flood of '93, I got me a little moped. I was a kid. I drove that thing all over the highway. I got pulled over one time. The one time you wouldn't expect a cop. I got pulled over. He told me I couldn't drive it on the highway without a license, so I drove it in a field the rest of the time. You couldn't get away with something like that over here. You know, it's the country. It's basically like, how do I want to explain this? It's, it's peaceful there. Put it that way. All you basically heard was crickets at night. Mice you had a problem with when they plowed the fields. And that's one thing I can't stand is a mouse. Nope. Whether it was through the flood or harvest time, something was always going on in that house. Having problems with mice...I remember we got a little flood water one time, and it was before '93. We had problems with flood waters coming up off-and-on the whole time we lived out there. Nothing as bad as '93, now. But the water had went down and we had cleaned up. And I was younger at the time, I think I was maybe 14, 15 years old. And my grandma had come up to visit. And I was always afraid- we didn't have water come up in the house, it was just around us. And I was always afraid that a snake would slither somewhere in that house. Because of the water all around us and stuff. And I went down to switch the laundry one time and mom told me, "Bring the laundry back up and switch it around." And I had just turned on the basement lights, and I see these two ole' beady eyes staring back at me. Over by the dryer. I dropped that basket of clothes and went running up those steps and my mom said, "Where's my clothes?" And I said, "Downstairs with the snakes and you can keep it. I'm not going back down there." Couple of days later, my grandma called me outside. She said, "Valorie come here/" And I said, "What, Grandma?" And she goes, "I got your snake. Come here." So, no, no, no not going outside. It wasn't a snake, it was a little salamander, and she'd cut its head off when she thought it was a snake [laughs.] Out there you had to be, I was scared of snakes. I didn't like mice, raccoons. We had raccoons. We had possums. We even had several beavers just running around. Because it was out in the middle of nowhere. There’s not -- There's one little store in town. You basically had to drive up Highway 367, at least ten miles, to get to the nearest store. Little ole' convenience store there in town. But they never had what you need. Well, and if they did, it would cost you an arm and a leg. That's one thing I hated about that place. I guess after bringing up some of these memories, it's not as bad as I thought it was. But it’s a time a time I would not want to go back and stay. It was really hard on my parents. A lot harder on my parents than it was on me. They were older than I was, and I'm able to bounce back better than they can. When you see how hard your parents work to have something, and then in a matter of just days, have it ripped out from underneath it. I understand what that means now. I was young then. I didn't think, I didn't put two and two together. Now I know. It was a terrible time for them. 7  KK: Your mom had mentioned that she had, that her and Terry had the catering business in the house. VC: Yeah. I remember that. Having to completely regroup, I guess you would say. And adjust to moving from. There was lots of times water would get in the basement and we'd have to move everything upstairs. You could still get in and out of town, just Highway 94 was blocked. There was several different times remembering dad having to cart stuff to town, using a wagon. I was helping him carry stuff -- Just so he could go to work. Then when the flood waters hit, they took what they could, you know? They had family come up and help. Several people brought trucks and helped move what they could. What they couldn't get to in time, they left behind. You had...the Army Corps of Engineers would tell you you got till right here. This time. To get out safely. And when...I'd packed all my stuff up and I was helping my parents then. I had a friend watching my daughter. When we started packing stuff out, the last load that we took out, we had three or four trucks, my car, my mom's car, and as we went to the end of the road, it was coming up on the street. And we had a puddle that we had to go through there for awhile, at least six inches deep. And that was...the water had got there before they had told us. You know, they give you this timeframe, and the water was there before that timeframe that they give you. So it's a good thing that we did what we could, and got what we could, and got out of there like we did. Cause then we would have probably been trapped. And people would have lost their vehicles, you know, it' just a scary thought. I can picture all this in my mind. Talking about it is a little different than playing it back in your mind. If you know what I mean. When we got out town, we parked our vehicles. They had Highway 94, there was two lanes going towards 367, going towards Jamestown Mall and towards St. Louis County. And then you had the top two lanes on '94 going from North County to Alton. We'd cross the Alton bridge. The flood waters got so high they had to close down the lower part of '94 and have one lane both ways. And even, I mean I was an adult, and I see how high that flood water got on that lower part of '94, and I'm driving towards North County in my car. And I was always scared to death that one of those other cars would sideswipe me or hit me and knock me off into the flood water. And I was, like I said, I was scared of water, which is a bad thing to be scared of at the time. So it was just...I could just picture me just being trapped, and can't get out of the car. Or trapped and I can't swim to safety. I don't know, it was just a scary thought. but that thought never left me though. When flood waters come up like that .... When water comes up like that, you constantly got something planned in your head, "What if these happens?" or "What if this happens?" And you're scared that that's actually going to happen. You have thought about it so much that you almost think it's reality, that it can happen. KK: So, whenever you would go into North County, that was probably for your job, right? VC: No, that was just like...I think we were going towards North County to...that's where mom and dad had found them a place, over in North County. For a short period of time, over near Jamestown Mall. They had them a log house and they really liked the house, but the lady...the roof leaked so bad that she wanted too much money for it. And that's when they decided they moved there, from there...you know, we had moved several different times between now and then moving to here. We started out in, what you call, North County, then we ended up in Blackjack, I believe. Or no, that was...Jamestown Mall is Blackjack. We lived in Blackjack and then we moved to Ferguson. Where, until we could settle on...basically to decide on whether mom and dad were going to go back, or try to rebuild, or find something else. And I guess mom and dad kind of had went back and forth about moving back. Do you want to go back and deal with this? Or do you want to take the government's buyout, them buy your land. They went back and forth on this for a little bit. And the both come to the decision that they didn't want 8  go through that again. So once they decided that the didn't want to go back, they moved from Ferguson, which they knew they had to get out of Ferguson, anyway. The moved from Ferguson to...where did they go...I think they come from Ferguson to here. Cause I think they lived in Ferguson for awhile. They were looking for a place around here. And there was a place in Edwardsville that dad liked, and mom liked this place here in Collinsville. And I guess they kind of weighed the options and they decided the liked this house better. And they've been here, what? Twenty-five, twenty-six years now? Yep. KK: So after the flood, whenever you and your parents and your brothers, they all decided to move over here to Madison County. Cassie was getting to the point where she could be in school and stuff like that. What were the reasons why you, and not just your parents, but you yourself, why did you choose Madison County? VC: I guess cause I’d stayed over here so much with them? That I've gotten accustomed to being over here. I have family over here. I didn't want to move somewhere where I didn't have family. So that's why I stayed here. I haven't lived here the whole twenty-six years. I moved out, I lived in Randolph county, I believe, two years? And then I lived in Minnesota for a year. But for the rest of the twenty-six years I've been here in Collinsville- well Madison County, I live in South Roxanna now. But out of the twenty-six years, I've lived here twenty-three. My parents have lived here twenty-six, I've lived here twenty-three. I just, I fluctuate, you know. I would rather stay here than. I guess I got used to being here. And when you. It's not that I really chose to move here. I guess it wasn't a decision, I didn't really think about it. Because I had my family here, that's why I stayed here. You know. We all get along. And I'd rather be close to family. And Cassie would rather be close to her Grandparents. That's why we stayed. She was the main source in that. KK: Now, you had mentioned that before that you didn't really care for being here right away. But then you got accosted to it. What are they things now that you like about Collinsville, Roxana, Madison County in general. VC: Hm. There's a lot of different things I like. Lot of things different from West Alton. You have convenience of about every store on every corner that you would need. Out there you didn't. I think the schools are better over here. The schools out there taught good, but the schools out here focus more on the kids. And, if they see a kid falling behind here, they're pretty good about calling the parents and saying, "Something’s going on here. She's off course. Or he's off course. And their grades are slipping." And the teachers will work more with the parents and the students. Whereas in West Alton, I don't think that the teachers really cared. I had one teacher out there that did really cared about happened with me or my grades or what have you. And at first, when I first met him, he was just a counselor. And it wasn't until I was in high school that he started teaching. He taught American history. And his name was Mr. Nunn. That's one man I'll never forget. That's the one guy that made it a little easier to go to school in St. Charles. That made a difference. I don’t know...people over here, they're just...for the most part they're just good people. If you need them, they're there, but they don't get into your business. Whereas out in a little town in West Alton, it’s this one's dating this one's wife. And this one's dating this one's husband. Here, you don't hear too much about that. And the schools are better, like I said. And there's more job opportunities in this area than out in West Alton. There wasn't nothing but farming out there. You'd have to drive into the city to get a job anyway. So I mean there's a lot of jobs around here to where you won't have to take that drive. 9  KK: So in the future, what would you like to see changed for anything? In the county, Collinsville, Roxanna. VC: Hm. In this day and age? I'd really wish for people to quit killing each other. Just, plain and simple. A life is worth saving. A life is worth living. I don't care what color you are. Just don't...there's too many people out in this world today that would rather, if they get into with you, would rather pick up a gun and shoot you as to talk to you about it. I wish that could change. I wish people could get along a bit better. And that's about what I want. KK: Is there anything else you'd like to discuss? VC: If you got a question, I'll answer them. KK: No that's it. You've done pretty well. Well, thank you for letting me interview you. I appreciate it. VC: You're very welcome. 10 
MadisonCounty;Gary Niebur;1953;2018;Gary Niebur  1953 2918   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Gary Niebur Oral History Interview Stephen Hansen, Interviewer January 10, 2018 Steve Hansen (SH): We're going to keep this just as comfortable and light as we possibly can Gary. Gary Niebur (GN): Yeah ok. SH: So just start out with I'm Steve Hansen, it's Wednesday January the 10th, 2018. And we're talking with Gary Niebur. And so Gary why don't you tell me a little about yourself, about growing up, where you grew up and. GN: First of all thank you Steve, I appreciate the opportunity to chat with you and share something about my past and my life here in Edwardsville. I've been very fortunate, I've lived- grown up and lived in Edwardsville all my life. Born actually in Highland, Illinois. My dad worked at Shell, had a career at Shell and they moved here shortly before I was born. So I've a- spent my entire life in Edwardsville. Which I really to this day count my blessings because I feel like I was just very fortunate, had a marvelous family, mom and dad and four brothers and sisters. Grew up down by Dunlap here in Edwardsville which was a marvelous place to grow up as a kid with the fishing and swimming and the ice skating and plenty of activities to keep kids busy. I went to Saint Boniface, all of my brothers and sisters did as well. I consider myself really fortunate in that even at a very young age I had the opportunity to meet some people that at the time were certainly my elders, but people that I looked up to in the community even when I was in the- in my teens and beyond. And one of the things that- that I recall vividly and that I think had something to do with the paths that I would take in the future was when I was very active in little league baseball and all the other things kids were active in. And at a young age I recognized the importance of those people that kind of stepped up and did things as simple as coaching a little league baseball team. I remember having coaches that didn't have any kids on the team, they just kind of wanted to help, they just kind of wanted to play a positive role in the kid's lives. And that kind of stuck with me and that's why as time went on I felt like I needed to do something to kind of pay some people back and try to contribute to the community. SH: So what was your plan when you were graduating from high school? What were you thinking that you were going to do? GN: You know I wasn't sure to be honest with you. And I think, I will tell you that, and sometimes they jokingly talked of my friend Mike Webber and Ed Rodney and one time believe it or not when I was young I thought "ya know gosh maybe I'll be mortician". And that thought didn't last long. But ya know I really didn't have anything. I wanted to be, I wanted to be involved in the community. And I think I learned that again from people that were kind of mentors to me. And that I looked up to and I remember that- to give you an example, just a couple names John Hunter Junior was a dear friend of mine, he was certainly much older than I was at the time. But these were people like the Bob Wetzel's of the world and the folks that really were people that kind of constructed the foundations of this community. And I just 1  kind of always kind of looked up to them and said you know what, I'm going to play a positive role in the development of the community that I really intended all along to be here for the rest of my life. I had no great desire or interest to move away or even go away to college or kind of depart what I thought was a pretty good place, and that was this place. So you know I think I always had an interest in parks and recreation. And so that was actually my first job was with the city of Edwardsville and it was actually very early on when I was between my junior and senior years in high school. And then during the summer for a couple years I worked part time for the city in their Parks Department. And I did the you know the traditional park stuff, cut grass and cleaned the parks and did this and did all that. And low and behold the opportunity came about when I was probably 22 or 23 that the position of Parks and Recreation Director was open. And a gentleman by the name of Ernie Tarvoski, you may know Ernie and Chuck from the home nursery, Ernie was the chairman of the park board at the time. And he came up to me one day and I was nothing but kind of part time grounds supervisor and he said hey, so and so at the time he said he left, he's no longer with us and we just need someone to kind of supervise the crews and keep things going and I said I'd be happy to do what I could. So that eventually lead me to being named the at the time the youngest Parks and Recreation Director in the city. And I was happy, I was very happy. And it gave me a taste of what I really felt was good sound public service. SH: and when approximately was it, you said you were 22, 23? GN: Yeah, I think I was 23 when I took the job of Director of Parks. SH: And what year would that- GN: That would have been, oh my gosh, 70- maybe back in 78, something like that. SH: Ok. So that was your first start actually also in politics then? GN: Yeah, to a certain degree it was. That I remember very well back then a good friend of mine this gentleman I still miss to this day Steve Ellsworth. And Steve somewhere in that time frame Steve was a Statefarm insurance person here in- very well known, very popular gentleman. And Steve ran for Mayor and Steve won. And then I was in that role at the time Steve was mayor, Parks and Recreation Director. So I got an opportunity to kind of- and I was friends with Steve already, but I just had a chance to get to know him better and Steve would not mind me telling this story but because I said it at- when I did one of the eulogies for Steve funeral couple of years ago. I told Ray, his wife, and kids were obviously listening and I said so I'll never forget Steve and he was only about two years after Steve was in his mayor he- I saw him somewhere and he looked at me and kind of waved me to come to him and I walked over there and I said well hi mayor how are you doing. And he said I'm doing ok, he said I got- he said you kind even when you were really young you kind of hung around here for a while. He said I got one question for you. And I saw what's that and he said does this thing have to last four years? [laughter] Steve- Steve was a great guy and contributed immensely to the community. But I think being mayor Steve found out was not really the gig that he thought it was going to be. But I'll never forget that story about Steve. But you know it just kind of gave- me a working in city government just kind of gave me a little taste of what, you know, maybe good public service could be all about. And I guess my take on it was that even after years of being involved and 8 years as a member of the City Council and then ultimately 20 years as mayor, I really never looked upon myself as being quote being in politics or a quote politician. I don't 2  know why, but it just to me was it really all come about because I just had a sense of public service. You know, being someone and then there are 100s and 1000s of people that do this throughout this country, it was necessarily- it wasn't partisan politics, it was just remembering back when I was back in little league baseball and having all these older people at the time, you know, just trying to help me and steer me in the right direction. And I don't know, I just I don't think there's any magical thing about it. It was just- it just kind of felt like I love this community and you know if I can get gainful employment here I have no interest in leaving here. And so SH: So you say you got elected to the City Council? GN: Yeah, what happened... SH: Was that your first elected office? GN: Exactly. So after I was Director of Parks and Recreation for, gosh, maybe four or five years this position at the YMCA came open. And an interesting connection to somebody you probably remember the name of Buzz and Maryann Shaw. Well Maryann Shaw was the President of the YMCA Board of Directors. And their CEO had left, they were in need of a new Executive Director today the title is CEO. And it kind of sparked my interest even though I had not up until that time I really had not been active in the YMCA. But there was a lady that to this day I love and respect Nina Beard who was, as you know, she was City Clerk for many years. So when I was with the Parks and Recreation Department obviously I interacted with Nina. And Nina one day said to me you know Gary you know I don't want you to think about leaving the city but what about the YMCA job, that's something you'd be really good at and they need somebody that's - that can really kind of move that organization forward. And I thought about it and Nina said well I've already talked to Maryann Shaw and said you'd be a great candidate. And I smiled when I said because I couldn't believe she would do that for me. So I went through the process and eventually was hired here. So after- after I was named the CEO at the YMCA the Aldermanic on the City Council came open and it was in an area where I lived in town on Ruskcan Avenue. And I said what the heck, I'll run for City Council. I did, served as a member of the City Council for 8 years, elected in I guess it was 1985, served two terms. And then toward the end of my second term a gentleman who you- Dennis Datoy was mayor at the time. And Dennis was kind of almost like Steve Ellsworths, four years for Dennis was enough. He didn't - [chuckles] Dennis did a good job and he cared immensely about the community but Dennis decided I'm not going run again. And since I was on the City Council I started giving some thought and Dennis was very encouraging. And so I guess it was the, gosh what was it the spring of 90- spring of 93, I guess, I decided to run for mayor. And ran, was elected and ran five more times. And so my record of public office was 7 and O. 7 wins, no loses. And I felt that that time that you know what, maybe I shouldn't risk the next one. And I decided pretty much long before my last term that would be my last term. It was just I loved what I did with the city and loved the community and loved the contributions that we kind of collectively made. So... SH: Gary, who- what did you have in terms of opposition when you ran for mayor? GN: When I ran for mayor the first time there was a gentleman who was a retired police officer in Edwardsville by the name of Roy Boyce. Roy today still lives here, Roy was a good friend then, he 3  continues to be a good friend. And Roy was on the City Council as well. So when Dennis Detoy decided not to run again it just happened that me and Roy kind of both decided we both we're going to give it a shot. And it was a very- you know, it was something that made me feel good about campaigning. Today when I look at campaigns I sometimes don't feel good about it. But back then it was in essence kind of two friends that decided to kind of look at that same office and put their best foot forward and who wins and who doesn't. And you know I was very fortunate, I won. And Roy was very supportive, to this day we're friends. But it was kind of the- what I guess today I would say was kind of the good old days of campaigning. You know, you didn't have to be arch enemies or rivals, you didn't have to bad mouth the competition, you just kind of put your best foot forward and with, in essence saying I trust the judgment of the people. SH: And how did you campaign, I mean did you buy signs or? [talking over each other] GN: I got a great story I want to share with you about that. But yeah that was kind of the time when you walked door to door and you had these little hangers that you put on the door and, you know, vote for me and whatever it may be. And at the time, I mean, we lived on Ruskcan and oh my gosh we would have had two kids out of the four at that time. But, you know, you just walk the streets and knock on doors and you get some friends and one would go on one side of the street and you'd just go up and down the street. It was just- the old fashioned way of doing it, you didn't spend much money on advertising. You know, you just put your best foot forward. But I did something that I felt was really important, that was to share what my vision was of a community that I love dearly, that I grew up in, that was already a really great place but I felt it could be better. So what would have to happen in order for this to be better for the future. So I put together what at the time was called white papers. I had like 12 different topics and I still have that by the way, it's very interesting to look at, and there were maybe 12 or 14 different topics just one paragraph- two paragraphs saying here's what I think we should do or here's some thoughts about these topics. And my goodness Steve it goes back to- one of the topics by the way was the old N.O. Nelson Complex... SH: Yes, right. GN: That SUI had had. So it was really just kind of the good old fashion stuff. And the story that I'll never forget is that was always kind of traditionally you'd say- you'd put something and say if you need a ride to the polls, I don't know if you ever remember the- SH: Yes, right. GN: You know, call this number for a free ride to the polls. Ok, so election day I'm kind of sitting around waiting for the phones to ring and they don't ring and they don't ring. And all a sudden late morning I get a phone call and it's somebody in general says something like hey, somebody told me that I could call you and you'd give me a ride to the polls so I could vote today. I said sure I'd be happy to, he gave me his address. And I was excited, so by the way cleaned the car up just to kind of make sure I was ready for all the calls I would get- I got one ok. Well the one call that I got was from an elderly gentleman who lived in an area that is referred to as Issuewood, it's down by Richard's Brick Company. And I drove down there and kind of got to the end of the street and low and behold here was this gentleman sitting in a couch at the end of the street. This is true, ok. You know, I helped him, he got in the car and I took him 4  up to vote and took- helped him get in- older gentleman, nice man. And when he's done voting he came out and hopped in the car and he said hey I just wanted to tell you something, I really really appreciate the ride and Roy I wish you the best. [laughter] So I gave him a ride to the polls and he voted against me. He called the wrong guy ok. SH: Where any of the elections that you ran in hotly contested or closely? GN: No, I think the first one where Roy and I ran for mayor and really was a real close race per say but. And then I ran for alderman again, unopposed. And then I ran for mayor- I'm sorry then I ran for- I get this backwards, ran against Roy for mayor and then I ran the next four times unopposed. So I had one race in my quote “career” and that was when a gentleman ran against me, I guess the third time I was running for mayor. So I ran unopposed most of the time and I kind of credited that to nobody else really wanted the job. But, you know, I really enjoyed- I enjoyed what I did. SH: What were some of the difficult issues you had to deal with? GN: I tell you what, back- the issues back then were primarily infrastructure, highways. This was back when 157 was two lanes, Troy Road was a disaster. Traffic around here was awful because that was also a time when the growth and development of the community really started. SH: And the railroads were still running. GN: Exactly. So you had the rail roads going across Troy Road. Traffic was a mess but you had community that basically had- was intersected by three state highways. You had 157, you had 159, you had 143, which were responsibilities of course of State of Illinois. The state never really recognized that necessarily in this area. So the biggest challenge I think was the traffic and the infrastructure, you know the community was really growing for I think a lot of good reasons. So I spent a great deal of my time in Springfield and lobbying for funds for these highways. And SH: How did you do that? How do you lobby? GN: You know what SH: In Springfield. GN: I guess the lesson that I learned through that was if you're not persistent and if you're not aggressive you may not get anywhere. So I almost had to be the biggest pest around to talk to. I'll give you an example of this, Dick Derbin served as one of the senators for Illinois. Dick at the time was a congressman and his area was Springfield. And I remember when I was shortly after I was elected mayor, if not about the same time, the district boundaries for congressional districts had changed. And all of a sudden Dick Derbin now went to- came up in- Edwardsville was included in his new congressional district. And I remember him coming to Edwardsville one day shortly after that and we were sitting in the office at John Hunter's Insurance. And I met then congressman Derbin there and he said hey this is a new part of my district, I want to get involved, I want to, you know, show my support. And he said so what 5  can I do to help. And I said if you really want to help the people of this area you've got to help us get some federal funds for some highway improvements, even though these are state highways. And he said what do you think the number one need is. And I said well, I said if I'm reading right or understanding this correctly it would be difficult to get federal money solely for a state highway improvement. So I remember coming up with the plan that basically said that we need to extend South Main Street all the way out to go- to Center Grove Road where the theatre is today. And I said that will be a new road and I think it'll be eligible for federal funds. And it's a project I'll always be very proud of because that extension of South Main Street is now a major thoroughfare that helped solve a lot of our traffic problems. In six months he was able to obtain a half million dollar allocation for- to start some engineering and design. So I think to a large degree being aggressive and not giving up and being persistent in fighting for the needs of our community was something that I was more than happy to take on. SH: Did you find, was Jay Hoffman our state legislator rep at that time? GN: Yes, Jay was extremely helpful and I had a marvelous relationship with Jay. And Jay did a lot for this area, including his role at the SIU, the N.O. Nelson Place. Yeah, so it was the local- Bill Hayne, you know, over Bill's tenure, even when Bill was back in the State's Attorney's Office I was very fortunate to have good relationships with him. So I think that- and again being mayor is a non-partisan position. So I wasn't a big party person per say on either side. I was committed to doing what I felt was best to hopefully continue to build and improve this community. SH: Did you find that being mayor that you had some big interest that were pressing you for different things and different economic, you know, whether it be developers or contractors or bankers or? GN: Absolutely. And I think part of it, and again I really don't have any complaints about being mayor but, you know, back in the prime of development here in Edwardsville, this was the same time we were having these challenges of infrastructure, our capacity for our water and sewer plants- not something you think about a lot but it better be there and it better be right. And then when you start seeing the growth in large part I think to SIU and its tremendous impact on this area, the proximity to St. Louis, there were just a lot of good things that set Edwardsville as a good place to invest in. Well the problem was- is that at the growth time of the boom of development it kind of seemed to be that anybody that had a pickup truck and a hammer was all the sudden a developer. SH: Right. GN: And so we knew the growth was going to happen just because of the many attributes of the area. And we said you know we got to slow down here and we got to- we have got to make sure that growth is not simply for the sake of getting bigger. Whatever growth we have here, whether it's residential or commercial, we need to make sure that that growth is a long term asset for this community, not a short term asset for the guy that's got a pickup truck that wants to build a house and then move on and build another house in some other community or whatever it may be. So we developed some very strict development codes. And that was tough because we just felt like it had to be done- if we were going to do it, we had to do it right. And we were very lucky, we've have some excellent residential developers in this community, thank goodness. But we just felt like we need to set the standard for what- what is our 6  standard here development. You know, do we just want development just because we want to get a little bigger, do we want development simply because if we let this business in town it will produce a couple dollars in sales tax- no that wasn't it. It was what is best for the community long term. So that was a big challenge, a big challenge was to set the standards that they're reasonable but there's expectations that come with investing in this community and I think in general I think we did a good job. And that if you look at Edwardsville's today. SH: Yeah I think so too. GN: So yeah. SH: So you talked about the growth in this area, the population grew, income grew, value grew. And you mentioned SIU Edwardsville as one factor, our geographic location as another factor, what else in involved and what did you see as the city's role in helping to promote this phenomenal growth that occurred? GN: Yeah, I think SH: Excuse, and as you said it's very positive kind of growth. Although I'm sure there's some who'd critique it GN: Of course. Well I think you mentioned some of the attributes that kind of made our jobs much easier. So maybe start with education in general, ok. So you just look at Edwardsville at the time, population what's, maybe 16,000 or whatever it may have been back then. But you had SIU which was a tremendous economic boom for the region, not just this community. You had a- you've always had a strong public school system here. And again a town of 17,000 or whatever thousand- you had parochial school opportunities for people, ok. You had the impact that Lewis and Clark was beginning to make in terms of the area. So you couldn't of- I'm sure you could have found an area that had more strong attributes for education. That was a big plus and as you said the geographic things. So what I think city had to do was to try to guide the development in the area of high quality, long term asset being very welcoming for residential growth but at the same time holding standards that were best for the community. Another challenge at that point was as you see the growth happening, and this was one of my major issues when I ran for mayor, ok we're going to see growth for all those reasons that I mention but we don't want to have a new Edwardsville and an old Edwardsville. We want one Edwardsville. So therefore we have got to old in the highest priority investing in our older established neighborhoods, that was kind of a theme. And that was downtown back in the early late 70s early 80s- was declining. So when you saw some of the growth the growth was happening where? It was happening on the outskirts. So as that growth is happening on the outskirts, as a sudden we're kind of recognizing that our core Edwardsville, whether it's downtown or whether it's our older established residential neighborhoods was not advancing. It was declining. I remember and have pictures of downtown Edwardsville with weeds that were 8 to 12 inches high coming out of some of the sidewalks, I'm talking about Main Street. I'm talking about the old wood utility poles that if you looked down the street one would be leaning this way, one would be leaning that way, and then one would be straight. And vacant buildings and it was to a point where we can't forget about where we've come from as a community. That was the base of this community for many years and we cannot allow that to deteriorate anymore. So we started an investment 7  in downtown Edwardsville and the older established neighborhoods and it was marvelous thing- you look at our downtown today and I don't think there's too many of a community this size that are that nice. SH: I agree with you with. How did you- what was the rule of the city in trying to attract money, development, and particularly renovation of downtown? GN: Well I tell you what, there was a gentlemen that I have said kind of came to our rescue in downtown Edwardsville many years ago, his name was Ralph Korte. You know Ralph well. And we had a section of the at the corner of Main Street and Main, I guess it was St. Louis Street, dilapidated buildings which were referred to as Edwardsville center. Now I wish I had some pictures to show, it was absolutely, it looked like it was in the middle of Baghdad it was just a disaster. Vacant buildings, going- it was awful. And of course we were fortunate that what held downtown together for years was being the county seat. Those people had to show up there, they didn't have much of a choice. You know, if they work for the county the chance are they had to come to Edwardsville and that's where they worked. And it also came to be that if people had to travel from Alton or Granite or wherever it was to the county seat, guess what, they had to come to Edwardsville whether they liked it or not. So we had that core base there. So we built around that and Ralph Korte and guy named Gary Bulkee, this was right about the time I was mayor, little before actually. And they decided to invest in an office building which is now today Mark Twain, used to be Mark Twain Plaza, the new buildings. And that's spurred things. And then all a sudden you had people like Bob Wetzel, the Bank of Edwardsville, always been a fixture in downtown Edwardsville. Listen, when they expanded their complex they didn't have to do there. And I knew it and we talked about it. They could have gone anywhere in the outskirts to the quote new part of Edwardsville, the new development but they decided they were going to with downtown. And then all a sudden you had people like businesses like Walgreens is a good example that said you know what, we believe in downtown Edwardsville. So a lot of it was that we did offer some significant incentives to draw people there but- and part of that was we could not expect the Bank of Edwardsville to add on to their complex and then have all kinds of issues with water supply. You know, so that's where the city invested. We basically reconstructed the infrastructure to make sure when people, even as simple as a Walgreens or the Bank of Edwardsville or whoever it may be, you know, you can't expect them to invest in something that's considered a bad investment. It's got to be a positive thing for them, so we built the infrastructure so they didn't have to worry about that. We improved the streets, we improved the sidewalks, we said if you- I guess my kind of take on this was this that, and I remember saying this in city government, if we're not willing to invest in downtown Edwardsville then why in the world would somebody from the private sector come in here and invest. This has got to be a true partnership of the city building the infrastructure, fixing up the utilities, making all the things available for success for private sector investment. And sometimes I shook my head but- this worked, it did. And then all a sudden it was it tired, sick and tired of seeing wood telephones falling all over the place this looked awful. So then we started the infrastructure program for the streetscape. And all of those kinds of things but a lot of it was that you couldn't be afraid to ask people. It didn't bother me in the least to go to the Bob Wetzel's, and people were very good to me by the way, and say Bob what can we do to insure the Bank of Edwardsville is going to stay in downtown Edwardsville and be a core part of our downtown. And you know it's a little thing but I think they appreciate the fact that we wanted them to stay. Our position wasn't you know, well do what you want to do, our position was we respect whatever your decision is in the end, but we want you to know that this is where we want you and this is why. And maybe in a small way those kinds of things kind of helped in the end. 8  SH: Who besides Bob Wetzel was instrumental in guiding or promoting the growth of this area? GN: John Fruit. SH: John Fruit? GN: John Fruit played a big role. And there was an economic development commission that Gordon Broom, you know a lot of these players I think. But Gordy was on, so we appointed an economic development commission and they helped kind of promote. And a lot of that just having people like that to rely upon to be good will ambassadors for the city. But the Ralph Korte, Ralph coming in and making that investment. You know Ralph was major player in the St. Louis area, one of the most respected business people that I have ever met over the years. But I think that, oh man, then you got to look at like- you may refer to these as kind of the littler guys, Embersmens Wear. You remember that? SH: Yes. GN: It was small, it was kind of the small business. Bob Schwartz. Bob Schwartz, you name it. It was really astounding how player of all sizes of all different areas came together and basically with that thing that basically says this downtown is worth saving. This downtown being the county seat, as mayor when somebody came into Edwardsville maybe once every three years from let's say Alton or you name it, and they're coming here not necessarily because they kind of want to be here but because they have to be here to do business with the county. I want them to come in to Edwardsville and say wow this is nice, this is a nice place. And it sounds like a miniscule thing but I think it was important that we make those kinds of investments in our older established neighborhoods, number one downtown and number two so of these older residential areas. A good example, Conventry Street. Conventry Street back in the mid-80s was probably 80 percent rental properties, nice homes but just kind of converted to rental property. And it was deteriorating quite frankly. But it wasn't just the homes that were deteriorating it was the sewer system and the water system that couldn't support much more than what was there. So we invested in those neighborhoods. We said you know, you know, we need new sidewalks, we need nicer streets, we need infrastructure that supports somebody's willingness to invest and that happened at a pretty rapid pace. Rich Walker a gentlemen I think you know Rich well. Rich was an iatrical part of the City Council back in those days. Rich was kind of, he was the guy that really helped spearhead the kind of restoration of downtown. You now Rich was the guy that was willing to take the lead on taking the Wildey Theatre which was a negative for our downtown and turn it into a positive. And if you look at the impact of that place today its been a tremendous asset to the community. But there were risks taken in order to get there and Rich was the guy that was willing to help. He and I and a lot of others say you know, our downtown is worth this investment. SH: Well Gary you had two names you didn't mention are Bob Plummer and Cassens? GN: Yeah, I should have. SH: Well I was going to ask you, don't feel like you have to say that [laughter]. But it was notable that those names were not mentioned. So I didn't know whether or not they were just- if they were- and this is no criticism, were they intimately involved in kind of thinking of the future? 9  GN: I think, I think first of all I would say with the Cassens the answer is absolutely. And the same with Bob, ok. So Cassens and that's one that if you look at it- I talk about the Bank of Edwardsville, well you know who was that? It was Albert Cassen, it was Cassens family giving support to the players at the bank, the Bob Wetzels and all those. So certainly Cassens. Let me give you another example of the asset of Cassens. Cassens Transport, that's a massive company. They don't have to be in downtown Edwardsville today, they could be anywhere in the county doing their business but they stuck with us downtown. So I commend them. From a standpoint of residential development Bob Plummer saw, I believe Bob saw the value of investing in Edwardsville. He was there- Bob was not the guy that I refer to with the pickup truck and a hammer, ok. Bob was a true developer, true businessman, self-made, very much so. And Bob, we all knew this, one of the ways to get new business investment much of that business was driven by rooftops, ok. So it doesn't matter that we want a whatever restaurant chain restaurant. It doesn't matter if the numbers aren't there for them, they're not going to come here. They don't care who the mayor is, they could care less. So rooftops played a major role in driving the business side of the investment. And Bob played a major role in doing that. SH: And Gary was there kind of a, I don't even know if I can ask the question correctly. Was there an overarching vision that you guys came up with or even not- that guided this remarkable growth? GN: I guess a lot of that happened so fast because it was rather rapid, that as I said earlier that we kind of had to say at one point let's slow down. Let's just slow down for a minute and let's make sure that we all are on the same page about what that vision can and should be for the future of the community. So I think that that's when we did take some steps back and said listen, we need to do a much better job of developing a comprehensive plan. And we did. We stopped for awhile and said we need to update our comprehensive plan, we need to develop development codes and not restrictions, but guidelines. And I think the vision was whatever we do let's make sure that's it's good for the long-term benefit of the community. SH: And you know I would think that the we in that sentence, at least in reference to the city, was you and your allies in the City Council and city government watching out for the issues like infrastructure, sewer, roads, and safety. GN: Exactly, planned commissions, zoning boards those kinds of things. SH: Exactly, right. And setting the codes and schools. Who, what other areas of the we are there and did you like get together for a coffee and say hey this is- this is where I think we ought to go next and GN: Yeah, you know, the one thing that whether it was a role that I was so fortunate to play as mayor, or even here at the YMCA was, you know, I learned from many years ago from many of the mentors that I kind of mentioned earlier that sometimes it's a lot more important to listen than to talk. And one example of listening was there's much more to the success of a community than a handful of people that are elected, ok. It's the citizenry, the everybody. So to give you an example when I went into office as mayor there were probably around 40 people that served on various boards and commissions whether it's a park board or a plan commission or zoning board or I mentioned the economic development commission area. When I left the city had about 110 because we expanded that and that was one way for us to get more input and sometimes it may not make you feel real good at the time but sometimes you also have to look 10  at the other perspective of development. A lot of people really weren't as wild about development. It was like gosh, we're ok the way we are or why do we have to do it. So you know I always kind of felt like I want to hear from the nay sayers too because I want that to be a balance of decision that we kind of make. So growing up here I mean there wasn't, and I love this by the way, you know if I go to the grocery store chances are there was somebody that would bump into me and say nice things and there were some that would say some not so nice things. But I think listening helped us, I really do. And I think that a couple examples of development that you see today and you see down in what they call the American bottoms, all the distribution centers well that was rather controversial when it started because it was good quality farmland and it was, you know, there was nothing wrong with it obviously. But there were others that had that vision of development and we annexed that area down there because we wanted to have some say in what that development would be. That's why we annexed it and if you look at it today it produces thousands and thousands of jobs and I think it's turned out to be you know good for the community and the region as, you know, a whole. SH: Well let's talk about some of the resistance to change and to the growth. You mentioned there were those that just wanted to keep Edwardsville a quaint city the kind of small town that they liked, loved and were use to. I've heard people suggest that they don't like the change because it's the suburbanization of this area we're in. And I guess that must mean that it becomes kind of homogenized. GN: Exactly. SH: And there are probably- were those- do people complain about their property taxes going up to build for the infrastructure? GN: Well, not really. I mean nobody is happy with property taxes, ok. One thing I'm really proud of is that in the 20 years I was mayor our tax rate actually decreased, ok. Now that doesn't necessarily mean your tax bill went down but it meant that it didn't go up proportionally as it could have based upon the property values, ok. So I think that this kind of ties back into the issue of downtown and the older established neighborhoods. And here was the balance that I felt like we had to have that it- if we weren't willing to invest in our older neighborhoods then why would anybody even think about doing that ok. So what we wanted to do was as best we could retain what I think you were talking about here and that's the charm and character of the nice, quaint, small, friendly town. And that's not as easy to do when people are wanting to be here, you know, they want to invest here. They know it's a good investment whether it's their own personal homes or whether it's their businesses. So it was like ok we're growing and we know we're growing and you know what whether we- we can't put a gate up you know. I had a lot of people after they moved here after they moved here a couple years earlier from who knows where and say you got to stop this growth. Well and I said well you're lucky we didn't it two years ago or you wouldn't be here, you know. But it really just comes to a balance, it's like ok well we're going to have new growth that's not a bad thing, but let's make sure it's good quality number one. Let's make sure it's a long lasting asset, maybe number two. Let's make sure that we don't forget about who we are and where we came from with our nice little quaint downtown which was no longer charming. But how could we kind of bring all those things together. And there were- there were sure people that said you know- and people say it today, you know. I hear people today that say the growth is kind of bit much today can we just kind of slow down and of course it's not my role anymore. But you got to have balance. And I think an example that I'll never forget was back in I guess it was 2002, I has been on the Illinois Municipal Board 11  of Director for at that point like 10 years. And the Illinois Municipal League is the league of cities in the state, ok. Illinois has like 11 hundred municipalities from towns of 10 people to Chicago. And I was selected president of the Illinois Board of Municipal Board of Directors. So it gave me an opportunity to basically to go north, south, east, and west to smaller towns to bigger towns, to you know it. From Paris, Illinois on the east to Galseburge to Cairo to you name it just as representative of the municipal league. And the one thing, I just told somebody this the other day, the one thing that I will never forget is that no matter where I was in the state as I was driving back home to good ole Edwardsville I would say I'm glad of the challenges that we have versus others. And by that, and it's very true in my opinion, I would go to a city in eastern central Illinois, nice little town there challenges were as follows people couldn't wait to get out of there, businesses were leaving as quickly as they could, nobody wanted to invest any money in the community, kids were growing up couldn't wait to get out their little home town. And this was happening all over the state. And I'd come back to Edwardsville, and here's my challenges too much growth, parking problems downtown, need to refurbish the infrastructure to prepare for new investment, businesses that wanted to be here, families that wanted to move here. And I- every time I'd come home I'd say you know what, makes me feel better about my challenges. SH: Your problems? GN: Yeah. SH: Did the presence of the university create any special tensions or challenges? GN: You know that- I've heard that. That would have been well before my time I think. You know kind of one of the first SH: The land acquisition GN: Yeah all that kind of stuff how many years ago. But I got to tell you something I think this university unquestionably is not only one of the greatest asset of this community, it's a great asset of this entire region and this state. So you think about it, how many people, maybe looking at one, ended up coming here to this place to this community to this area because of that. A lot. And these are people were certainly highly educated. They were willing to invest in their homes and their property. These, the people that came to this area because of the university have had an immense positive impact on this community. No doubt about it. I have always felt strongly and very positively about SIUE. And to pay back that, let me just say this, I remember saying this to Vaughn Vandergrift before his departure. I said Vaughn, matter of fact this was at Vaughn's- had a little party for him at Birdies I remember, going away kind of thing, very nice thing. And I spoke and I said you know I've been working on, I worked on David Warner and that just didn't quite work with David. Now I've been working on Vaughn and I said this is a relatively simple thing but if, I said if my son Andrew he better graduate in four years, which he hasn't by the way he's on his fifth year at Carbondale. I said if Andrew graduates in four years that means that Debbie and I will have had 20 years of our kids in SIU, either Edwardsville or Carbondale. Isn't that neat? And I said there's nobody in this room that can't tell me that ain't worth having a sidewalk named after me. [laughter] I said Vaughn I never ask you for a building, I just want a sidewalk, I want a bench, I want something for those 20 years of investment. But you know what I mean, I look at my kids and Ashley went here for four years, went on to law school at Carbondale, has a tremendous career. Amanda four 12  years here, great job. Abby, four years in Carbondale great job. Andrew is we're trying to wind him through, matter of fact I may to call on you for some help. But SIU has been marvelous for this area and I, you know, I mean I think we're you know I personally feel like I'm very blessed to have grown up in a really nice town that in my view keeps getting better. SH: Well I think it was- it gave Warner credit for really beginning to emphasis the Edwardsville. GN: Absolutely. SH: And that over, maybe over the SIU part. And he said after all people talk about Berkley, they don't talk about University of California at Berkley, just say Berkley. Well we should just say Edwardsville so that logo [talking over each other] and that evolved into the E. And it's just absolutely really I think important that they symbiotic relationship between the city and the... GN: I think there's a true connection because of those kinds of things. Not that there wasn't ever a true connection but that really it kind of solidified that togetherness, you know. And I mean I have people that come in from out of town and I love to drive them around this campus, you know what I mean. I think we just really fortunate and I think on the education part when Lewis and Clark, I have to tell you a story that about the Nelson property. And you probably remember some of the history of this, but SIU had that for many years. And it was declining and SIU finally said this ain't worth investing, you know, money in to keep it kind of going. So it was kind of abandoned, right. Well I remember my white papers talked about that when I first ran for mayor what can be done there. And I kind of said back then it's probably- in order for this to succeed whether we like it or not it's probably going to require some type of support from taxing entities. I don't think the private sectors going to go in there and clean it up and fix it up, I just don't think that's going to happen. So low and behold Dale Chapman, who as you know Dale, he's a pretty aggressive guy he's a do-er I think. So I'll never forgot it was in conversations with SIU and with Lewis and Clark and Jay Hoffman played a big role in this, I will never forget the day and it was actually that day- it was at city hall and my secretary said Dale Chapman. And I said ok, so I Dale how you doing, have our little conversation. Gary guess what, I said, he said we got a deal with SIU on the Nelson place. I said really, he said yup. He said we got a deal, we're going to take this project on and you're going to be proud of what we do and all that good stuff. So Dale then, I said can you kind of share with me what kind of deal did you get. And Dale said we're getting that whole place for a dollar. Now Steve you're going to love this. And I said Dale I think you got a big problem. He said what's that, what do you mean a big problem. I said well, I said state statue it requires- you cannot pay more than the appraised value and the appraised value ain't a dollar Dale. [laughter] It was a joke of course, I said Dale you're kind of over paying at a dollar. But if you look at that, that's a good example you know of turning something in that's like the city's old sewer plant. It's now the watershed nature center, now that and the N.O. Nelson thing is kind of turning something that's a negative into a positive, you know. But so SIU has played a marvelous role not just for the community but for me personally. And that's a value to me. SH: Was there any particular challenge that you felt that you just wished you could do it over again and address differently? GN: Well, I'm sure that there are some that- I'm a pretty positive in general person, so that kind of stuff I forget I guess [laughing]. But no, I think that there were some real tough decisions that had to be made in 13  order to have the end product what it is or was. One that I won't forget is the city of Edwardsville back twenty- fifteen years ago was one of the few cities that didn't have a utility tax. So, but what we did have was- we had to buy city stickers for your car and had to buy dog license and all this little nickel and dime stuff. So I said in order for us to achieve our goal of improving our infrastructure- streets, water, sewer, sidewalks, all those kinds of things. You know whether you like it or not you have to have money for it. So I proposed that we impose a three percent utility tax, which is very standard, and nothing- but it's a new tax. And people don't like that. But what I said was if we impose that tax then I propose we do away with all the nickel and dime stuff that we bug people with. We make people drive to city hall to buy a city sticker so we can get ten bucks, that's crazy. So we put a package together that basically said if this three percent utility tax goes into effect as approved by majority of city council here's what we will do, we will delete all these other pittily nickel and dime things, but we will also commit to 75 percent of every penny that comes through utility tax can only be spent on streets and sidewalks. And to this day that happens and that's why our residential streets have had a lot of improvements and how those today get that nice resource available them. But I think in terms of regrets, you know, certainly I think you know sometimes you wish things could happen faster. But I guess that's just government, you know. I'm just trying to think if there's anything that kind of really jumps out at me. And there's really not, you know. I'm content, and we certainly- I'm sure we made mistakes along the way but, you know, I think the goal when I went into office was to hopefully play a little role in making it a better place when I left office. And I feel pretty good about that. SH: I think you should, I think you did a marvelous job. Is there anything else that we should cover or talk about that you can think about right now? We can always pick up again. GN: I'm kind of thinking we covered a lot of things. I think that one of the things that I think really kind of may be reemphasizing this but again when you have people that want to be a part of a community that's a good thing. And I think that says a lot about the community, that people want to be here. They're not necessarily coming here because they don't have to pay taxes, they're not necessarily coming here because groceries are cheaper. They're coming here because I think that they believe it's a good investment for them, their business, their family. Or it's a good invest in the lives of their kids. That- to me those are really important things so when I would see people couldn't wait to get out of their home towns, you know, I'm thinking I'm glad we don't have that. And I'm kind of- I'm really glad that people if they're going to move to the metro east area that they're going to look at Edwardsville. And there's a lot of different things that make that happen. And it's the education component, I think it's a safe community, I think it's fiscally sound community. It's a place where if you're investing your money you're going to most likely invest it in something that gives you the highest rate of return that you can get. So in my view if you're going to invest in land or property or a new home, chances are you wanna make that invest based upon what you think is best for your future and your quote return. But maybe your return in different ways than just money. And I think that's why there's just an awful lot of people that come here. And the Y's a good example of that. I mean, I see- I served in those dual capacities for a long time and, you know, I just think this is a good place and you've played a role in that- the people. This isn't- this wasn't an achievement by an administration, this wasn't achievement by a handful of people, this was an achievement I believe, and by the way we got a long way to go we're not there yet we're getting better I think every day. But I think it's an achievement of a true collective effort by all the partners and players and that's what kind of makes me feel good that for awhile there I was a captain of that. 14  SH: Very good. Thanks Gary. GN: Thank you. 15  
MadisonCounty;Paul Brazier;1965;2017;Paul Brazier  1965 2017  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Paul Brazier Oral History Interview Jason Stacy, Interviewer Global Brew Tap House, Edwardsville February 8, 2017 Jason Stacy (JS): This is Jason Stacy, it is the tenth of February 2017. I'm here with Paul Brazier. We are doing an oral history for Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive of Madison County, and we are going to talk about bike culture in the 1980s with Paul Brazier, who is popularly known as "the bike whisperer of Madison County". So, uh, let’s get started. Paul you worked for a now famous bike shop called Pedal Shop in the 1980s. Why don't you tell me about how you got started there and what it was like to work there and what you did? (00:48) Paul Brazier (PB): Yeah, I started working there in the summer of 1980, I was a freshman in high school. Beginning out just doing some menial things around the shop, cleaning up, uh, doing trash, doing windows, and things like that. Eventually moved into doing some basic repairs, flat tires, tune ups and things like that, assembling bikes. And as I went through high school, and through college, I still worked at that shop and moved all the way up to the ranks of managing and running things and the store when I left in 1992. (01:24) JS: Good, so you were there about twelve years. (01:27) PB: Yes JS: So tell me about some of the merchandise you had, some of the merchandise you moved, some of the popular stuff that you were selling. What, what was it like to run a bike shop in the 1980s? (01:39) PB: Uh, it was a lot of fun for stuff. We had a great time doing it. Um, since I was a little bit younger, the focus of mine was more in the BMX bicycles, the bicycle motorcross. There was racing all in this area for that, nothing really this side of the river, but there were three tracks on the St. Louis side of the river. And a lot of the kids that were, you know, eight years old up to 15-16 years old were spending weekends racing the BMX bikes. So that was a big part of the business at that time. And then also were just the uh, regular family bikes, road bikes, cruisers, three speeds and things for just casual riding. Um, in the 80s there wasn't a huge cross section of different kinds of bikes. You pretty much had kids bikes and you had 10-speed bikes so, uh, of course there were high-line racing bikes for those that wanted to actually race on the road and such. But, um, in this area wasn't a huge thing at that time. (02:45) JS: So, you know, since you brought it up, let’s talk about BM bikes, BMX bikes a little bit because I see a lot of kids today riding around on BMX bikes in Edwardsville and um, you know a lot of them uh, the bikes seem to have kind of street tires on them and they've got the saddles way down on 'em, and it looks like a lot of fashion to me, it doesn't look like these kids are doing a lot of racing, but I don't know. Can you tell me maybe some of the about the BMX bikes, a little about BMX culture, uh in uh Madison 1  County in the St. Louis area and tell me a little about the bikes maybe. (03:19) PB: Okay, um, well the bikes you see today are completely different than what we were looking at in the 70s and 80s. The bikes back in the 70s and 80s were more designed for off road racing on a track, basically if you've ever seen a motorcycle off road track, the BMX track is a miniature version of it. And um, it's how those bikes were popular, they had knobby tires for the dirt, um, they're pretty light weight and such, but [Loud noise, inaudible] different design in what you would find today. Today's bikes are more designed for doing tricks, um stunts and things like that, and not necessarily built for racing on the off road. (04:02) JS: And were a lot of kids, you know Edwardsville was a very different town back in the 70s and 80s, were there a lot of kids riding around on BMX bikes in little gangs like I see them today? Is it the same sort of culture here in Edwardsville as I see among the 13 year olds set today? (04:18) PB: You know what, yeah it was. I was kind of in on that type of thing at my age when I was doing the BMX stuff. We were rode around town in groups looking for places to jump our bikes and find some dirt to race on or whatever. Um, but that type of thing still was popular with the kids that were riding those types of bikes were banding together in groups and doing stuff like that like they do today. Um, the difference is, is now that there are maybe some places for those guys to go do tricks, but um, for the BMX guys like, like I was, it was getting ready to go race on the weekends was the, that was the big thing. (04:57) JS: And you think what, what helped the change was skateboard culture? I see a lot more of the tricks that look like street tricks that they are doing on the BMX bikes, uh, was the difference then, they were more modeled on sort of motocross racing or something? (05:11) PB: Well the bikes then we had was more like motorcycle/motocross it was that style, now I said the bikes are more designed to do tricks. So like skateboarding like you brought up and stuff, you know has a lot to do with it because those guys will ride those bikes at the skateboard park and try, and try to do some of the same tricks as the skateboarders do also. So, yeah, the skateboards, and the guys riding the 20-inch BMX style bikes now are kinda hang out together a lot I think. (05:40) JS: Good. You also mentioned recreational riding and um, you know, right now Edwardsville, I see a lot of recreational riders on hybrid bikes. I see them out on the trails and the hybrid bikes to me look like, um, combination of uh just a street bike, or a city bike, and a, and a sporty bike, something maybe to give you some speed that you might even put some spandex on and try to ride. But I know that's pretty new, what kind of recreational bikes were you selling back in the 80s when you were at the Pedal Shop? (06:11) PB: In the 80s, really the recreational stuff would have been more of a three speed bike with fenders and not really a fat tire on it at all, just a regular, you know normal width tire. Just something to basically get you around. Um, you know, it was kind of an interesting culture back then. Um, you didn't have a whole lot of choices, what you got to choose from form a bike. You either had turn-down handle bars style ten speed bike or you got kinda the recreational three speed bike that was a little bit more upright or you had a kids type o bike, a BMX bike or a just a banana seat kind of bike. So there wasn't as many choices as they have today, and I think back in the 80s is when pretty much the bike manufacturers really started paying 2  attention a lot more to technological advances and starting incorporating that into the bikes. They were going for the lighter weight with different types of materials, aluminum, moving into titanium, and then carbon fiber after that, making the bikes a lot lighter and of course the prices were really good at the time too with that. And um, also, you know during the 80s there were some other bike types that were, starting to come into play. Mountain biking started to come in the mid-80s, and then what you were kind of mentioning is more of a hybrid bike, kind of a mix between a road bike and a, and a mountain bike which kind of give you a little more of an upright riding position but you also had a lot of different gears to go through and you see a lot of that on the trails today for more a recreational style bicycle. Its more comfort. But yet you can still cover quite a bit of ground and it’s not, um, you know the big fat knobby tire that is vibrating you to death either while you ride, if you want to ride a quite a bit of mileage. (08:03) JS: You know it's interesting you bring up the trails because I love the trails here in Edwardsville and in Madison County. I use them for transportation and I use them for entertainment, recreation. But I imagine those trails didn't, uh, exist yet in the 1980s, or if they did what was recreational riding like here in Edwardsville for your customers when you were working at the Pedal Shop? (08:26) PB: Yeah, the uh bike trails that we find in Madison County now had not even probably been thought of. They were still railroad in use railroad lines that you know had you know had trains on them all the time up until probably the mid-90s is when they started I think abating those trails and turn the train right-a- ways and turning them into trails. So, in the 80s in this area there really wasn't any marked bicycle trails to actually ride. Um, closest thing you could probably get was to maybe go up to Alton and ride the River Road from Alton to Grafton, or maybe up to Pere Marquette. That was probably in this area the only really designated bicycle trail that you could use. Um, at SIU campus had some trails on the campus itself for use, but um there was really no connectors to it or anything like that so you were riding streets until you could get onto one of the trails. Um, the main trail entrance I believe for SIU was off of St. Louis Street, and it's actually closed now, it's not even a useable trail any longer. So, um, but that has totally expanded tremendously as we all know how our trail system here is now is in Madison County is incredible. It's probably pretty much second to none in the state for sure and probably one of the best systems in the country for recreational riding. (09:58) JS: So was that way to get on SIUE campus, was that the old Morris Trail that they just recently shut down and knocked that bridge down? (10:06) PB: Yes, that is what I was referring to. Yeah it came off and went across the creek and then took you up into campus, up by Tower Lake area and in campus.(10:11) JS: That was a pretty rough trail.(10:15) PB: Yeah it was just um chat rock or possibly you know, um, aggregated line it wasn't super nice and when it was wet it wasn't nice to ride on. So it was, but it you know it was a way to get to campus without riding on the busy highway worrying about maybe getting clipped by a car either, so.(10:37) JS: So when I go to a bike shop here in Edwardsville today, and I know you sometimes sell some used bikes, you know you get a lot of adults who just want to buy a hybrid and they want to use it for weekend riding and they want to ride the trails and such  when you were at the Pedal Shop if you had you know an 3  adult come in and just wanted to just do some recreational riding with their family, where would they ride in Edwardsville? What kind of riding could you do on an old 3-speed with fenders like you said, just wanted to sort of treat a bike like a you know, piece of recreation and get a little exercise? (11:12) PB: Well, mainly, you'd probably just ride the streets in town. You also have to remember you know 30 plus years ago, there was half of the population here in Edwardsville. And so you didn't have as much traffic, the subdivisions weren't, there weren't really too many subdivisions developed. So you know, there really wasn't a whole lot of traffic, wasn't here as much as it is now, so, you know I wouldn't, you know, in the 80s you could ride the streets and not see a lot of cars and you could move around town fairly easy on a bicycle and not have too much trouble with that. Um, you know if you wanted to venture out on some of the country roads you could, you could also do that. But, and mainly the people that were riding recreationally around here were you know just going around town, one place to another, one side of town to the other, downtown by the courthouse, maybe out Mt. Clair, or vice versa type of riding is what you were kinda looking at. Really not a lot of, you know, no where nearly the amount of trails and types of riding that you could get [inaudible] you can get on a trail in Edwardsville now probably just about within a mile of any house, so, a lot more accessibility now than there was back then, to lengthy riding. (12:33) JS: So let's talk about road bikes a little bit because you know I'm a big fan of, of steel road bikes and old road bikes and when I go into the bike shops here in town I see a lot of carbon and I see a lot of really expensive bikes, and I'm just curious what were some of the road bike brands? I mean you were working at Pedal Shop at the height of the bike boom, at least the last bike boom, and so I'm curious, what kinds of brands you were selling? What the road bikes were like? And what kind of people were riding road bikes? And where they were riding back in the 1980s when you were there? (13:04) PB: Um, so in the, most the brands that are still around today were still, were also around back then. Uh, kind of makes a cycle of itself. Of course, in the 80s Schwinn bicycles were still probably your most well known bike. If you asked anybody about "name a bike brand?" they would say Schwinn and it's probably pretty much still true today if you ask a lot of people um. But they um, you know, there was some changes in the company and such and they've kind of fallen off out of the mainstream as much as they had been, but you know, if you were to talk about bikes, that's what you talked about for Schwinn's back 70s and 80s. Um, in the shop, in the Pedal Shop, we carried, we carried the Schwinn bikes, we carried the Raleigh bikes, which is an English company, we carried Panasonic bikes which were out of Japan, and we also carried a French bike called Motobecane. And so those were the main brands that we carried. There were multiple other brands available in the market. Bianchi was available. Trek was just getting started. Specialized was just getting started at the time. Um, there's an array of Japanese bikes that were in the market also. Small branded, private branded bikes that were being brought into the country too under, under names. Around here one of them was Takara, was a, was a Japanese bike that was being brought into the, into the uh, in. (14:36) So you know there, it was, there was a lot of different brands you could choose from. Like I said, at that time in the early 80s there was no lot of technological advances going on. If you bought a bike in one year and the next year there probably wouldn't be big changes in what was on the bike or something, maybe they might change a color. And that might be the big change. But, um, it seems like about the mid-80s came along and the technological advances started really kicking in, they started using different, like I said, different frame materials, aluminum, titanium. They were 4  experimenting with other stuff, plastics and carbon fiber, not necessarily a lot of carbon fiber in the 80s but that was more 90s coming in. (15:22) But it was that type of stuff, the technological advances were just every year coming on and coming on and making the bikes lighter, making them stronger, making them perform better, so they shifted better, they braked better, they weighed less, and they were more, seats were more comfortable. Just all those kinds of things for advances on the bikes. So big changes in that time were going on, so. But you know, for people, normal people they didn't, like I stated earlier, there wasn't a lot of choices. You either bought a 10-speed bike with a turned-down handle bars or that had multiple speeds or you had more a 3-speed kind of a bike with upright type of a bike. So there wasn't a lot so most people were choosing the 10 speed bikes. You know, it was just basic transportation, nothing super fancy or anything like that, so, that’s what you saw. You saw a lot of, whole lot of that type of bike. The $200 range bike was probably the most popular type of thing in the road bike at that time. (16:32) JS: And what was the bike you were riding? I know you did a lot of road riding, what were you riding and where would you ride in Madison County? (16:40) PB: Um, I was uh, when I wanted to go on longer rides I actually had a Motobecane that I rode. For a little bit longer rides it had panniers, and racks on it so I could pack stuff along, pack stuff and go if I wanted to camp or do overnight type stuff. That is the bike I rode for that. I also did some road racing in the 80s and I had a Raleigh road bike that I used to race on, for myself. (17:07) JS: And when (17:07) PB: Is what I had (17:08) JS: And you bike-camped, where would you go? (17:10) PB: Oh we'd do maybe rides like I said up to Pere Marquette, camp at Pere Marquette, or maybe just have friends that lived in the county and we'd ride from town out to the country type of thing because you know your 14-15 years old and you can't drive, so how else you gonna get anywhere but on you bikes? [laughs] so you know, it was your transportation, so you know, that’s what, you did that type of stuff. (17:35) For training purposes around here most of the people would ride country roads, and um, sometimes it was a little dangerous. Some of the people out there weren't very friendly to cyclists. So you had to be very careful where you rode, when you rode, and um, and such. But that's where you did most of your training was outside the city on the country roads around here.(17:58) JS: Gravel roads or paved? (18:00) PB: Uh, more, eh, maybe blacktop, and maybe some chat roads. Um, that was pretty much what we were on. Most of the country roads were like that around here, back in the 80s. (18:12) JS: So see I find people generally pretty polite now when I ride out to Marine or ride out to Worden or Staughton and I think that's maybe because they are used to a lot of bicycles on the road. But you've found that you know, people out in the country weren't used to bicycles back then? And they weren't as, weren't as friendly? (18:29) PB: Oh definitely weren't very friendly. That's probably one of the main reason I stopped riding the road 5  bike as much, for that reason. And I [inaudible] switched over probably in the late 80s into, actually doing mountain bike racing and riding some, it was a good reason to transfer over, just because that reason, it was getting pretty bad around here with uh, altercations with people out on country roads. (18:55) JS: You got, you got a story you want to share about an altercation out on the country road? (18:59) PB: Uh, there were so many different ones. You would get beer bottles thrown at you, people at would cuss at you out their windows and tell you to get off the road and go home. It, you know, stuff, I've had some friends that got you know, pushed off the road by cars and trucks. Um, had some pretty bad accidents too, under that. Luckily I've never had that, just you know people throwing stuff at you and yelling at you more than anything else. But you know it's kind of unnerving when you're riding your bike and they're in a big old pick-up truck, it's a little unnerving when they are coming around you and throwing stuff at you and yelling at you.(19:36) JS: Do you think people are more used to cyclists or a little more accepting of cyclists now-a- days out in the country or have we all just gotten lucky?(19:45) PB: Oh I think they've, I think people noticed a little bit more and are a little more aware of the cyclists and I think there's, the people there living in the country are not necessarily as country as they used to be. So with people living out in that area, um, are a lot more accepting of bicyclists. (20:06) JS: So you mentioned you switched over from road cycling to mountain bikes primarily because of uh, some danger out there in the country, see do you want to tell me about mountain bikes in the 80s and what it was like out here? What the bikes were like? And where you would ride? And what it was like to ride out in this area in the 1980s on single-track? (20:29) PB: Yeah, I mean it was actually a lot of fun because it was something completely new and different than anything that you've seen. You know I was a former BMX guy so I was a little bit more familiar for me to be off the road and riding in the dirt. But it was just a blast. We really tried to find anywhere you could off road to go ride. It was a lot of it, times were just starting to abate the railroad tracks so you had some of that area to ride on, so it was more of a single-track muddy area to ride on some of that. Um, we found some old motorcycle trails in the woods that had been around for a long time. There used to be some off of Old Schwarz Road, there's an old coal mine back there that you could go back and try, there were some trails back in there we'd ride. There used to be also some trails back off of Plum, Plum Road area. There used to be an area back there were there was an old motorcycle track that was back there and also some trails cut into the woods by motorcycle riders, off road motorcycle riders. We'd find those. Um but the best trails were out at SIU on the campus, they were called The Sweet William Trails. They were, I guess the best way to put it, they were up on the bluff across from the soccer stadium. They were on that side of the campus versus where they are now on the other, on the kind of other side of there. But there was a ton of trails cut into there. I believe they were originally cut for biology department out at SIU and they were doing studies in the woods out there for different botanical, if I'm saying that right,(22:11) JS: Yep (22:12) PB: type of things. Um, and so those trails were all cut and the mountain bikers found them and started 6  working on them, made them a little bit bigger and improved it, some improvements on them and they got a ton of use. But eventually you had some people that mistreated them and would go out and ride on them when they shouldn't have been riding on them, when it was wet and muddy and nasty. And they thought that was a lot of fun to tear them up, and so eventually the university had to shut those down just because they were unsafe and they were doing a ton of damage to that area so the science people couldn't use the trails anymore for their studies that they wanted to ride themselves. So they shut down but I believe within the last probably eight years or so that they developed another set of trails on the other side of the campus. I guess the north side of the campus that are the trails now, those are really nice set up, they kind of connect up with the cross country course and stuff like that. So that's actually really nice place to, to ride also. (23:15) JS: And these are rigid mountain bikes you guys are riding, right?(23:19) PB: Oh yeah! There was no, there's no suspension on these. These were basically some of them were modified road bikes or whatever, modified BMX bikes to made in to put some gears on and let them go. I mean the original mountain bikes that came out from manufacturers were super heavy and they weren't very durable and such. But when we said that technology stuff kicked into that part of the bicycle industry too and they started developing lighter weights, stronger materials, and stronger bikes. And then probably in the early, early 90s is when suspension started kicking in. You had your first bikes offered that had suspension on them, so. There was front suspension, wasn't very lightweight either, they added even more weight to the mountain bike if you even needed that. But it did make the ride a lot nicer. (24:12) JS: So were you one of the first adopters of mountain bike riding in the area? Like were you doing that kind of stuff even before Pedal Shop had them? Or did you get your first mountain bike when Pedal Shop got their first mountain bike? (24:24) PB: I got my first mountain bike when they, at from the shop, it wasn't anything I put together and just made. But um, uh it was a production bike, it was a Raleigh production bike that I had bought. It was in its beginning years and everybody, as I said, every manufacturer had bikes, mountain bikes, had different stuff going on with them. And I think even the industry really didn't realize that how big it was really going to get for you know ten, fifteen years. That's what everybody was wanting to buy. Everybody wanted a mountain bike, with the fat knobby tire bikes and you know wanted them to be more durable they could jump off of curbs and you know whatever they wanted to do with it. So it became really really popular thing. Um, not, I wasn't necessarily a pioneer in riding mountain bikes in the area. I mean I was doing it, we were doing races, and it was just a group of us that were working in the shops and other avid cyclists. And the guys that were road bike racers and wanted to do something on the, in the off season so it gave them something they could do ride different kind of bike. They weren't on the road you go in the woods, a little more cover, not so cold, still get a good workout. So it was, it was a good crossover activity plus, it was just a lot of fun. (25:42) JS: I got just one last question for you Paul, and you can decide whether you want to answer it or not. But I heard a story about you, some friends, BMX bike, ice on Cougar Lake and SIUE officers - are you willing to relate any of this story? (25:59) PB: Oh my goodness, uh, that's probably, uh, that's a long long long time ago. Yeah, I might say I was 7  involved in that. JS: [laughs] PB: There was a large group of people there on Cougar Lake, yes. We, no harm no foul.(26:18) JS: Were there any arrests? (26:20) PB: Not that I know of. (26:22) JS: And did anyone end up in the water? (26:23) PB: Nobody ended up in the water. The water was solid. (26:27) JS: Good! That's good to hear! Well this has been Jason Stacy interviewing Paul Brazier on bike culture in the 1980s in Edwardsville in Madison County for Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive of Madison County. Thanks Paul, I appreciate it.(26:43) PB: Thank you, Jason. (26:44) JS: Talk to you later. (26:45) 8  
MadisonCounty;Kathy Piercy;1966;2016;Kathy Piercy 1966 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Kathy Piercy Oral History Interview Kourtnee Brenner, Interviewer Dunham Hall, SIUE, Edwardsville, Illinois Kathy Piercy October 8, 2016 Kourtnee Brenner (KB): This is Kourtnee Brenner interviewing Kathy Piercy on October 8th in Edwardsville, Illinois at SIUE. Hi Kathy. Kathy Piercy (KP): Hello KB: So, basically I want to get started with a general "who are you, where are you from, what is your background" so can you tell me where you were born? KP: I was actually born in St. Louis Missouri, um when I was a baby, my dad was in the Air Force. And so, we immediately started traveling all over the place and um I ended up going to 8 different schools from the time I was a kindergartener till the time I got to college. KB: Alright, um any ones that particularly stand out? KP: Um, I actually got involved in, I got to do my first theater production um when I was living in the state of New York. We lived in Mahopac, New York at the time and um I saw an audition for a show uh for Gypsy and they needed kids, and um it was at Chappaqua, New York which some people may realize what that is, that’s were Hillary [Clinton] lives. [Laugh] but that was the first show I tried out for. KB: And you got in? KP: I got in actually, I got baby Louise. KB: Excellent KP: Um, yes and my sister actually wasn't even going to audition, but she came along with me and because we were very similar in height, um they gave her the role of baby June, which broke my heart a little bit, but then again I came to find out that my character went on to the end of show, and was the star so, it appeased me. [Laugh] yes, both my parents also were in theater in fact they meet on the stage. KB: Excellent, that sounds amazing KP: Yeah, so it runs in my family. KB: Good, um so, once you settled down, what high school do you actually graduate from? 1  KP: Oh, I actually finished uh high school, we ended up coming back to St. Louis um and I graduated for Bishop DuBuorg High School. I was very involved in um their theater department, The Guild Players, and in fact I have done a few productions with the Guild Players alumni, in the last couple of years, so all these years later I'm still involved with that. KB: Good! Good, so when you were a child did you always want to be an actor? KP: Um, to a certain extent yes, because my mom and dad had been involved both of them, my father has his degree in Musical Education from Washington University um and then my mother um was just a singer and stuff and then she ended up with five kids and so she didn't do, she just sang around the house, but um our theater library, our library of music back then, the albums around our house were almost all um musical theater and one of the very first albums I was so enamored with I remember in high school was Jesus Christ Superstar and I was fascinated by the fact that they had actually made a play you know a stage play out of that. But um all the all the old Broadway shows my dad had albums of and that's how I and then the other thing about it is being an Air Force brat I moved around so much and it's sort of when you’re constantly making new friends every time we moved it’s sink or swim and I had to learn how to be outgoing, I'm basically not [Laugh] a true outgoing person, but I have had to learn how to be because I was always changing locations and friends and things like that so it sort of feed um that that same drive and the theater seemed a natural progression after that. KB: I can see that gaining that coping skill of "this is itchy because it's new so" KP: Yes, yes, and coping is a good word for it because yeah like I said, it's sink or swim, um I remember there was one location when I first got there I was very small for my age as well, very short um I went to a school, we lived in Cape Girardeau, Missouri at the time, which was kind of odd but um I remember they used to do uh, I went to Catholic school were they did the Mary uh, um, oh gosh, it was the thing for Mary [Laugh] whatever, I haven't gone to church in a while but um, they would put us in line sized order and I was with the third graders when I was in seventh grade, so it makes a diff[Laugh] because of my size so that was also another reason it was like "ok, I have to find ways to make myself stand out and to seem taller than I really am” and personality seemed like the way to go. KB: You have to elevate your personality in order to elevate you and your confidence. KP: I did, exactly. KB: OK KP: That's exactly right. KB: Sounds familiar KP: [Laugh] yeah KB: Alright, so, um... besides your parents being within the theater, um was there anybody in particular that kind of pushed you or um had a really positive influence in your life that you can remember? 2  KP: This is going to sound kind of crazy um but was actually kind of the opposite I had a high school teacher who was a um the director who hardly ever cast me in shows and he, he would say things to me like "you've got a lot of spunk but you really don't have a lot of talent" which fascinated me first of all, that a teacher would say something like that, but it was sort of like that and so it was like "alright, you've thrown down the gauntlet, I am going to prove to you that I do have talent." and it wasn't truly until after high school when I got to college, I mean I suddenly just blossomed and it made such a difference so it's like from, it’s funny, most people say, "Oh yeah know who was the person that gave you the most inspiration,” and it wasn't, it was actually a vengeance [Laugh] I am going to prove to you that I can do this. KB: You had true grit, you did. KP: I did. I did [Laugh] KB: That is excellent. [Laugh] Alright, um let’s see, um so, moving on to one um, where do you work now? KP: Well right now, I work for KPMG which is one of the big four public accounting firms, um I have been at this, this coming May, will be my 30th year with that firm, um. KB: You must like it then. KP: I do. I like the company as a whole. I have had different jobs throughout the years, um right now I am, and this is the job I have been in the longest, it about almost 10 years I am a proposal writer for them, so I um help production, engagement teams propose anything from audit, tax, or advisory consulting services and I help them from the RFP process all the way to when they get the piece of paper in their hands and send it out the door. So, that's what I do. KB: Ok KP: It's an interesting job and it's extremely deadline driven. KB: I bet so. KP: Very deadline driven. KB: So how did you move from theater to accounting? KP: It's amazing actually I did it because I needed a job at the time. I ended up starting there many many, well 30, almost 30, well it was more than 30 years ago because I actually left the firm once for about 18 months [Laugh] like I had to get back, but when I first started there I was an administrative staff, I was a secretary um and um it I got once I got into the firm, I started noticing things and believe it or not I have actually like threaded my experience in theater at things and events, I have written uh corporate productions for them based on some TV programs we did one that was based on Seinfeld we did the first one I did for them was based on Cheers um I did another on that was Saturday Night Live and we had everybody from Rosanne Rosanna Danna, all the way through Hans and Franz and um 3  KB: I bet that was amazing. KP: yeah we did, it was really fun to do, um and it was kind of fun to find out that the company paid me for the research so they paid me, back then I thought it was an exorbitant amount, $25 an hour to sit there and watch Saturday Night Live videos. KB: I would take that today. [Laugh] KP: [Laugh] I know, so um it was interesting to find out that I could do that and what I would do is actually twist then the scripts that I would write to meet a theme, um that the firm was, like maybe they were rolling out a quality service initiative, or things like that and that’s how, how we got involved in those things, and you just sort of twist and you know I took scripts and just kind of plugged together the certain themes KB: [inaudible] KP: Exactly and then um, I would also then, then I would [Laugh] have the actors would be actual people that worked at the firm, which people thought was hilarious to have them play those parts um and then it was really a lot of fun and I loved doing it because also because I am just so type A personality that I wanted to be the director, the writer, the producer and everything. So, it's just sort of me [Laugh] in a nut shell. KB: That sounds like a good opportunity to do everything. KP: Absolutely, absolutely, and over the years I have talked to, and I've discussed this with some of my other actors in different productions who have said to me "you know, how do you do this? Why don't you just stay in theater? Yada, yada, yada." and I am like "To be truthful, you guys, you could also kind of be doing this and corporate productions are worth a lot of money [Laugh] you guys could, it would be a nice way to make a living if you really want to do it. KB: A new untapped market. KP: It is an untapped market, um and I’ve thought about that and I have thought well you know if I ever really wanted to retire I could kind of keep my hand in the game by going that direction too so. KB: But you'll never retire from the stage? KP: uh, not from the stage never, oh no, no, no I meant retire from the accounting job. [Laugh] KB: The actual job. [Laugh] KP: [Laugh] It is too bad to, I am so far from an accountant. I can't even balance a checkbook. [Laugh] So, it's funny I work at that kind of company, but um, but what I do for them is totally different, and the fact that um my proposals what is also, and advantage, I get to use my creativity throughout a proposal um it's just a twist on you know the theater stuff but it’s like thinking of a unique way of presenting us 4  and I also in the midst of my job, I also coach the teams on their oral presentations and so my stage experience comes in very very handy. KB: So, you're teaching? KP: I am teaching, I do and acting yes. KB: [Laugh] KP: yeah at an accounting firm, yes I know. [Laugh] KB: That is amazing to me. Okay, so beyond work, you’re actively with community theater and when you first kind of settled in this area, got your job, what was the theater scene like? KP: It was pretty non-existent, I have to admit the only, the way I got involved with Curtain’s Up was kind of unique. I was actually in jeopardy of being let go from my job at the time and I was struggling with what to do. And I had a severance package coming to me and everything and I my husband and I had a long talk and I said, "I'm totally burnt out from working so much." and he said "why don't you take the summer off, the 3 months, and then after 3 months you can go and start looking for a job again?" so I was, I actually tried out for a show, Curtain’s Up show, theater company show, Bye Bye Birdie, in the, with the thought in mind that I was losing my job, job. And so, I got the show and the next thing I know I didn't lose my job I ending up changing departments and was able to stay, in the midst of doing the show. But it's funny what motivated me to get into it, but I remember at the time thinking "gosh, there's not a lot to choose from, I had not even heard about Alton Little Theater I had not heard about Looking Glass I don't know how long those productions had been in the area, but I mean I had never even heard about them, now I lived in Collinsville for, I am trying to think how many years I’ve lived there before, it was like I never heard of these productions, so one of the biggest things I think is changed is the amount of media coverage that community theaters are getting now. It's so much different, and I found that when I first joined Curtain’s Up, it was just basically a little group of people that kind of stayed to themselves and then when I started hearing about Alton Little Theater and Looking Glass and some other groups it was like they kind of stayed to themselves, well, since then it's expanded and especially the actors like to move around especially. so, it's changes quite a bit. KB: Ok, well how did you find that audition for Bye Bye Birdie? KP: you know I was trying to think about that, how did I find that? I saw it, where did I see it? It may have been a flyer like up at Shunucks. I'm trying to remember exactly how I heard about it, um and I had not been on stage except for helping write the corporate productions at work I had not been on stage for 19 years. It had been that long and I was, gosh, I wanted, I had gotten married and we'd bought a house you know the usual stuff happens in your life and the next thing you know it's 19 years later. and yeah and then the job thing happened, it was like "you're losing your job" and so yeah I was looking for something to do and KB: Why not do something you love? 5  KP: and I thought "oh well you know it will be great I'll try out for a show and if I get in the chorus that will be fun." I got the lead. [Laugh] KB: Underestimated yourself huh? KP: I did, I did, I underestimated myself so it's funny how things turn out, it really is. boy, for the life of me though I cannot remember how I found out about that audition. but I think it was something like seeing a flyer at Shunucks, I’m pretty sure. It was something like that so... KB: Well, it's very different now, you get texts and.. KP: Well, yeah you don't, well there wasn't anything, I don't even think I had a cell phone, I don't think cell phones were out at that time, that’s how long ago this was. or if it was, I had a cell phone but you barely used it because every moment was like "cha-ching, cha-ching, cha-ching" yeah and they were big and clunky and so it was a long time ago, and yeah Facebook wasn't around I am trying to remember how long Facebook's been around, but it wasn't around back then and you didn't have texting, you didn't have any of that, so yeah. KB: Actors now just look on Facebook, or look on line. KP: I know yeah. Well there's now, I mean Arts for life is one of those newsletter-y type organizations and they keep everybody connected together and somebody can post all their auditions KB: I mean even STL Auditions. KP: Yeah STL Auditions has got a bunch of auditions up there too now. I mean it's amazing how things have evolved. [Laugh] You've got the paperwork right. I can go online and look up something where as back in the old days you couldn't, you had to get it by word of mouth or hopefully you saw it in the newspaper. That was pretty much it. KB: So, it was, it was, chance that you.. KP: It was, it was by chance back then, but I was looking for something, I knew, I had thought about going to a library in the area to see if they wanted me to maybe, I thought about doing so kind of like teaching kids, that was one of my other things, that I had thought about doing I just thought "you know, maybe I could take them and was could read a play and act out scenes or something just to kind of get them involved, that is where my head was going at the time I was looking for something and I happened upon Curtain's Up Theater Company. KB: Oh, so, working with children and kind of making sure arts stays alive is really something very dear to my heart, so why did your thought immediately go to "We have to talk to children, and get them involved in plays."? KP: It's funny, well some, another side of my background was I also was a dancer. I used to, besides the normal tap, jazz, ballet dancing that I used in musical theater when I was younger, I also then did some professional work and then when my few professional jobs kind of dried up, I went to ballroom dancing 6  and became a ballroom dance instructor. I enjoyed very, very much. I suddenly came to the realization to me that I would go to weddings and stuff like that and nobody knew how to dance, and it made me crazy. So, I had thought that that was another side of it is that I love to teach kids and teenagers especially the importance of, "This is really something you guys should hold on to." Dancing, I always tell the boys, I'm like "and I hate tell yea, but if you can dance, girls will like you." [Laugh] but I just love doing it and I love then from there it expands out into I love coaching kids through scenes and it just seems like a natural progression. I grew up in musical theater so that's why music and theater kind of go hand in hand in my life at least. KB: I think that is a very, very important stepping stone for any child. KP: Absolutely, Absolutely I think it's so important and one of my biggest things in everything I do that is associated with Curtain's Up is like I want to make sure that somebody, at least one kid, you can't touch all kids, any teacher knows that but at least one kid walks away from it with the most amazing feeling and the fact that they've learned something and they're going to take something with them down the road, I want them to know that. it’s just too important of development in their lives not to have that happen, so that’s why it’s so important to me. KB: You want them to get bit by the theater bug. KP: Absolutely, well it’s not just being bit by the theater bug, I want them, well maybe I was a little bit bullied as a kid because I was so small, but it’s one of those things to put that confidence in them. it’s about helping them develop their personality being that I was, I basically a shy person, and it’s like getting that personality, giving them the confidence to open their mouth and do something on stage in front of people maybe it also is a little bit I can do performances in front of, I could do a 100 thousand people but if my close friends and my family are in the audience I become a blithering mess. And it’s the people closest to you make me the most nervous. So, and I see kids, you know I want them to develop that same confidence to do things. KB: that nervousness is a good feeling KP: Sure, keeps you sharp, keeps you sharp, but it also makes me, there have been times where I just want to throw up right before I go on stage. [Laugh] KB: Goodness KP: And I've always told people like "yeah you know what if I ever lose that edge, then it is time to quit." because, then it won’t mean anything to me. but it does, as long as I keep doing that. [Laugh] I'm good to go. KB: So, what was your favorite show that you've done with Curtain's Up? KP: With Curtain's Up? Wow, um Chicago was fabulous, I, that was a dream come true and I know that was last year and I worried when I got cast in that, "How can he cast somebody at my age in the role, but I thought, I did, it was one of those there I walked away, and I did a pretty darn good job, when you feel like, "I did it" and I did some physical things that I didn't think I could ever do, I was like "I did it." 7  KB: Being Velma is very physical. KP: it's an extremely physical role, um I have had some other roles that I have absolutely loved, I was the queen in Once Upon a Mattress [Laugh] I loved being the devil. [Laugh] it was. KB: Which is so strange because your personality is so sweet. KP: yeah [Laugh] I loved that part, I was rotten, it's like getting to be Jekyll and Hyde it is so fun to do a role like that, um I've done, I've been very, very, very lucky to do some marvelous roles, Miss Pennywise in Urinetown, another really cool, cool part, and um Nancy in Oliver I got to die on stage, I love that. KB: Is that on your bucket list? KP: It is on my bucket list. I died on stage now twice, twice, three times. I got shot in Ruthless so yeah it's fun [Laugh] I love to die on stage. [Laugh] It's so much fun so yeah. KB: It's ok, it's playing and acting. KP: absolutely, absolutely but yeah, in Oliver I got beat to death so I got to really flop around and use my acting skills. [Laugh] yeah, that was good, so. Yeah I’ve been extremely fortunate to have some really, really fun fun roles even the first show, Bye Bye Birdie I was Rosey and that's also a real really big part and I adored that show, it's a really delightful show and it's a great marrying, when you’re talking about a production team, marrying a bunch of teens and adults in one production that's it's a great show for that, in fact be have been talking about bringing that one back because there are so many kids out there, especially girls that want to do theater and there’s some shows just don’t have enough parts in them, they just don't so, you hate to not cast some and it's heartbreaking because you know they all want the part. KB: I mean, going off of that, how do you first decide the shows you’re going to do, and then how do you approach the audition process and the callback process? KP: As of right now, I serve in the role as Artistic Director and I have an artistic team of people, but the things that help us determine which shows we are going to do we go through phases, it's kind of interesting because a few years ago we had done some successful productions and we had some money in the bank, so we were like, "hey we want to step outside the genres every once in a while." I know that we are considered very much a family community theater group but that was the year I think we decided to do To Kill a Mockingbird which is extremely edgy and it end up being very successful for us, but it was, it's one of those, but there were so many of us that were like "we want to do something different for a change." You can't keep doing Cinderella and Annie over and over again. KB: I mean they’re money makers KP: They are money makers KB: but you still have to get out of that 8  KP: Exactly, you have to once in a while, you have to do things different, you don't want to be a one note group, so we tried to do some other things, so you know, we did Urinetown we didn’t make as much money on that, I'll tell you what though the people that were in that cast, we had a blast doing that show, and it was different, and I was so happy to see us step out of the box and try something new and different for a change. Let’s see, now that last couple years we’ve had to kind of think about how we, the machine that runs a community theater group is like running a business it is difficult. our treasurer is always worried about money, [Laugh] because we are spending it as fast as we get it. KB: It’s very difficult. KP: It is, it’s very difficult so it's the last year, last two years, we’ve tried to do shows that are more money makers to bring some more money back in because we ebb and flow, and you are not able to see my arms going up and down, we barely have any money in the bank and then sometimes we have a bunch of money in the bank like we got done with Beauty and the Beast we sold out every show, Cinderella sells out every show, Annie sells out every show, KB: Chicago sold out every show? KP: Just about every show sold out, so those shows that bring in the cash, is great. Now you also have to understand, Curtain’s Up doesn't have... it’s a house, it’s like we have to go to different venues and we pay. and there’s some venues that are more expensive than others, we love working at SIUE, but is isn’t cheap for us. We have to figure out if we are going be able to make enough money to sustain, being in the theater, or not. So, we’ve worked at The Wildey before we’ve worked at the Alfresco in Granite City before, we’ve found out, we’ve learned through different productions the first couple years The Wildey was open, the had exorbitant fees to be in there, but then we learned that later to, ok let’s try to work out a better deal, because we are community theater and they have, they are much easier to work with now because it gets to the point where it wouldn’t even be worth to, we would fill out every audience, sold out and we still wouldn't have enough money to break even. Even if we did that, so that’s how expensive it is sometimes. We'd love to go to other venues and things, and we find other ways to raise money throughout the year we’ve done what we call the library shows. A lot of times, well we do FOTAD. FOTAD's productions in the spring which we love doing. I love doing that part, because it is for kids, kids performing for kids. I love that aspect of that because we want to inspire kids. KB: Can you tell me a little bit more about the FOTAD show? KP: Sure, Sure, you know this morning when you asked me to do this, I was trying to remember how far back we started, but um the Friends of Theater and Dance have four productions that they do every year, that they sponsor and they ask groups to come in to perform for kids, I would say that the average age is 6-7 to years of age of the audience. We try, we in years past we’ve done, one year I think we did two so they do one, it's like the seasons, the spring, the summer, the winter and then the fall, is the four productions. Our slot is usually the spring slot up in March it seems to work out for our schedule because were a group were the board members usually end up being the set builders and doing all the work. KB: it's the community of community theater 9  KP: Community theater is everybody has to do the work. If we have our spring show usually around may around Mother’s Day we have another usually around Labor Day and then sometimes we do a Christmas production, a holiday production. Those wipe us out, you know the physical laborers need a break. [Laugh] So trying to fit in another FOTAD show is very hard so we usually do the March-ish show. It's a production it's usually an hour or a little bit less in length so that we keep the attention of those little 6 and 7 year olds. It's usually, and obviously, we’ve picked productions that are focused for kids. We have a tendency to sometimes do fairytales with a twist, which are a lot of fun, like Cinderella and The Story of Bigfoot was a cutie, but they all seem to have some sort of a theme and most of the time it's themes that run along like "you're not really different than anybody else" and/ or we also, its themes like "its ok to speak you mind, its ok to be a part of something and to be creative, it's ok. So all these shows have some sort of a theme, so they’re really fun to do and we get a stipend from the Friends of Theater and Dance that help us to maintain our, we have to find ways to raise money to keep going, so that's one of our fundraisers as well it to do that. KB: To do that show? KP: To so that show and then a lot of the times what we'll do is we take that show and then, maybe it would be a month or two weeks or a month later we'll do it at another location we've done it the last two years at The Wildey up in Edwardsville, we've worked out a deal with him, since it is just a little matinee, just a little one hour matinee for kids we’ll do just a spilt the house kind of arrangement, which is really helpful for us we usually get pretty good audiences even these little show, like Cinderella and the Story of Bigfoot you know, they sold out. So, I mean it’s just those kinds of things where, if we split the house, we actually can, we can make a little money that way to so, we try and do that we haven’t done it, we are also getting ready to put together an audition workshop for kids. We did that two years ago we haven’t done it since and that is to just have a, sort of like from 10 till 3 a day and we give the kids, usually we have one or two directors that come in and actually have them do little mock auditions so that they understand what it feels like, cause some kids have no idea what to do when they get to an audition and I did a dance session with the kids, I just taught them like "If you were going to an audition for Annie you are going to have to learn a dance." and they look at you like deer’s in headlights and they're like "What?!" "Yes now I'm going to show you what it’s going to be like to be at an audition like that, and they give you [Clapping in time] this amount of time to learn it, ok go away, let me see an if you learned it and then come back and do it for me like your auditioning." It kind of, some of them freak out, and some of them have it, and some of them stumble around. I'm like "This is what it’s like, we want you to feel what it's like." KB: That a necessary part of the process. KP: It is a necessary part of the process, being prepared is a big part of the process. So, we also give them, so they have a little brief monologue, they do the audition, I know there was a third aspect, I can't remember, oh the music. They did music auditions yeah so we had a musical director in there and she would give them a part of a song and they had to come up and each sing it. And some of the kids were [Gasp] [Laugh] freaking out but it’s a part of auditioning, if you want to be a part of it. It's also just to give them a little bit of confidence cause when, some kids walk into the situation and they see what’s going on and they see 50 kids and they like "Oh wow." it can be extremely overwhelming, so at least if they know in advance what to expect, they don’t have that much anxiety which is why that whole process is there for them. 10  KB: We do that in college we have an audition workshop so that even college kids don't get the big bright eyes and, KP: It is, It's extremely daunting I know, I've done it for years and I still can’t stand doing it because you walk in 90% of the time you walk into a room and there are two or three people sitting at a table, it's just you and them, and [Gasp] they can see every flaw, they can see everything, at least in a big show you’ve got other people behind ya, or with you, [Laugh] you’re sharing the disaster, as opposed to being all alone you’re the only one there. [Laugh] KB: Well, I mean, it sounds to me that Curtain’s Up is doing community theater, but they are also doing community outreach and really are focused on getting kids, not groomed, but accustomed to being on stage or even being public speaking, that kind of thing, confidence booster. Is that part of your main goals? KP: It’s kind of like our mission statement. It is, it’s a part of that. Yes, and I have to be truthful, like you said before, it is not just strictly little kids, it’s teens and college people and in fact we just recently had a woman try out for one of our shows who she had never been on stage before, and she is like "I just wanted to try it" and it’s just like, someone who is in her mid-fifties you know, it’s really great and to have them come and be a part of something new to the area, like she said "I'm new here, I don’t know anybody, trying to find a way to make friends and stuff" so I’m like "join, you may not like any of us but hey come on in." [Laugh] KB: You have the opportunity to make friends. KP: You have the opportunity to meet friends, I love seeing also, I remember years ago when we [Groan] Beauty and the Beast I was co-director on that and that show had over 70 people in the cast it was massive and there were tons of kids, lots and lots of parts. To the point the where we had to split them up into groups. It was sort of like, just the way we split them up, group A was the shorter kids that were below this certain height and group B were the kids that were this height, and yada, yada. I have a young man who went to school with the taller kids but he was so short he ended up in the shorter group we he wanted to quit. He was so upset that he was with the smaller group, and he kept thinking that he wasn't going to be able to be with is friends or, eventually evolved "You have to understand you’re all going to be there together in rehearsals, just because you’re in group A doesn't mean you can’t be with your friends and you can’t be a part of the whole show." and I talked him into staying and I’m going to tell you right now, that this kid now is one of the most outgoing, and he also had such anxiety back then too he had [Goan] horrible anxiety of being on stage. He has evolved into a charming, handsome, talented and he’s in college right now and now he's done some professional work and he's done some commercials and I mean he's moved on, and I remember that day especially when he said, [Laugh] he was just crying, I begged him I said "Please come, just come to one more rehearsal, just come to one more... KB: Give us another chance KP Just one more chance and it’s like making that difference on one kids, to see the difference in him, years later, I mean its... and his mom still is like the difference was amazing. I hope I do that for every kid that I see and touch in these productions. I hope every single one of them 11  KB: Is that why you keep doing it? KP: I think so, I think so. That's a big part of it. It’s also just saying "we did that, we created that." KB: That's your baby. KP: It's not only just the set, it's the whole thing and it’s the applause at the end is always that, we did it, we got it, and they loved it. Cause I want to make sure the audience has a wonderful experience. It goes through all parts of it, you know from the day we decide what show we are going to pick to the final performance and we have to break down the set and it's sad. [Laugh] KB: Yeah here we call that "killing our baby." KP: Yeah KB: That's a little harsh but that’s... KP: But I agree, it is. It's like your heart and soul when into something KB: You build something for 3 weeks, and then it’s gone KP: yeah, yeah exactly, well like Chicago we rehearsed 9 weeks, something like 9 weeks and when you give that much time and energy in something, and I mean even though I was 3 to 4 times a week, the other days I was rehearsing at home, so I was consumed by it for 9 weeks and then it's over in four performances. That just seems just KB: That Sunday here just... KP: It does, it depresses me. It depresses me some times, yeah and the day after I sit there and go "What am I going to, I don't even like watching TV." [Laugh] "What and I going to do?!?!" KB: Get in another show. KP: Get in another show, get started on another show. KB: Alright, so can we move to the actual board members and... KP Sure, Sure... KB so can you kind of briefly describe, you said you were the artistic director KP: I'm artistic director right now. KB: can you briefly describe what other roles there are and you don't have to give names and just like how those people handle those and... KP: Sure, absolutely, well we have a president and we had someone whose, when I can into Curtain’s Up theater company the president, he had been in there for a long time until just two years ago, he decided to 12  go 'you know what guys I’ve been doing this for like 15 years [Laugh] I need a break." so he just stepped back, he is still a member of our board and then another woman stepped into the role as president and she's doing a fabulous job. The role of president, obviously that person just sort of oversees the operations they’re like the CEO of the company if you want to call it. They do not have a voting, uh they don’t have a vote but they just, they kind of run the meetings, we have official board meetings and then they try and keep everybody on track as to what's going on what they need to do. We also had a vice president who sort of just fills in when the president is not around or just offer opinions and things like that. And then we have a secretary that person basically just keeps track of all the board meeting minutes and tasks that people are all on. Then there's the artistic director, that’s my role and I have to pick out what shows we are going to do I kind of help out with the contracts too, not only licensing contracts for the productions but because we move around so much were dealing with contracts with all the different venues as well and then, let’s see, who else, I have a team of people who are on the artistic committee and they help out which just their opinions and certain productions and you know, we put in together a list every year of things we might consider to do what shows we might do. Oh, gosh, let's see. I know there's several other committees that I am trying to remember all of them now, there’s a [Groan] what’s the group that she takes care of the... I am trying to remember the name of the other department  I should have brought a set of the minutes [Laugh] it's hard to remember all the different departments... see if she's got it on this one. [Papers rustling] give me a quick second, I don’t know if you want to pause me for a second. KB: No, no pausing. KP: I know I had a, I am looking for one of my outlines from one of my board meetings because it has all the different committees listed on it. Cause there's like a ways and means committee, which, oh here we go, oh sorry, oh so and there’s a treasurer too I forgot about him. Yeah the treasurer, God love him, he takes care of not only keeping track of all the money and tickets, but he and his wife usually are the ones that deal with tickets, God love'em, I know I won't want that job, and keeps track of what we’ve got in the bank and any kind of monies coming in or going out as well as taxes, he takes care of all the taxes, see I would never want that job. We have a nominating committee which, they basically are to just make sure that every year, you have to up whether you’re going to stay on the board or not, or you’re going to stay in the role you’re in or not, and so there is one person, she usually kind of just keeps track, it's usually towards the end of the year. We're normal fiscal year, December year end. So, we have that committee, we have a marketing person and I don’t know if that is part of a specific committee, or not. Advertising? Public, you know, whatever. Publicity, she's fabulous she's got a ton of experience in that area and she really good at getting grants... KB: That's important KP: Yes. and does the, she knows how to reach all the right media sources and so, she writes up all the press releases and things and gets us interviews and stuff like that so she's she does a great job on that. And then we also have a couple people that work on our website and our Facebook pages that's also really important because that's the way it is in this day in age, that’s how people notice who we are, um, trying to remember what else we’ve got, I thought there was like a hospitality or something [Laugh] but I don’t have that on here but I know that we have a, you know there is always a group of people helping out if we do special events every once in a while we might do a, I’m trying to think, I know the hospitality team helped us when we had the workshop, the audition workshop for the kids, they kind of like took care of 13  all the food that day. [Laugh] so it was good, to have those people to take care of those little things, because there were other people that were taking care of logistics and things like that so, but there are roles, every person in the board seems to have slid into a specific role. There is one gal who she is always the prop mistress on every show. She just sort of has slid into that spot she doesn't mind doing to and I always ask her "Do you want somebody else to do that for you once in a while?" she goes "No, I'm good." I mean her daughter was little when they first started, and her daughter is now long since married with a kid, she's long gone, her daughter doesn't even participate with the shows, but it’s great that this gal, she loves to the props.. KB: She found her place. KP: She does, she found her place. It seems like everybody on the group has found their place. KB: How big is your board, how many people? KP: [Groan] I knew you were going to ask me that. I’m trying to, um 12? I think there’s 12 people. KB: That is the official employee number that I found. KP: Is that what it is? 12? Yeah, that’s what is it...1...2...3...4... [inaudible]... artistic... nominations... let me count these guys. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12, yeah 12, yeah 12. [Laugh] That's right. And all of our board meetings, the reason I was counting was because my notes here have extra people on them, but our board meeting are always open so a lot of times spouses will come to meetings. KB: Now why did you do that? KP: Um, I don’t know I think, to be truthful, I never really voted on that. It's just, it’s always been that way. Now there has been occasion where we have had something sensitive to discuss and we will do a closed session. It may be part of a board meeting, and we'll just say "those that are not board members can you please leave the room while we discuss this particular topic?" It's been... KB: And it works out. KP: And it works out that way, so but most of the time, we usually, our board meetings are wide open, we don't really have anything to hide. And we, a lot of times, if we are in the midst of a production or we have a director who is, who would like to do a production and would like to come, and like pitch their idea KB: Propose it? KP: their proposal, we will have them sit in, so we liked having, it we are in the midst of a production we like to have the director come and hang out and just tell us what's going on KB: Like an update, production meeting KP: Yeah keep us up to date on things, now as Artistic director I have tried to make our production, [Laugh] I’m a project manager, 14  KB: You defiantly are. KP: So, I've tried to put a lot of information into particular documentation and to let the director know that they should have their who production team pulled together instead of "Hey I think I’d like to do a show." and then they get into it and go "Oh wow, I need a musical director, oh I need a choreographer, oh I need." KB: That just makes it more complicated. KP: it's so much more complicated, so we're trying to make sure that those things are taken care of in advance. KB: So, that influences your choice of show? KP: Absolutely, it does, it does. Like I said, the biggest influencer is money, the second is, we get a little bit, and I don't want to say child fatigue, but sometimes, it is not particularly that, it’s just that we don’t want to do the same shows all the time. We want to get out and get a little more creative cause it helps us, as a board member, you don't want to get burnt out, and so that's why sometimes want to go outside the box and do something different. So, that’s why we do shows like To Kill a Mockingbird or um, let’s see, we are getting ready to do The Odd Couple so it's just something that is just not the same usual musical theater. KB: So, along those lines, are there any shows or topics or things that you absolutely would not consider doing a show on? KP: There are, we tout ourselves as a family oriented musical theater, there have been some productions that in the past we have not put on, Putnam County Spelling Bee is one of them. [Laugh] I wanted to do that show. KB: Which reason was that? KP: And it was because of especially the one song in the show, that, darn it the name escapes me. The name of the song. KB: "My Unfortunate Erection." KP: That's it, that’s the one, although I have heard that they now have a junior, well I guess, there is a difference in junior versions, also had heard a group you can actually do it without that song, you could actually cut the song form the show and do it with adult, I would rather do it with adults it’s the kind of a show, it’s funnier with adults. [Laugh] KB: It is. KP: It's better with adults. But that it’s we try not to do something that is so controversial, sexually, or... KB: Is that for fear of not being able to sell it? Or... 15  KP: Yes, partially. KB: Or for not wanting to... KP: We also don't want to get, how is it, we want to stay politically correct and we don’t want to alienate families it's a very big part of it, and if families think that we are exposing their kids to sexually explicit indecent material, then they are going to say "You’re never going back to that group." so We even have a clause in our audition form that says if you have got any kind of, if you’ve been convicted of any crimes, or deviant behavior, sorry, we are not going to let you be with us. Yeah we can’t allow you to be part of our production, because we want to make sure our kids are safe and then we also want to make sure that families feel like we are giving, we are letting these kids have good material and they’re not teaching them bad things. [Laugh] KB: And, it's about the experience of the child too. KP: Absolutely, gosh we don’t want to traumatize 'em. [Laugh] Oh Lord. KB: Because they won’t be back. KP: Exactly, Exactly, yeah so it’s important that we pick wholesome stuff and so, I mean we've had a few things, I mean they just got done doing Damn Yankees. Which I know people were like "Oh my gosh do we have to change the name?" I'm like "No" [Laugh] we don’t have to change the name. But you have to just be careful, when we did the auditions for I think Damn Yankees He is think was 18 and above. The director has that prerogative. If he or she wants to have a restriction on age range we feel that, if you are 18 or older you are old enough to know, if you don’t know the show well enough, at least look it up and make sure you understand that there is slightly sexually explicit material in this production, so we do do that, we make sure they know.. KB: They know what they are getting into. KP: They know exactly what they are getting into, same thing with Chicago, it had some pretty racy stuff going on in it, but we had a big disclaimer in the program, we had, big disclaimer with the people who auditioned for the show, and I mean I will tell you that, I give a lot of credit to the actors who try out for these things most of them do their homework. Most of them know what’s going on, every now in them you find somebody who says "Oh I've never seen this show." Every once in a while, you find somebody. Most of them know and, but the other side of it too, we have to make sure we pick material that people what to come see. And then, like I don’t know if Curtain’s Up would ever do a show like Spring Awakening. That's a toughie. KB: It is. KP: There is a ton of sexually explicit material in something like that. KB: There is suicide, there is some many things. 16  KP: Yeah I'm sorry, yeah sex, suicide, yeah it’s a tough one. That's just not quite what they are. The beauty of that situation though, and somebody would say "oh that really restricts your actors." I'm like "the actors go elsewhere." KB: Umhum, it's community theater. KP: It's Community Theater where they go up to Alton or they go to Looking Glass, or they go to Granite KB: Or Here? KP: Or here, or they come to SIU exactly, I am always telling people about SIU's productions. KB: We tend to do some that are... KP: They’re a little more edgy. Yeah and it's nice, it's nice to be able to do that as an actor I like to do be able to learn and expand my repertoire as well. So, that's want makes it so nice to have that. Yeah, it’s so nice to be able to have that many options in this area, so... KB: And that's changed over the course of you being here from reading about a first audition on a flyer to auditioning 4, 5 6 different places? KP: Oh, yeah, Exactly, Exactly. Yeah, and the caliber is different at every location I mean there’s some people who have the hardest time, like we said earlier, Curtain’s Up does not have a home, a home theater and we do not get to move into our theater usually until the week before. KB: Or sometimes the day. KP: Yeah is depends, sometimes the day before. FOTAD we move in the day of. [Laugh] You have your tech rehearsal that morning, everybody eats lunch and then we do the performance and then we usually do a matinee and then we do an evening performance. Yeah, you don’t have that luxury and in some ways, some people have a really hard time transitioning like that, but other people are like "Hey you know what, it’s the life of a gypsy." That’s what it is. They have learned to just think on their feet. [Laugh] It's interesting. I know I had another point I was going to make there, now I can't remember what it was, but it’s about moving and being able to transition from different locations to different locations, and being able to build a set in one day, we're very lucky to have a guy who does most of our sets who kind of builds them in his garage and then he disassembles them and sticks them in a storage locker.. KB: That's amazing. KP: And then we go to the storage locker a couple of weeks before the show opens and everybody helps paint, and then we move in, move in day we drag it all over here, or to wherever we are going and we put it all together. KB: It's very satisfying to see that. KP: Yes, Yes, and we drag our husbands and our wives and our kids, we are always asking if anybody has any strong backed teenaged sons. [Laugh] Bring 'em! Because we need them to carry stairs. 17  KB: All the help you can get. KP: Yes, so. KB: Alright so I just have one more question, is there anything else that you wanted to talk about today regarding theater, Curtain’s Up, community, kids? KP: No, this has actually been really kind of fun, very interesting, I kind of wish the group in Collinsville was back I know that they had to disband because their theater kind of went under. So, I am wishing that they were... KB: Financially? KP: I don't know exactly, well the theater Miner’s Theater closed because it became in such disrepair. They’re in the midst of trying to get that renovated but it's going to take quite a few years, there’s not a lot of money so. As many groups that have come out have, I wish there were even a couple more, so that you can do more things throughout the year. There was another point I was going to make  I hate that when I do that. KB: You wish that Collinsville... KP: Yeah, I know Collinsville, yeah I want that, but there was something else I was going to talk about. Darn it, well. I had another thought in my head, now I can remember what it was. About productions, different groups, oh well I can't remember what it is. [Laugh] Darn it, you know me, I'll think of it as soon as I get outside. "Oh yeah that's right I was going to tell her about this. I was going to tell her about that." Oh, well. KB: So, that's all the questions I have today, thank you for illuminating me about Curtain’s Up, and I was familiar with you guys and I have worked with you for a while, but I was not aware of all the community things that you do. KP: Oh, sure. KB All the outreach... KP: We actually even sing for some of the assisted living centers, usually at Christmas time, we take the kids out and we'll sing and we, they’re getting ready to do the Edwardsville Parade, Halloween parade, and you know, they do all this stuff too. You know, it's fun. The FOTAD show, when we take them out to the libraries those are fun too because they did one summer where they did 12 different libraries over a summer. KB: Wow. KP: and they took the productions out KB: Just into the basement of the library? 18  KP: Well it depends, every library, one of the ladies that is in our group, actually has a connection, she's with the Madison county library district or something, I forget exactly which library district she's a part of, but the libraries actually have like an audition process and I forget what they call the day but I remember we went out and did the audition and these library groups they have a stipend of money and they will hire different groups to do different things, that day of auditions, we saw magicians, we saw groups that came in and just read, did reading material, they did an art class they did crafts, they did different things, well we were one of the theater groups. KB: All of these are outreach programs? KP: It's like outreach programs right, and so we came in and what happened was we did our little skit for them and then we had like, like I said I think there were 10 or 12 different libraries said "we want to hire you are this date, this date, this date, this date" They gave, it was like 100 bucks, 200 bucks per performance something like that. KB: As long as it covers, gas. KP: It kind of did, had a little bit of money that went in the bank but most of it was to teach kind of kids "If you every get in a summer stock, if you get in, running production.." KB: Summer Stock, it's a whole different thing. KP: It is and you’ve got to be like invested and you’ve got to put a lot of time into it, it’s a little bit different that just going to rehearsals, I mean you are actually performing, you’ve rehearsed, now you're taking your show on the road. And you also, have to be, you know you have a little simple set, you have to drag everything with you, you have to have all the props, you know, everything has to be set up, every time, you got to get the group there, so it's a whole different kind of animal and it can be a lot of fatigue on a family. [Laugh] KB: Especially when they’re all in it. KP: Moms and dads have to drag them around, a lot of times they’re during the day so they have to take off work. Yeah, it's kind of a pain, but anyway that's another part of one of the things that we do. KB: That reminds me of a question that I didn't have written down but the technical side of theater is something that is dear to me KP: Of of course yeah. KB: because, it what I have my degree in, do you guys ever have a kid say "I don’t want to be an actor, I want to do this?" KP: Absolutely. KB: Ok, and how do you handle that? 19  KP: Well we try, I have to admit, and I wish we did a little bit more nurturing of the technical side, it’s one of the things that I think we need to do more of, because when we hire in at SIU, we come with a technical team, you guys have one in house and we hire you, but when we go to like the Alfresco, in Granite City, we have to bring all our own people, we have to make sure we have somebody that knows how to run the sound board, that knows run the light board, knows how to do, now grated, we have a guy that kind of builds set for us and that's about the most technical person we have, we had for a while there a guy who was our sound guy, and then he had to leave, he move out of the area, so I mean we have a guy who has all the sound equipment, the microphones and everything, but I don't know if he could ever sit down and actually run board, I don't think he could, just like I don’t think I could. And we rely on those people and a lot of times that’s really something that we’ve talked about it in our board meetings, but we don't even know how to go about teaching somebody something of that, because we don’t physically have the equipment, we usually go into a place. KB: I see. KP: So, it's, that is actually a hurdle that we have not been able to overcome yet. I would like to  I would actually like to overcome. Oh, I know something else we were going to talk about, you got people in all these roles and they all seem to be doing the same things as board members. I have been talking to my group about this, we are going to have to eventually figure out how to do each others jobs. Because we had somebody pass away and she was a massive force on this board. KB: You are speaking of Karen? KP: I am speaking of our friend Karen Perry. And, um when she passed away suddenly there was this huge whole, she was a musical director, she was the treasurer, obviously, she was one of the founding members of the board, and she was getting ready to direct a show so it wasn't, and on top of it, we lost a friend. But it was devastating, people, we were paralyzed for a week or so, and then everybody has to sit down and go "Ok, ok, ok, we have to figure out what to do about this" because we had a production that lost their director, and their musical director, we had a board that lost its treasurer, we had, so all these things that we're so entwined together and we rely on each other so much and when one piece falls away we all were, "Wow what are we going to do?" and it took a while to recover from that, and that's another part of this is that not only getting a technical person in there, or technical find a way to teach some of the up incoming kids how to do the technical side of theater, it’s also just having people to cover for board, and the different roles that we play. Like what if one day the one guy who’s always building our sets suddenly, they have to move, our marketing gal who's so good, her husband now works out of Washington D.C. and she's been saying "We may have to move" and we are all going "Uh oh" [Laugh] "Uh oh what are we going to do?" so it's funny how as a theater group, as a family, everybody has their role but we have to start learning how to cover for each other because there’s going to be days when somebody’s not going to be there. Who's going to take up the slack? And it's daunting to think about that, it's a big machine to move a big production in. KB: Yeah it is. KP: I mean it's a big machine, I'll never forget Beauty and the Beast I think was our monster beast show and that show, just moving around 75 people and then just the staff behind all of it was massive, 20  costumes, you know and all that stuff. It is a machine. And making sure the tickets get sold, and making sure the tickets get ordered. KB: Yeah. KP: [Laugh] All those little things that most people take for granted when their part of a, you know like a set theater group. KB: It's like "You did that right." KP: Who takes care of all those little administrative tasks? You know. KB: And I can understand that when a cog in that machine is missing or broken in some way, it is real valuable to be able to kind of step in and give it a little grease and figure out how to handle that so, since you brought up Karen, how has, we talked a little bit about how it has effected the board, but as far as the like the actors, the children, I remember when she passed, and I remember the very next production you had a beautiful picture of her in a seat and you saved it so how has that effected, I mean you work with little children, so tell me a little about that if you would. KP: That was, it was very difficult. But, it is also a part of life, as so we tried to, some of... most of the kids in that production didn’t know who Karen was, they didn't know her. Just, you know, the difficulties of talking about death are just they are what they are and we had a long conversation with parents when we first cast the show and we talked about what the show was going to be about, and it was going to be a tribute to her. KB: What show was it? I'm sorry. KP: It was Big Bad Musical. KB: Yes, it was. KP: It was our FOTAD show, and she was so excited to do that one too. When we found that she had said "I can't wait to do this show!" KB: It was a very cute show. KP: It was really really cute and just talking to parents about that production and letting them kind of know what was happening and we did let them know from the very beginning and we're a spiritual group, but we are not the kind of group where we pray, but we do try, because I don't want to cross those boundaries, know it's really kind of hard to separate church and state, kind of thing, but it, there is absolutely nothing wrong with saying" you know what guys, we are doing this show for Karen." KB: It's a respect thing. KP: It's out of complete respect, she's looking down at us and she's, I think, I hope she likes what I did in the way of choreography for you guys, and what do you guys think you know and you try and make it as 21  interactive as possible and the kids thought it was really nice to have her face in the front row actually, her family ended up moving it up, because the front row seats don't have that great of sound. [Laugh] KB: Yeah, they don’t. KP: But, they said that they thought it was really really nice, in fact we actually did that for every show that year. We did Big Bad Musical... KB: I remember seeing it a couple times. KP: Yeah, and I'm trying to remember the other two productions that year, now I can't remember. [Laugh] we do so many shows, now I can't remember. But yeah it's we dedicated an entire year to her, you know and her family was appreciative of it they’ve come to every production too, and we also dedicated a tree to her when we did a festival of trees, so we dedicated a tree to her and it ended up, her husband ended up, he was in such a good mood about it that he bought the tree, festival of trees. [Laugh] it's just, it's been nice. We didn’t want that family to feel like they were just like she's gone. KB: Yeah. KP: Out of site out of mind, we wanted them to know that we still think about her all the time, we still think about the impact that she and her daughters, well even her son, I forget, her son also was in a couple productions when he was young, Matthew, they were all in the shows, they were choreographers, they played some, I know her one daughter played the piano, so and Karen was a really good musical director too, played the piano. KB: I remember seeing her in a couple shows, and her directing. KP: yeah, yeah she was good, Super type A personality. [Laugh] we both, yeah. We've had our differences of opinions over the years, but I do miss her, I miss her a lot, so, but it's one of those things where you think about it, and she made us all better for what we are today I mean just knowing her and her ethic, she was one of those people, she worked harder than most people that I know. I have never seen a woman who had her hand into more projects of things than that lady so, yeah absolutely. And she would come down, her last couple of years, I cannot remember the name of the school district she was working in, but she would drive down, it was close to Chicago I thought, but I mean she would drive down and come to meetings, and come to, be a part of productions and I was really shocked that she'd spent that much time driving on the road but that’s her dedication. She loved this group, she loves the group. KB: It sounds like you guys did a really good job filling in for her and... KP: Yeah, we picked up the pieces as best we could, yeah. KB: And you’re successful. KP: I think we are. I think we are, we still got money in the bank, may not be a whole lot this year but, we got money in the bank and we do what we can to keep things rolling signing up to become a not-for- profit 501c3 is a pain in the butt, and I know our treasurer wants to just [Laugh] sometimes strangle 22  somebody but he takes care of it and it's amazing. I love this group for what they do, and I'm hoping that we can get more kids to stick around it's funny that they do the shows and they kind of grow up with us, and then they go off, and they do you know, we got kids now they’re doing Muny, and we got kids that are off in Broadway. KB: That is successful. KP: That's successful, however there is a few of them, "Why don't you guys stick around and like help us out?" [Laugh] Is what I am trying to get them to do... KB: Roll them back into the fold. KP: And roll them back into the fold, that’s part, we are still not quite, we're so glad that they’re successful but come back and help us. [Laugh] KB: Give us a hand. KP: Come back and direct or you know produce a show or whatever. KB: Build a set or paint something. KP: yes, yes, so that is the one thing, so but yeah it's a very successful group. KB: Good, Good, that’s all the questions I had, anything you want to say? KP: No, no this is great, I enjoyed talking about it. KB: Thank you very much. KP: You are very welcome. 23  
MadisonCounty;Joann Condellone;1941;2019;Joann Condellone 1941 2019  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Joann Condellone Oral History Interview Michael Limmer, Interviewer Lovejoy Library, SIUE February 14, 2019 Michael Limmer (ML): This interview was conducted on Thursday, February 14, 2019 at 1:10 p.m. in Lovejoy Library on SIUE's campus. My name is Michael Limmer and I am interviewing Joann Condellone. Joann, could you please give us your name and birthdate. Joann Condellone (JC): I'm Joann Condellone, and my birthdate is October 14, 1941. ML: Perfect. So if we could just talk a little about, you know, you grew up in Collinsville? JC: I did. I grew up in Collinsville. I was born there just before Pearl Harbor... for some context yes. ML: So could you tell me a little bit, I know you grew up in an immigrant family. JC: I did and at that time in those years, the early ‘40s, Collinsville was still primarily at least in the immigrant community was a coal mining town. The mines were beginning to close in some areas, but the last of the mines ran until the early ‘60s. But at the time when I was born there were still lots of union coal mines in southern Illinois and around us in coal mining is what brought my great-grandfather, my father's mother's father. And my grandfather's from Italy to the United States and to Collinsville in particular, to make a living digging coal. ML: What was your great-grandfather's name? JC: Giovanni Berutti. He is buried in the Union Miners Cemetery in Mount Olive, Illinois. He died of black lung at the age of 43 in 1901. Which in those days was young to die of black lung. Today not so much because of the way mining is done. But probably he died so young because of the kind of mining he did in Italy. He worked in a tungsten mine and some other mines that had high silica content in its basilica that's so deadly. That's probably what killed him and left his widow with children to feed and not much money. So the man worked himself to death. ML: And that was your mother's father? JC: That's my father's mother's father. It's my great-grandfather. ML: What about your parents? JC: My parents. My mother was born in a beautiful little hill town in Tuscany called Massa Marittima, that her people lived in for many generations. My grandfather, her father, Annibale Burgassi came to America with one of his brothers in 1913 to dig coal, again there was not enough work for people to feed 1  their families in Italy, not working people. The land reform hadn't happened yet. There was no hope of ever owning your own property or moving anywhere socially or economically. So he came to America. He mined in the mines in Tuscany. Tuscany is full of mines. It's called the metal-filled hills around them. Not coal but hard metals. He came as an experienced miner. He came to Southern Illinois where he knew people. Where they told him come here there's work here. They also would have spoken the same Italian that he spoke, so it made it easier for him to integrate into a community. Because even though Italy was already a modern federation at that time, this was pre-first world war, when he came and they were just struggling to have Tuscan as written and spoken Italian. It was not unusual for people to have such different dialects that they might have a hard time talking to each other. So, if you came with people from your town, your province, your region, you were more likely to actually be able to understand each other. He came to Southern Illinois. He worked for two years, sent for my grandmother and their three daughters, their three children to come to America. My grandmother didn't want to come to America. Typical of a woman of her time, she never really had the opportunity in her life to make any decisions for herself. Had it been up to her she would have stayed in Italy and when I met them and their town I can see why, it's magnificent. They waited and waited to go the First World War was brewing and my grandfather was sending anxious letters, please come, please come. Finally, they came to America. Of course, none of them spoke any English. The oldest child, my aunt Margaret, who had a magnificent memory and was absolutely fearless. Sort of took charge of things and when I was very young and we sat around the table, and the stories were always told around the table after the meal with wine. She told me about that trip. About the ship having to turn the lights off because there were hostile ships in their area and that it was a pretty scary time. They made their way to America and then all the way across from Ellis Island to Donkville which is now a part of Collinsville to the coal-mining town. My aunt told me that when my grandmother woke up in the morning and saw this grey ugly coal mining town where her house was that she wept because it was not Italy. They traveled around, they went from mine to mine. Eventually stayed in Collinsville. Managed to build their own house. My two aunts married young. My aunt Margaret married at fourteen and her middle sister at sixteen. My mother was at home with her parent's. Mining was an iffy proposition, they worked, they didn't work. They struggled to make a union. There were some very hard times. My mother went to work at thirteen in a dress factory. For many years was the primary breadwinner in her family when my grandfather wasn't in the coalfields. My mother was extraordinary in that she didn't marry until she was twenty-one. She married on a Saturday and she told she got paid on a Friday and the Friday night before she married she gave her parents her last paycheck. So that they would have that money from her. Then she and my father lived in a small rental house next door. Italian was the first language in that family. My mother was fluently bilingual as were my aunts. Although my aunt Laura was not proud of being Italian and always refused to speak Italian. My aunt Margaret spoke beautiful Tuscan as did my mother. And so all of our events and family get-togethers were dual language, we sat around the table and there were three conversations. There was Italian-Italian, Italian-English, and English-English and sort of jumped in when you could. There was always this focus on the story. I grew up hearing about Massa Marittima, life in Italy, coming to America, how hard it was to work in the mines. It was my father’s family, his father came from near Turin, a beautiful town called Pianezza. That still, my family, there still owns my great-grandfather's house. I get to go visit it whenever I go to Italy. He bought it in 1861 and his picture is still in the parlor there. ML: Wow. That's fascinating. 2  JC: Looking very dapper, leaning on his cane, and his bowler hat on his head. The deed to his property is on the wall next to it. It's now owned by one of my cousins, the grandson of one of my grandfather's brothers. My grandfather was the only one to come to America. He spoke Piedmontese, which is its own language and some of the northern Italian dialect but spoke English always to me, unlike my other grandfather who always spoke Italian. My father's father was a very charismatic, extremely bright man, who was a cooper, that is he made barrels and a carpenter and a gunsmith. He did a lot of organizing in the coalfields for John L. Lewis and when the great schism came and united miners’ union and the offshoot union was formed it was a kind of civil war that progressive miners which started in Gillespie, my grandfather was a part of that group. I found a wonderful C.C.C. trunk in the attic from my grandfather's house. That has the every scrap of paper that's the history of the Condellones in America, in there I found my grandfather's Progressives Union card. There was a big civil war, people died, it came to a bad end, the United Mineworkers continued to be the representative miners’ union, but my grandfather went on to do other things. He took people hunting, he tried to open a bar, he opened a gunsmithing business, he wanted just to be his own boss. Fiercely independent, a legendary shot, I hate to admit a poacher and an absolutely interesting man. Whenever we had family get-togethers and we did often, my grandmothers sisters would come from other parts of Illinois and their husbands and children and sometimes grandchildren and we would have a great party on the lawn and my grandfather would play his concertina and we would make smudge pots of tobacco to keep the mosquitoes away and eventually the women would go upstairs and talk and the men would go downstairs in the basement and pass the wine around and tell the stories and I always went to the basement and sat and listened to the stories. I always loved the story from the time I was a very small kid. I grew up hearing about life in America, about coal mining wars, about who was brave, who did stupid things. They didn't tell me everything and there is still questions that I would ask if I could have one of them here. I would ask my grandfather about certain battles, if he was in them and if he was the Prager lynching, I would like to know that. I know he went to East St. Louis when it was burning in 1917 to see because they could see the smoke. My father said he just put his long gun over his shoulder and walked there from Collinsville and came back and said that was pretty awful. There were people hanging from the street lamps and the city was burning. He was that kind of a guy. He didn't take part in that battle he was not a bigot. He was a communist and an atheist. And gave up communism for a sort of democratic socialism late in his life but never gave up his atheism and believed truly and deeply in solidarity as did they all. I never realized when I was a kid about how truly difficult their lives had been. I mean, imagine my mother never had a grandparent, didn't have an aunt or an uncle. You know there was no family. She told me about a woman in the coalmining town who had no grandchildren and she was Czech this woman and they did not speak a common language but they got very attached. My mother would always accompany her when she went shopping and take her to buy her groceries and the things she needed for her house and she would always buy my mother a little treat and they would go to the old lady's house and they would have tea and she was sort of a surrogate grandmother for my mom and my mother was sort of her surrogate grandchild. You get the picture that people have tremendous resilience and courage. Sorry. When I first started going to Italy, twenty-some years ago and I found in Massa Marittima the full copy of my mother’s birth certificate and it had the address where she was born. So I went, I went there and I sat on a bench for two hours just looking at it, you know, just looking at it. Every year I go back and my son was there this year and I said oh please go by number 16 via Giuseppe Verdi and see who is there. One year I was there and there was a man working in a garage there and I told him the story about my grandparents leaving from there to go to Italy and my mother being born there and he took me home and made me coffee and fed me cookies and told 3  me a soldier had to die there an American, when the town was liberated in the second world war by the Americans. I have the great privilege of knowing family in Italy and America and we share the stories when I go and they tell me what it was like to live through the war, be occupied. One of my cousins there was a partisan, and he was an antifascist guerilla fighter and he would never talk about it but the son of his best friend who was also a partisan would tell me the stories about how brave they were and what it was like to have your town not only occupied by the Nazis but to have people that you grew up with that were fascists and how divided the community was and how they struggled to be one community again after the war. Again I saw that same kind of resilience. I remember walking down the street in Massa, the main street the Via Liberta’ with my cousin Guido Mario Giovanetti and he was in his late seventies and it was August and the street was full of German tourists and there was more German being spoken around us than English and I said Guido doesn't this bother you, think of the days when you ran down this street to save your life with people who spoke this language shooting at you and he shrugged and he said it was a long time ago, the war is over, it's a different world now. I was always astounded at their ability to live fully and not descend into regret and anger. Again I think it’s a tremendous kind of resilience. It's the thing that now that I'm elderly myself, other than the wonderful stores because we all live by stories and we all try to figure out who we are and what the world is like through stories but this gift of resilience I think is the greatest gift that I got from them. My father in particular who was. Everybody was born at home in the first two decades you know and he was born at home. For some reason, he had a physician and not the Italian midwife Mrs. Marko who delivered everybody else. I don't know why. Maybe there was something with my grandmother's pregnancy. But nonetheless there was a young doctor and he attended the birth and my father was born with a very severe orthopedic deformity, that's commonly called club foot. He would have never been able to stand. He certainly would not have been able to do manual labor to make a living. This doctor set up. I have a classmate from Washington University who is in the orthopedic clinic, I am going to send you to him, and I have the clinic card from my father's appointment in ninety-nine to go to the clinic and they did corrective surgery on him. He was in the hospital for four months and my grandmother went and stayed in a boarding house so that she could breastfeed him and he wore really heavy braces up above his knees to his thighs for the first nine years of his life. I often wonder if that experience made him or at least contributed to the kind of patient, tough intelligence that he had. I mean he had all his life and my son has it too. I wish I had it, I don't. This ability simply look very clear-eyed with very clear eyes at a problem and say "Ah this is the problem. This is what we could do." Even if it was something really ugly or difficult I never saw him descend into a kind of pettiness or regret. He was an elected official for many years. He started out as shop steward and ended up as president of his union for twenty-some years, and integrated the officer core of his union and for that got shot at and beaten up and threatened. I can still remember answering the phone at ten o'clock at night and someone saying "your father's not home, you don't know where he is, but I know where he is and you're never going to see him again." He was really genuinely a tough guy but he didn't, it didn't make him petty or mean or hateful or stupid and I have always been sort of dumbfounded by that. I'd known, I had the great pleasure to work with a physician who had that same temperament, who is a brilliant physician, that I worked with for a long time, but I think seeing that kind of intelligence and that kind of temperament and action in difficult times is a remarkable thing and I often again wonder if it was that experience of having to draw back, be a solitary person, to be moving around in these huge braces that gave him some perspective at a young age, that he might not have acquired otherwise. Who knows, but he was quite a guy. 4  ML: It sounds like your family had a huge influence on you. You were very close, intertwined. How did you feel growing up in this immigrant home? It sounds like you had adored it, in some way. JC: In some ways, but you know Collinsville was a very small town and it was rather static, even then. You know, I was a bright kid and I lived in books and I grew up with the stories and I wanted to know what else there was in the world. I wanted to know everything there was in the world. I wanted out. The year I graduated from high school, my fathers, the plant where my father worked moved out of East St. Louis actually ten-thousand Union Packing House jobs moved out of East St. Louis in those few years. It had been the biggest packing house center in the state outside of Chicago. Those jobs were gone and East St. Louis obviously never recovered and they went to my dad's plant Armour's, I still don't buy Armour's products, went to Alabama a right-to-work state. My dad was out of work for a year. There was no money. My parents were very frugal. They had no debts. We owned our house. My mother made our clothes, we gardened, my dad hunted. We didn't spend a lot of money. We always had a ten-year-old car. But by the end of that year, there was very little money left. My mother went, I remember to work waiting on tables and my father was just horrified that he couldn't provide for his family. So I couldn't go to college. There was no question. I wasn't going to school. I went to see a friend and they said, my friend's mother said that her daughter was working for the telephone company, I should come and see and I went with my mother to visit in this horrible place where all these women were sitting there lined up at these nasty little machines. That convinced me I was getting out of there one way or another and that's why I went into the army. Cause it seemed like a way to go to school. I mean that's how they marketed it to you, as a way to go to school. I loved them, and I couldn't wait to get away from them. I wanted to know what was over the next hill and what was, I wanted the wider world. I wanted the world of books. Yes. ML: Before you got over that hill and you know, to the world of books, take me through like what was a day like being a kid in this family. What did your parents do? JC: Ah. My dad took the bus to the packing house. So my mother got up at five o'clock in the morning and this was a four-room house so people are up cooking and making coffee at five o'clock in the morning. You know you're going to hear that some mornings. So while he was eating breakfast she would make his lunch and then he would go and get on the bus. He would go to work and she would get my brother, I have a younger brother that's three and a half years younger, up to go to school. She would make our breakfast and our lunch. We did not have money to buy lunches at school and we had two cents for milk and sometimes an extra penny for a small piece of chocolate because the principal at my school always had a little candy stand at lunch and you could buy penny pieces of candy. We had a coal furnace. So my mother in the winter would have to go downstairs and make the fire. I remember we had this Indian blanket and my brother and I would huddle up with our bottoms up against the heat grate and wrap up in our Indian blanket until it warmed up in the kitchen and then go to school. In all but the worst of weather, I walked the mile to school and back home again. My father typically didn't come home until late in the evening. My mother would save dinner for him. We never ate in a restaurant. My mother cooked all of our food from scratch. She canned and preserved. As I said my father hunted, we ate squirrel, we ate rabbit. We ate a lot of traditional northern Italian and central Italian foods. My mother made her own pasta. My father and mother pickled peppers and canned mushrooms and it wasn't until I got into the wider world that I realized I ate like a king when I was a kid. You know all the wonderful things that you have to go to a really good Italian restaurant to get today was standard fare. There was that. I didn't see a lot of my dad during the week, because often he came home late, because he was in the 5  Union Hall after work and sometimes the union, he had the reputation for being an excellent mediator so the union often sent him to other places and he also did some teaching on how you organize a union and sometimes he sent my mother with the women's group. She went to Washington and New York to represent the families of men who worked in the union. They were deeply involved in it. Sometimes he would bring home, he would call and say he was bringing home two or three guys from either the state or the national union and my mother would cook for them. She would make pasta. She would make chicken. She would make salad. Then I always got to sit at the table and listen to the conversations. They were talking about, and what they were trying to do was preserve their union, negotiate for contracts. We always went to the Union Hall on the weekends, so I would go with my dad to the Union Hall I have his desk that was in his office, it's enormous. Sometimes on Saturday afternoon after we got out of the Union Hall we would go to the Polish Hall and he would drink boilermakers and I would drink chocolate soda. He, Mr. Peanut out of the package. I loved going to union meetings with him. He took me once to an international meeting in Chicago and I mean he always treated me like an intelligent human being. He would say now here is what the problem is, and here is what we want and here is they want. Now, this guy is going to get up and he is going to make this argument and then you see that guy over there he is really with this guy and he is going to get up next and he is going to support this argument by saying so. So what we have to do. He would just tell me about how the mechanics of it, the strategy of it, how to look for what they really wanted, what the arguments were. Then, you know, we would talk about it. Sundays, we always had a big dinner. We went to early mass. We went to Bruno's bakery after mass and got goodies and brought them home. My mother made dinner from scratch. We listened to the Italian hour on the radio and we talked. We talked books. We talked politics. We talked about what was happening in the world. Sometimes we talked about Italy. But there were always really interesting conversations that included everybody. My grandparents who lived down at the bottom of our road would come up after lunch sometimes middle of the afternoon and there would be coffee and cookies and wine. There was a lot of family in the day-to-day. My step-cousin lived two doors away and he is still one of my best friends. He is, let's see I'm seventy-seven, he is seventy-eight and we still hang out. There were kids in the neighborhood. We had a woods, behind. On good weather, we spent the day. We would leave with a wagon and food and we would go in the woods and build a fire and make a camp and get in the creek and hunt for crawdads and nobody bothered us. You know, we'd go in the mornings we'd come home in the evening. In the winter we'd take a sled I remember a neighbor had a dachshund and we would put him in a box on the sled and take him to the woods. It was fairly uncomplicated. I really had no to contact of being part of an Italian minority. That I was, that Italians were a minority and I wasn't aware of the horrific Italian stereotypes until I got older. Until I, certainly was in college and then later in the university and certainly when I lived in New York and I realized how much anti-Italian sentiment there was and how much the stereotypical Italian had so little to do with the life I knew as an Italian-American or with the Italians that I knew. The food was different. The relationship with the church was different. The patois was different. I begin to understand my mother's classic Tuscan snobbery, "we are not like them," as a defense of not being that stereotypical Italian. My first year in college I was at SIU Alton it was before the Edwardsville campus was open this was like sixty-one, sixty-two because I come back from the military and I was taking a history survey course and the very first meeting of the class the professor said she how just come back from a European trip and that she told us this little joke and she said well she'd taken the train from Switzerland to Italy she knew when she passed over the border from Switzerland to Italy because she looked at her watch and her watch had been stolen. So I just remember that it just enraged me and I was rising up out of my seat and my friend who was sitting behind me put his 6  hands on my shoulder and said just sit down and shut up you need to take this course. But I then I began to understand again as I got into a wider world but that certainly was not part of my consciousness as a young person and now of course in the last thirty years I've read an enormous amount about immigration and women immigrants and the great diaspora and the difference in culture from one province to another in Italy but I was ignorant of it then. ML: It sounds like as a kid you were very well-rounded, you experienced a lot. JC: I was pretty secure. ML: Yeah. Your parents exposed you to a lot it sounds like. So I know you ended up joining WAC. JC: Yes I did. ML: The Women's Army Corps. JC: Right out of high school. ML: Right out of high school? JC: Yes. ML: So eighteen? JC: Yes. Eighteen. ML: Okay and you said you did that because that was your opportunity... JC: I was desperate to go to school and it seemed to me that it would get me out of Collinsville and it would help me get to school. Not necessarily by an easy route but that it would get me there and I was a pretty naive kid. I'd never eaten in a fancy restaurant or ridden in a new car. You know? I passed all the tests. I did extremely well on their intelligence test. So I got to choose my military occupational specialty and I became a cryptographer and I went to cryptography school it was a program of mostly men of course. I mean there weren't very many members of the Women's Army Corps and we were still were not integrated of course into the wider army. The school I went to in Georgia was a god awful place, Fort Gordon Georgia, just an awful place. In my class, there were thirty-six men and four women and we were all smart kids from working-class families who wanted to go to school who didn't have any money. We had that in common. One was from Boston. One was from Nebraska. Oh god, I don't remember who the fourth one was but there we were. Then I got stationed at Fort Meade Maryland at that time it was a huge post. Two and a half times bigger than my hometown. You know, it was before the world of computers, things were automated, but they were not fully computerized so I worked in this huge busy communication center underground, locked in, badges, and guns and we worked shift work. They made it absolutely impossible for me to go to school and I complained a lot and went to visit people and made my complaints known which was absolutely useless. They wanted me to, I took the officer candidate test and I proficiencied out of I don't know how many hours of college and they said well if you reenlist we'll send you to officer school and then you'll be able to go to college for sure. But by that time I didn't trust them 7  anymore and I had an experience. I had already learned how dangerous it was to be a woman in the military. I learned that at Fort Gordon and I saw the way women who had problems were treated by our own cadre who were to a woman all World War II veterans and they really had contempt for us. They saw as some sort of "who in the hell were we to wear their uniform," they were all veterans they had been in a war. There wasn't much advocacy in our cadre. I'll give you an example. One day at work I slipped. We worked in this incredibly noisy, busy unit and these wires went back and forth across the walkway and the intercom was blasting and nobody was hearing it so I went running down to pick up the intercom because you had to respond and I slipped or tripped with the wires and I hit my head, just slammed right on the top of my head on the corner of a concrete post. I got nauseated and literally saw stars, sat down on the floor, felt really sick so my commanding officer said, "Condellone you're going back to your company because I want you seen at the infirmary." I got back to my company and my first sergeant sent me to the gynecologist because I was nauseated and dizzy so I might be pregnant. So there I am in my uniform, no ring on my finger, sitting there with all these military wives and I get to be examined by for the first time in my life by an army doctor who wants to know not what my neurological status, is but if I'm pregnant or not. That's sort of a view of what it was like to be, I must have had a concussion, at least a light concussion. I mean, fortunately, I woke up the next day. Right? But they were ridiculous. You know, they were ridiculous. Later on that year I was assaulted by a man who had a lot of rank and I knew there was no percentage in making a complaint about that, but I also knew that I was out of there. I did not ever tell my parents, because I didn't even tell another human being until late into middle age, because I didn't think my parents needed to know that. They were horrified that they couldn't send their smart kid to college. That's the last thing I needed to tell them. So I told them it was because I couldn't go to school and the military refused to pay any attention to me. So I got a general discharge. If they tried to give me a dishonorable discharge I would have fought that but a general discharge seemed to be an easy way out. So I got out. When I read about, you know some of the things that Colonel Ann has written about women in the military and I see how women are treated, fifty-six years later it still makes me really, really angry. I don't think I had PTSD but what I had, it took me much of my twenties to figure out where in the hell I was going from school to school and job to job to sort of re-root myself in the world is that I developed a great contempt for bureaucracies and organizations and I saw them all as incompetent and stupid. I took me longer to mature into adulthood and then, of course, I chose the profession, midwifery, which is a constant negotiation with the powers that be and bureaucracies to advocate for patients. I must have figured it out for a while. I don't know that even at this age I fully comprehend what all of that meant to me for sorting out my life in my twenties. ML: So how long were you apart of the Women's Army Corps? JC: Two years. ML: Only two years? JC: Yes. ML: Okay. So then you leave... JC: I came home and went to SIU Alton and then I went to the University of Arizona, moved to New York, and you know, went to LAU for awhile, went to under college for a while, worked in printing and 8  publishing, which I loved, I absolutely loved. I started doing volunteer work on the lower east side where I lived. I was really involved in the antiwar movement and the integration movement. I had a lot of friends on the lower east side who were activists. The group that I volunteered for was just a storefront social service that helped people get enough to eat and go to the doctor and find a place to live and I helped with their children's program, which I loved, I absolutely loved. Out of that I met a lot of community activists. In sixty-eight when there was war on poverty money a local organization got a huge grant to start a community development project. They were called the Real Great Society. They were a coalition of Puerto Rican and black and later additionally Chinese former gangs. We had a grant that came from them to run a program called the University of the Street and the man who was the executive of that was a man I knew from other community work and he asked me to come to work for them and run their children's program. So I did that for the last few years that I was in New York. ML: You went from SIU Alton and then from there, you went to Arizona? JC: Mhm. I went to the University of Arizona. ML: How long were you out there? JC: Just a semester because I couldn't afford it. I absolutely loved it and I had good friends from the military there who really wanted me to come and put my life together there. I loved it. Great school. I had the world's best Italian instructor and a really fine writing teacher. I simply couldn't afford it. I had friends in New York and in those days it was easy to find work, it was easy to find a cheap apartment. I was determined I was only going to be there shortly and I then I was going to Italy. It took me some time to get to Italy. So I went to New York. ML: You went to New York and the pull was friends and a job and? JC: And yes. Being able to go to school, very inexpensively. Yeah. ML: Then you also mentioned while you were out there you did a lot of different types of activist work through different organizations. How long did you do that? How long were you in New York? JC: I was in New York almost ten years. My partner and I had Sam, my only child in seventy, and the University of the Streets was pretty much in shambles at that time and I had gone back to work for the offset lithography company that I had worked for some time. It was a very strong union shop and I met a lot of really old-fashioned smart activists there who were very much involved in the antiwar movement. I felt at home with those guys. They were for the most part men. Then we had Sam. I had this sort of epiphany when I had Sam. I had a wonderful pregnancy. I studied Lamaze with Elisabeth Bing, the woman who brought Lamaze to America. I had a wonderful labor and birth couldn't have been more normal, unmedicated. I came out of it feeling like an adult. Then four weeks postpartum was dreadfully sick with septicemia and a hundred and five point six temperature, back in the hospital, nearly died, got better. While I was getting better figured out that I was going back to school. I was going to be a midwife and I was going home to do it because I knew that George and I would need help with the baby and the world and so that's what I did. ML: You met George in New York? 9  JC: Yes. ML: You mentioned also that you were of the minority women, it was majority men, what was that like being the only woman? JC: Well you know I grew up in the Union Hall and all these uncles. I like men. I've always liked men and I think because I grew up with such interesting men. I felt comfortable. Did I get hit on? Yes. Did I respond? For the most part not. Did I have wonderful mentors who were men as well as women? Yes. I would say the worst experiences I ever had being a female minority was in the military, but the military condoned and promoted violence against women. That was not true of the people I worked within the community development organization and that was not true of the old-fashioned socialist activists that I worked within the printing business. I was good there. ML: Then also in New York you did printing? JC: At first year yeah. At first I worked for a publisher. I worked for G.P. Putnam Sons. I realized that I just loved that production piece of it. Putting things together. I went and got this job at this offset lithographers. I actually was the first woman they ever hired in production and I just loved it. I loved all the problem-solving. I loved going to the other presses. I took classes. It was just really, really... Plus as I said a lot of the, certainly not management, but the craftspeople were old-time union guys and I understood that. I felt at home there. Of course, later I realized I was the only production person who didn't have profit sharing, right, but it took me a while to figure that out. I worked for them right up until my maternity leave. They were very kind to me. They'd say come in when you can. Stay as long as you can. Sometimes they sent me home in a cab. Then after I had Sam. I trained a couple of replacements. One didn't work. The next one didn't work. The next one didn't work. They said come back, and we'll pay your daycare and I knew if I did that I'd be doing that for the rest of my life and that I really needed to go back to school and find my own profession. ML: What year was Sam born? JC: Seventy. ML: Nineteen-seventy. Okay. You move back to Collinsville with George and Sam and you come back. What's the plan? JC: The plan is to get a degree in nursing work for a couple of years, go to graduate school, get a master’s degree in nurse-midwifery, and go live in Canada. That was the plan. ML: What was the draw in Canada? JC: It wasn't America. It stayed it generally out of the war. We had friends who moved there. It was cheap to homestead. We bought a hundred acres on Cape Breton Island, which we still own. Only Sam and I own it now instead of George and I own it. We would homestead and I would go be a nurse in Canada. That was our goal. It was to raise our child in a safe place. Vietnam was hell on my brother and so many of our generation and I figured by the time my son was eighteen there would be another war. It 10  was about keeping my child safe and living close to the sea which is something I love. So we came back here. I indeed did get my bachelor’s degree in short order. ML: From? JC: Here. SIUE. Went to work. Had a wonderful little hospital that doesn't exist anymore in East St. Louis, Christian Welfare. Then I got... at that time St. Louis University had a master’s degree in midwifery. Part of the war on poverty that is not as well-known as some of the other issues was a great initiative for expanded practice nursing, advanced practice nursing. Midwives have always been advanced practice nurses. We always did more and had more responsibility than most nurses. There was all this money to send people like me off to get advanced practice skills so that we could fill that niche between doctors and less skilled practitioners. St. Louis University had a masters in midwifery at that time and I got accepted into that program and I had a federal fellowship that paid for my entire graduate education. Gave me a stipend which paid my daycare. I got an excellent master's degree. Because I had no debt and I had seven hundred dollars in debt from undergraduate school I had a certain freedom to go take care of poor women which is what I wanted to do. Here it was impossible to deliver babies. I taught nursing. I went to Texas on the Rio Grande border with a catholic institution and did an internship for a summer. Came back and got a job at the then forming only full practice midwifery service in the region, which was at St. Joseph hospital in St. Charles and the physicians threatened to boycott the hospital if they didn't get the midwives out of there. So off we went. No midwifery practice. For years I ran a family planning STD clinic. I worked for the state department of public health evaluating family planning services. I was the administrator of a project in Centreville where we took care of pregnant women and then did some family planning, and then realized I'm fifty when am I going to practice fully. My then-husband, George and I had long parted when Sam was four and I remarried in seventy-eight and my husband was a professor here. He was getting ready to retire and we kept our house here. We bought an old farmhouse in Pennsylvania and I went out there and practiced. He died just several years after we moved there and I continued to practice there until two-thousand and eight when I retired and came back here. So I did deliver my babies. ML: Why did you never go to Canada? JC: George and I separated and there I was trying to find my way in practice with this young child. It seemed more important than ever for him to be close to my parents. He and my father were very close. He knows stories that my father never told me. He was, Sam really attached to my family. Then later when I remarried Bill was a tenured professor. We were not going to Canada and the years passed. I go to Canada often. Sam and I went for the first time together last year and we walked our property together. No easy feat. It's wooded and wild. I would still love to live on Cape Breton Island but not in the woods. I love it there. I love the proximity to the sea. I like the island mentality of people. They are very private but cooperative at the same time. There's lots of art. I love the place, so I go when I can. ML: Fascinating. I want to backtrack and I want to hit a few things. You mentioned your brother and Vietnam. Was your brother deployed? JC: My brother enlisted when he was still in high school. There were eight of them that enlisted together in the marines. My brother was a marine. My brother was, still is a very handsome articulate man. No 11  interest in higher education. Quite an athlete. Football. Track and field. He went off to the Marine Corps. He called me from San Diego when he was ‘cause they took a ship they were leaving. I begged him not to go. I said you don't have to go to war. You know you don't have to go to war. If you want to go to Canada I'll go to Canada with you. If you want to go, I mean I was a young single person and he hung up on me. I took me years to realize how much I insulted him. We were raised to take care of people. To engage in our community and do what we could. I couldn't imagine how he could survive if he killed while he was there and he damn near didn't. He had terrible PTSD. He's in his seventies now. He was a wife, a good marriage, a child, grandchild, but fifty years have struggled to get there. I do not exaggerate. ML: What's going on by the time you get back in nineteen seventy to Collinsville? What's going on with your parents and what are they doing? JC: Well my dad was in his sixties working for the city of Collinsville and he was also a township trustee for Collinsville Township. He was a precinct committeeman for years. He's always been involved in his community. I used to love to make rounds with him. He'd say so-and-so lives there and that one's going to need a ride to the polls and this woman needs help with that and we need to bring surplus food to this family. He knew everybody and everything. It was his way to just tend to people. He tended to people. He was still in politics. He had terrible arthritis. His health was not good. Terrible pain really. A horrific amount of pain. I went mushroom hunting with him. We had great times. He loved getting to know my son. They spent a lot of time together. Things were tense because of my brother's PTSD. It was difficult to see my parent's age and my father's world become smaller and smaller as he aged. It was interesting when I went to Pennsylvania in ninety-one we had been here twenty years. Sam was an adult. We had spent a lot of time together. The Sunday meals, the celebrations, the making pasta together, the feeding my colleagues, the hunting mushrooms, the listening to the story. I had a party and said I'm going to Pennsylvania and Bill's going to split his time between here and there. My mother was beside herself. My father said you know what you need to do for your profession. We'll manage. When I went back there he had knee replacement surgery which I begged him not to have because I felt he was a terrible surgical risk and I didn't like his doctor. I liked the hospital even less and he said, "look you know I can’t get around and I'm incapacitated with pain, this a risk I have to take" and it killed him. He had a post-op heart attack which they were all too stupid to notice until he was in congestive heart failure and we got him into Barnes for excellent care but he had too much cardiac damage and he died. I felt that if I had been here and seen him up close that I might have figured it out. That was really horrible. That was horrible. It was horrible for all of us. My mother, she'd been married till she was eighty-one and he was the only man she'd ever dated or kissed. He proposed to her on their first date. She'd known him her whole life. It was really hard for her. My brother was great. He spent a lot of time with her. Stayed with her a lot of the time but I came and went from Pennsylvania. Then my husband died and there was all of that. It was a really difficult time. ML: That sounds very difficult. You're living in Pennsylvania and your husband dies, what brings you back? JC: We had bought a farmhouse so I had rehabbed it. I had a community I loved there. I was working at that time just part-time practice with a physician that was from Pana, Illinois that I was really fond of. We had a really good collaborative relationship and I had hired a couple of other midwives that I liked. All of that was good but I lived in a very rural setting. A hundred and thirty-five-year-old house that I just 12  managed to finally finish rehabbing. I was really involved. I'd started a writer's group. I was involved in the arts council. I lived in a community of organic farmers. There were some really good writers. There were a lot of really good things there but I was tired of living in Appalachia and I felt that I wanted to live at least in town and not quite so rural, so that it wasn't so very hard to get to things. Twenty minutes to the grocery store. An hour and a quarter to the hospital, etc. Then Sam said he was getting married so I thought great perfect time to come back home and we had kept the house and little farm that Bill and I had bought here and Sam was living in it so that became his place and I bought a house in town. So what was left of my family one cousin I'm particularly fond of, my now ninety-four-year-old aunt, my brother, and my son are here, so I came back here. ML: Did you pick up midwifery when you came back? JC: My intention was to practice part-time but the state of Illinois made that really impossible. They would recognize the, oh my god, they didn't have any reciprocal certification. That was going to be a very long expensive process. It was impossible to work part-time and pay for my insurance because midwife carries a big cost for insurance and of course, the institution always provided my insurance in Pennsylvania. In order for me to work and be able to afford insurance, I either had to work fulltime and pay for my own insurance and work fulltime for an institution that would pay for my insurance and I didn't want to work fulltime, I wanted to work part-time and to write because I had started to writing again about thirty years ago, and I knew I couldn't practice all the time and write too and not get old on top of it. It just became impossible. I haven't practiced since I moved back here. In fact, I've retired my certification and my nursing licensure. I volunteer for hospice, but not as a nurse as a civilian volunteer. That's the nursing I do now. ML: Your son now he's thirty-eight, thirty-nine? JC: He's going to be forty-nine this year. ML: Oh forty-nine. JC: Yes. He's practically middle-aged. ML: So what's next? What's next for you? What are you doing now? What drives you now? JC: I think that... the story. The two things that I've loved the most consistently in my life are the story and midwifery. Those two things have a surprising amount in common in that they both require you pay exquisite attention to what's going and that you're not quite the center of the universe. The process or the thing is and I really like that kind of deep engagement. When I came back here and god I've taken courses from some wonderful people on this campus  Geoff Schmidt and Valerie Vogrin and Allison Funk. Who've just been wonderful to me and had pieces that I like published and find myself writing. There's that. In a sort of and I think that it has to do with the developmental stage of old age, of generativity. I think that my tribe is the tribe of immigrant women of labor organizers and so I work with Mother Jones Museum, I work with an Italian organization that I cofounded here on the campus and we tell the story of who did all this work and who did all the middle class, and what immigrants mean and how we got to be a modern democracy which is the... in working for the museum and the Italian cultural association are the only things that keep me from absolute despair about the state of my society and my culture and my 13  democracy. Which as I see as grim. Much grimmer than it was when we were marching on the Pentagon in 1967. I see it as grim. I feel an urgency to be part of the group that says hey wait a minute look at this. There's a lot to be learned from this and isn't it interesting. I think it's that. I think it's generativity and saying this is the way to give back to all those people. I think about my great grandmother, who died impoverished in a state institution probably with a kind of dementia. When I got her death certificate I was so excited I found out where she died and I sent for her death certificate and it didn't have a god damn piece of useful information and I realized she died among strangers who knew nothing about her, and that's so awful. I think about my grandmother her daughter going to work at fifteen because she had to help feed people and my mother going into the dress factory at thirteen and I got to spend six years at a university and I have this healthy old age and I'm always buying another book and reading another book and reading another story and speaking to another class. Yesterday I got to talk to two class of really smart young people at Roxanna about why it's important to study the immigrants. So you have to say thank you. I have to say thank you. ML: That's a great message. It really is. JC: I am a very privileged human being. There is a great song. There's a song called the “Price of Coal” and it comes out of a song that was written out of the Spring Hill mining disaster in Spring Hill, Nova Scotia in the fifties and the line in the song is "the price of coal is paid in blood and bone." So, I think it's important to remember that. ML: I think that is a perfect place for us to end it. A great message. Thank you so much. JC: What fun, Michael! What fun! You're so sweet to let me do this. ML: Thank you so much. JC: I hope I get to meet again Michael. ML: Oh. We will. JC: You get into that Master's program, I want to meet that professor. ML: Will do. Thank you. 14 
MadisonCounty;Bryan Mathis;1959;2018;Bryan Mathis 1959 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Bryan Mathis Oral History Interview Interviewed by Lesley Thomson-Sasso Venice, Illinois October 18, 2016 Lesley Thomson-Sasso (TS): This is Lesley Thomson-Sasso, oral history interview with Mr. Bryan Mathis, a longtime resident of Venice, Illinois. Today is October 18th, 2016. So how did your family come to reside in Venice? Bryan Mathis (BM): Uh my grandmother migrated from the South, Clarksdale, Mississippi, and then she moved in what's called Madison at the time. So uh, then uh, my mother was born they moved into the projects Lee Wright Homes which is considered North Venice. TS: What made your grandmother pick Venice as a place to live? Like from the South BM: That I really have no idea how she actually ended up here, uh, as people migrated I guess they stayed wherever they fit in, ya know, or they felt they had the greatest opportunity uh, and so, I guess that's why she ended up here. TS: Okay, um, you said that your family moved into the projects, uh, and that there were two projects here in Venice, there were the Lee Wright Homes and then eventually there were the Venice Homes. BM: Correct TS: Um can you describe what the housing project was like, your memories of growing up there? BM: Well first of all there is a train trestle down the street there and that was dividing line the color line uh, for lack of better words and the Lee Wright homes were right uh to the north of that and then you have the Venice Homes which were there's a vacant lot right over here. That's where the Venice Homes used to be there's one apartment building that's still there but that was not part of the Venice Homes, but that is the area where the Venice Homes were. So, um, the government controlled the Lee Wright Homes and the Lee Wright homes like a little city as far as I was concerned. It had everything basically you needed, it had a rec. center there, Head Start was there, then uh, was the school, Dunbar Blair, was there for a um, Kindergarten through I think, 5th grade, and then after 5th grades, 7th on up to 8th, no, what is it? 6th, 7th, and 8th went to Dunbar then after that you went to Madison. Um, when my parents, where you lived depended on how much money you had and how many kids you had in your family. So, at the time my parents were on government assistance at the time and so we were placed down here in the Lee Wright Homes. And my grandmother lived in the Lee Wright Homes. So, and then uh, all my friends and you know, so it was really nice. I didn't know any better  I never knew that I was poor. Really didn't care, I just had fun and all our needs were met and that's the only thing we really cared about as kids. So, uh um, I never understood the color issues. I never understand why I couldn't go past the train trestle back there, 1  but if I did go past that train trestle you got in a lot of trouble. (2:47) TS: What happened if you passed it? Like were there, did your parents tell you not to go past it? Or was it just like a social norm you knew not to go past it, or... BM: Both TS: Okay.... [laughs] BM: ‘Cause my cousin and I one day because I didn't understand it, I think I was about 7 maybe 7 or 8, I rode my bike up to the train trestle and my uncle who was actually getting off the bus right here outside on the sidewalk saw me from that me and my cousin that far away all the way down there, and I got a spankin' and punished and uh, cause he saw us. TS: What types of like, what types of uh kind of things were told to you about not going on that other side of the tracks? Like was it just like "stay away" or was it like "things are going to happen to you" or... BM: Well, I can almost remember, I can hear his voice almost really. [chuckles] he said, I'm like "What's the big deal Uncle JB about us going on the other side?" He said, "Because ah you can just simply come up missing." that's all he said. TS: Really.... BM: And that's what they would always say to us, you don't need to be in areas you're not supposed to be because you simply just come up missing. You know, and I guess that was in reference to the Emmett Till what happened to Emmett Till, so, I didn't know anything about Emmett Till 'til I was grown, they still... all they did was give you an overtone, uh, you know, they basically kept your shielded from the worst. you know, even when Martin Luther King got shot, my grandmother just like, she said uh uh "I knew somebody was gonna eventually get him." you know, and that's the ter - exact words, her exact words was "I knew somebody was eventually gonna kill that N-word, that's what she said. TS: mmm.... Wow BM: Yeah. TS: Um, Emmett Till was a very, you know, prolific moment in - in history in Civil Rights History BM: Right TS: Because that was you know, really this first instance, that went you know, public in the news BM: Right, Right TS: in the news, um, so that you know, growing up as an African American in the 50s and 60s - Till was murdered in '55, um, that was never really addressed? Or do you think it was something that was always in the back of your parent's mind, because you lived in a community, that was, like you mentioned, you know, it was split? 2  BM: For the most part. it, you know, we didn't know about violence and stuff we didn't see a lot of television we weren't allowed to watch certain things you know, we had never hardly ever watch the news as kids, so we didn't know what was going on in the media, and in the public. Our world was basically, that side, and even when we would come up here to the park, uh uh we knew there was segregation in the park, we knew that people would look at you funny, white people I'm not talkin' about the blacks, so, but still, they would tolerate, you know, us being there you know, so, and you know like I said because I was having fun and I let my parents always said "let the grown-ups deal with the grown up issues you just stay a kid, and that's what we did. We let the grown-ups handle a lot of stuff, so, we really wasn’t aware of racial issues that were going on, uh, I remember a lot of stuff just like when we were talking about that but.... being at such a young age, it's like mmm... que sera sera you know, TS: Yeah. BM: You know, so.... (5:55) TS: When you went to the park, you mentioned that you know, sometimes, ah, whites would look at your funny, were there any instances in Venice where you could actually see Jim Crow segregation? Like signs that said [phone rings] to your memory? BM: This uh, used to be gas station right here [phone rings] on the corner, and my grandmother said they didn't take sign down in 1963. And I was born in 59, so me being 4. But I never physically saw it or remember it, but it was there. So the signs were there, and they let you know stuff is especially slow to change in small towns, but the people of Venice were quiet about and very subdue about how they dealt with issues of racism and stuff like that, you know, they weren't like in the South where people all in your face and you know stuff like that. They were here were just look at you, and make you feel very uncomfortable - let you know that you weren't welcome in that area. That's how they would do it. TS: Okay. BM: Yeah (6:49) TS: um, so if you were born in ‘69 I know that Kennedy BM: ‘59 TS: Or, ‘59, I'm sorry - uh, Kennedy came through in ‘60, BM: Mm-hmm TS: Do you remember your parents or grandparents like as you were growing up discussing BM: Mm-mm TS: Not at all? BM: I know people loved him, they loved him and his brothers and everything that's all I knew. 3  TS: Mm-hmm BM: They had, uh, you know, never really talked like I said - my parents really and grandmothers really didn't talk politics much at all. TS: Okay.... interesting um, so, the housing - the housing projects that you grew up in, uh the Lee Wright Homes, BM: yes TS: Um that was basically like a self-contained uh, community, for...for only African Americans in Venice, so did you feel like .... BM: Yeah ‘cause stuff was real segregated back then TS: Right, and so do you feel like that community provided you with like a good, like a good upbringing, like you had a positive time there? BM: Oh yeah I had fun TS: Yeah BM: Everyday you know, you know you might get into a couple of fights or something that'd be the most that you know, but you know, it was a lot of people in the projects back then, you talking about like about 2... about 2,000 2,500 people lived in the projects over there that small 4 block area you know, so, TS: yeah, ‘cause it's changed a lot now, um, but BM: Yes it's not it's only a 1/4 of the size is brand new ones there now, it's a 1/4 of the size of what it used to be TS: Wow BM: Same amount of land they just spread it out made it a little bit more posh and spread it out, with less people, far less people. (8:17) TS: So, when do you think that um, so, for your elementary school experiences, you were with all of your friends from Lee Wright Homes .... BM: Mm-hmm Madison TS: Okay and then um, I noticed that in the 1960s, even though you were small, certain cities in Madison county, Venice included, were facing this challenge of integrating, not only just schools but housing, even the community pool, um, did you feel any of this tension growing up here? BM: Uhh just a little bit. They - you know - as long as you were in your area, by nightfall, like the saying when the lights came on, be in your area, you know, as long as you were there, you were tolerated, you 4  didn't get too much hassle, when I was growin' up ... you know, uh, my brothers and I used to walk up to downtown Madison to shop and buy stuff they had the 10 cent store but then Granite City, which is, uh, on up the road, now they were a lot more, uh, in your face and and would - you know - you really come up missing in Granite City. So, you know, they didn't allow us to go there - and if we did go to Granite, you'd have to be 5 to 7 strong no less because you could come up missing so, uh, you know, you know, it was you knew it was there, but you were taught what to do, where to be, and and how to conduct yourself. (9:42) TS: Were there any stories that you remember hearing growing up like you mention like that you would come up missing? Like were there any instances of where that happened? Where your parents you know, were able to say to you, like if you do this... BM: You mean, were blacks being abducted in this area? TS: Yeah BM: No, I never heard any of a... TS: There's just kind of like this social like norm that.... BM: Yeah, you had more uh, regular kind of crime murder, gangsters, all that kind of stuff, going on, more so than the racial issues TS: In Venice itself? BM: Yeah, Venice, Madison, not even with Granite City, people just stayed out pretty much out of Granite City and then like East Saint Louis was goin' through the biggest cause I had relatives in East Saint Louis that was the one where people basically like `flew like a flock of birds just fluttered and just up and moved really quickly  you know they lot of times they would just leave the house and just move, um, uh, but that wasn't the case here in Venice and Madison peoples just slowly and gradually moved out. Quietly. (10:48) TS: So what was the first job that you had in Venice growing up? BM: Uh, the first job I had in Venice was that of a paperboy for two-thirds of the city of Venice. Um, and it covered roughly I'll say about almost 10 miles by the time you got through walkin' up and down every street on both sides of the street. And all of city dignitaries uh lived where the school superintendents down by the high school, uh, and the principal, the mayor which lives just catty corner to city hall [phone rings] all this all the way down to that train trestle all the way down to that train trestle [phone rings] everything back that way belonged to me. TS: Okay, and what the most difficult part about being a paperboy? BM: Um TS: That was a big route 5  BM: Yeah, real big route and I tried to break it up they said when they did finally broke it up, break it up, they had to get three paperboys to do what I was doing. [chuckles] it was just too big, but, uh the hardest part was collecting money. Because when people didn't pay their bill, it directly came off the paper got paid off the top then you got your money once you got through collecting everything from everyone so that mean a lot of times I didn't get paid, and to do that for three years, there was sometimes be months and I never got paid because the people were by being so large everybody that didn't pay me or if they would stop their service and not do it property all that came directly out of my pay. And, uh, as the older I got and more I realized I was basically working for nothing, I quit. Well, and the main thing that made me quit uh, forget what year it was, we had a really bad snowstorm. The snow was uh, 4 ft. deep and on Saturday night uh, people would always look for their paper and if it took me to one o'clock in the morning to finish my route that's what i would do, I would stay out there until I got finished. And people would actually look for me, because they knew that for three years every Saturday they got their paper or early Saturday morning uh, I mean Sunday morning and there was some mornings that the paper came late that I didn't I was up at 5am delivering paper. People were very adamant about their papers in this community. So, uh, I was over on Robbins Street, and the snow by being so high, was level you couldn't see any terrain, and so I didn't see this hole which had to be at least two and a half feet deep so when I fell into it, it went up under my coat all the way up to my chest, and not only crawling out of the hole still had 20 30 papers, Sunday papers are heavy too, um, I was - by the time I got here, I sat I sat on a radiator for two hours cause I was so cold and that was the turning point and after that I couldn't 'take any more. TS: How old were you when you were the uh, BM: 15 TS: paperboy TS: 15? BM: When, when I finally quit 15. TS: Okay and um, so now you were covering most of Venice, at that point, so you were leaving the projects where you grew up and you were delivering into like all different parts. BM: We had moved around the corner from the projects on Jefferson in 1973, we moved up to Venice from North Venice to South Venice in 1969 in 1973, we moved from 71 Venice apartments to 507 Jefferson which was around the corner. When we lived up in the Lee Wright Homes we lived in 90, uh, and 95 uh Venice Homes. And so then when we left there we moved to 70 I mean 90 and 95 Lee Wright Homes. TS: Okay BM: And then when I was lookin' up the other day uh, Lee, which was Mayor Lee, that's where the Lee came from, and Wright was another prominent not sure if he was an alderman or whatever but evidently they were the ones that had a lot to do with bringing the projects to that area, and they said Mayor Lee when he was uh the mayor got a lot done for the city of Venice. So... 6  TS: Now, you delivered papers to Mayor Lee BM: Mm-hmm TS: And then now you delivered into areas that were like predominately white neighborhoods as well, or...? BM: There was very few, matter fact, there weren't any blacks over when I delivered blacks there weren't any blacks in this area over here at all. TS: So did you feel any like - did you feel safe? BM: Yeah TS: Because you had mentioned like before.... BM: Everybody knew me TS: Everybody knew you so that gave you this sense of security and you didn't feel any of that racial tension when you were delivering papers? BM: I never felt any racial tension in Venice [chuckles] TS: Never? Okay. BM: No, no, we moved up here, it was a little bit you know, we have projects maybe we have a couple of the kids or whatever you know, but I never felt any racial tension uh I mean, I probably, I wasn't an angel my own self you know I got into um mischief, um, uh, some of it like ah I actually was a bully one time in my life and I had to go back and do it again I bullied a little girl if I could if I ever found that girl again I would beg her for her forgiveness and apologize because now I hate bullies. I was bullied too, but the fact that I was once a bully now I don't like ‘em at all and I'll stand up to bully, I actually come to somebody else's aid because I know what it's like to be a bully and be bullied and I don't you know I just don't like it, it was wrong. My mother took me to the girl's house made me apologize to her, and her parents, and and umm uh, I was not you know and after that I never did anything to anybody after that. And um, my mother back then my mother made you see what you was doing was wrong was because one of the first questions they ask was "Why are you picking on her?" and I had no answer. And, I had no logical answer and I felt like the biggest dummy I felt like I was mean, we went to church every Sunday, so then I felt evil, and after my mother got through talking to me and taking me over there it forever changed me. TS: Mmm. The reason why I asked about like you feeling safe um, as paperboy was you know you had mentioned that you know when you're friends and yourself wanted to travel into places like Granite City that you would have to go with at least 5, or 6, or 7 of you to travel safely. And you had mentioned that you um, BM: Granite City was, and still is, very racist. TS: Yeah 7  BM: You know, where Venice um, was prejudice. You know, there were there were a few bigots here but not not to the point where they were just out and out racist. And, as I've grown older I've learned the difference between prejudice, bigotry, and racism. The - the two dangerous are bigotry and racism. You know everybody is prejudice to some form or some degree, but when you implement those other two, now you talkin’ about influencing and uh causing havoc on another person's life. And so, um, Venice was just basically prejudice with a little bit of bigotry. Granite City is bigoted and racist. TS: Mm-hmm. You had mentioned that um, you had to travel with you know these 5 to 7 people because you'd said that there were instances or your might have remembered an instance where like people would try to take children? BM: That's from the younger kids um, when we lived in North Venice okay, in that time, and at that time, hobos and everything because the railroad tracks were right there so you had hobos, transients, some of everything coming right through there because that was a truck route, you know, going in and out of the depot, you know, and then you had escape routes, which is, what is now Route 3, right here was um a levy and on behind it was a place called the Island, and that's where you come up missin’ at, and I'm for real you know, and so that's what we talking about a minute ago, where they would come in and snatch kids and then you know, but the community was tight very tightknit and so you always watched out for each other. Unlike today's society and today's neighborhoods, ah you only had each other so people kind of watched out for each other you, to a certain extent um not you still had a lot of uh rivalry and stuff going on but you still had when the issue came down to self-preservation it was more prominent than you know. Nothin' like it is now. TS: Yeah (19:29) BM: So, and so, the issues of ah, like the whites didn't really come down there unless they needed something and they had no reason really to come down there really, but in North Venice there was still a lot of white families down there ah, and store owners and stuff like that, and never had any problems or anything so we moved up here to Nor - South Venice into the Venice Homes, um, that was a lot of fun too, I mean, you know and as you got to know all the families and everything especially me being paperboy at the time I came a paperboy and because I had all these houses basically at one time or another every house on this end of Venice was on my route, so that meant every individual in Venice if they didn't know my name, they knew my face. All you had to do for a lot of people is say do you remember the col-, colored paperboy? That was me. You know, so, I was the only one to my knowledge I delivered the uh, Metro East Journal, um.... and that was the prominent paper it covered all the uh of uh, counties you know, all the way up to Springfield. Had a wide range of everything from Sport to everything whereas the Post-Dispatch and what was the other one? Globe Democrat where they stopped and what they covered in Missouri the Metro East Journal covered on this side of the river. TS: Okay BM: Mm-hmmm so TS: Oh interesting. Um, so you said that you delivered to most of the people of Venice, and um, so Mayor Lee who lived across the street from this building, um, was a long-time mayor of Venice. 8  BM: Do you know when I was delivering papers, but he never knew my name, he would just say "the paperboy" everybody just called me the "little colored paperboy." TS: And did that both- did that bother you at all? BM: No TS: Okay, alright. Um, Mayor Lee was part of this like, larger kind of, um, [inaudible] looking at him as a political figure he was part of this larger Madison County and Venice political machine. BM: Right TS: Um in particular he was accused of not promoting any type of like anti-poverty legislation, or helping people that needed help in the late 60s and early 70s um, do you remember any of those accusations? BM: Too young TS: Or did people in Venice react at all or .... BM: There was one issue they said let the adults take care of the grown-up stuff. TS: Yeah BM: Um, they never - the parents - they were really adamant about their kids being kids and staying out of adult affairs. Matter of fact, if anything was going on sensitive like, that unless there was a need to know, they would have sent you out of the room you weren't even allowed to be in the room while serious issues were being discussed with adults it was just unheard of back then. TS: Mmm BM: So TS: Um, what other childhood activities were you involved in besides the paper route? (22:22) BM: Childhood? TS: Yeah, or even into adolescence like what... BM: You know, they had in the summertime learn how to swim, and they took us you come up here in the morning-time ah to the rec center up here and they take you to depo where we learn to swim. that was a summer thing they had park program they had for a little while uh 2 or 3 years, other than that we just played, rode our bikes, uhm, climbed trees, B.B. gun's all the stuff old fashioned kids used to get into. TS: Were you involved in any other type of um activities like Boy Scouts here? BM: Oh I forgot about Boy Scouts, yeah, I went through my brothers and I we was start out with Cub Scouts um I was a Webelo and Richard and Pat Foot were the Scout Masters they covered everything from 9  Bobcat all the way up up until um Webelos and then they were - Mr. Tolliver and he lived on this street 1,2,3, down from Mr. Lee. Mr. Tolliver was he over Boy Scout troop and they had their own building and everything ah actually one of the better Boy Scout troops in the area down here ah and I did that for 2 years no 3 years excuse me, I think I stopped there when I was 16 so, but anyway, so I went from Webelo to Boy Scouts and uh, got to go to Camp Sunnen which is out Potosi ah, the council still uses that camp site for their summer gatherings and stuff so yeah, that was pretty cool. Learned a lot. (23:58) TS: And you had mentioned that you guys were the only African American Boy Scouts in your troop? BM: [chuckles] Yeah TS: And did you did um, was there - how was your experience? BM: Pat Foot and Richard Foot didn't allow any kind of division. TS: Okay BM: They didn't allow any issues of color race that come up, they were there to teach boys to get along actually stay true to what scouting was all about doesn't matter race creed or color. But when I got to the Boy Scout levels and being the only black Boy Scout over there - that became somewhat of an issue. I was kinda shunned and left in the corner, and kinda you know, and he would have his son Jack, ah, Mr. Tolliver would say "Jack would you spend some time with him- I can't make the other boys ah, spend any time with him or work with him..." he said "but I'm asking you." And I heard him pull his son to the side and ask him that and Jack said "yeah" and when - all through high school Jack Tolliver ah ah was always I always thought very highly of him because of that, ya know, so, and um, so, Mr. Tolliver I think his hands were kinda tied because lot of Boy Scouts their parents were more affluent people of Venice if it was such a thing, you know but you know.... (25:22) TS: Mmm... Is that when you - is that like growing up for you, did that like you mentioned like when you were in the homes or even when you moved like you were just you know, kids, and you played and you had fun and you know you were a part of all of these activities. Was that the first instance for you where you started to kinda feel that kind of subversive? BM: Oh no. Going back to when we lived here in North Venice, ah on Saturday mornings we you know get up and watch TV, watch Captain Kangaroo you saw Romper Room and always notice that you never saw any black children anywhere on television, and I notice when you go to the stores you never saw any black mannequins. Everything that you saw was white. And so I kept asking my father ah ah "How come you never see anything black?" and my father was kinda at a loss for words.... and I remember ah, one time I said ah after watching TV and everything was white and I think we was going through a rough time at our house, and I said "I wish I was white" and my father got really really ticked off at me and you know and he backhanded me ah ah and I'm like I didn't understand why he got so mad for me saying that. And he didn't nev - he didn't ask me why I said it, he just - my father didn't lose his temper for most part always calm, and that was my first time ever seein my father just lash -- I mean naturally it scared me half to death cause I'm like you know, my father just didn't he didn't hit you with his hand, you know, and so um, that was a wakeup call then, I forget how old I was, but, ah, I wasn't even 10 I wasn't I know I wasn't even 10, but that's when I start realizing ah, the prejudice and racism and segregation and all that kinda 10  stuff then, but the thing that bothered me was they had no answers. You know, they didn't' tell me why you know, and and and so as you grow older you learn, but see, as a black kid growing up in in so much of USA even by today's standards you were told whatchu couldn't do, where you couldn't go, whatchu couldn't have or wasn't supposed to have, you know whatchu couldn't be or never be, you know, and so, all this stuff stuck with me, and uh, even to the point when I went to the military, and I remember I was over in Italy, and I saw the coolest chess board ever seen in my life, this chess board was onyx, marble, pewter, silver, and bronze. It was made up in like castles with knights and everything, so the board was actually made up off the ground and around it was rocks and hills like you had to infiltrate ah a castle, you know, just magnificent, beautiful. So it came in 3 different sizes ranging from $200 all the way up to $750 dollars okay, so, I wanted the middle one, which is I think around $375. My girlfriend at the time, black woman, from St. Louis said "Black people don't have that kind of stuff, what would you do with it? You don't even play chess." I didn't get mad at her, I got mad at the system, because to me she was brainwashed, and it was going back, it was reinforcing this 'black people don't have this black people don't go here black people ah ah don't know this” and go on and on and on and so, my thing after that kinda stuff was even growing up in Venice was "Imma show you what I can't do, what I can't be, what I can't have, where I can't go." I can show you better than I can tell you. And to this day, I regret not buying that chess set. I don't have many regrets in life, that's one of them. (29:21) TS: Mmm. BM: and it's always bothered me all this years, and I've known a couple of people that went to Italy and the shop that it was in was right at the base of the leaning tower of Pisa that's where I lived two miles from the leaning tower of Pisa. And so, just the fact that I was over there, lived on the countryside in my own little villa, you know, in the Air Force with two kids, I was single, and I,t and I’m like this right here is an opportunity many people have never had - so once again that say where I can't go, I'm already showing you where I am. TS: Sure BM: You know, so TS: Umm what ah, by the time that you got to high school, the schools in Venice had been desegregated however...... BM: Mmm TS: Right? Um, however, BM: That started before ‘69 though TS: Right. And it started with this redistribution of busing. BM: Mm-hmm TS: Um, so can you talk a little bit about - like do you remember that? like, in elementary school? um, vaguely? 11  BM: Well I came up here in the 5th grade, and what they said they started integrating when I got here. They said they started it was some blacks went to Venice in the uh early uh late 50s and there were only a couple of them. They weren't really - because they had the blacks went to Venice uh Lincoln Technical Center down there which is now the Venice School up the street here on Route 3. And, but when uh redistricting came up, uh, that's when blacks would move into the school and I think I'm not sure I never heard any stories about when they integrated the people didn't like it, but they didn't make too big of a fuss of it, the biggest fuss came when Madison had all the problems. Venice didn't want to be associated or made like Madison, so Lee, said “Let Madison be the brunt of all the negative stuff and we wanna keep ourself positive.” So, but I heard he did his dirt too but he kept it low key. (31:25) TS: Mmm-hmm BM: Just like this [taps at paper] TS: mmm yeah I remember reading something in a in a newspapers I think it was the Intelligencer about how Madison even had like burning crosses BM: Yeah.... TS: When their schools were integrated. Did you hear...? BM: Too young? TS: Yeah, or any of that friction, and um, you know, any siblings or family members that were older? BM: It wouldn't surprise me but no, I was too young, and then our parents would have shielded us from it. Uh, because you don't want your kids walking around in fear, but you don't want them to be in areas, you don't wanna put them in danger, but you don't want ‘em to walk around in fear either, so, um, you know, they just made sure that we were - were supposed to be, but when I moved up here to Venice, like I said we moved up in ‘69, uh, in the projects, there was not much the people that they used to integrate Venice originally were from Eagle Park, which was originally they had the choice to go to Venice or Madison because technically they were uh, in the Madison school district but for some reason because they were not basically in Madison Township or Venice Township they was in the outskirt they had the option of which school they wanted to go to, that's where the busing came from, and it was still there when we were there until they closed the school, so, um, uh, and I had issues with the people of over there - black kids of Venice had more problems with the black kids of Eagle Park than the white kids did. (32:59) TS: Why was that? BM: I have no idea [both chuckle] BM: They just thought they were tough for some reason I don't know TS: Eagle Park kids thought that they were tough? 12  BM: Yeah.... yeah.... TS: Okay okay, now you mentioned that you moved in 1969, up to this part of Venice. BM: Right, Mm-hmm TS: Um, and at this time, actually in 1969 Venice saw a riot where over 30 black youths firebombed the city the uh, newspaper says as an attempt to prevent a black police officer from patrolling the black neighborhoods as he was accused of harassment. Um, do you recall any of that night's events, like you said that maybe thinking back.... BM: (33:39) The night that that happened we were - I was in my grandmother's house because remember all the police uh, and we weren't allowed to come to the park for months matter fact, after that happened, um, they used to have this over here used to be rides, beautiful park waterfall um, manicured trees with tap - topiary trees and everything all of it used to be over here, beautiful baseball diamonds just really beautiful park, and when it got down to the point where would start giving blacks more access to the park, they took it all out. TS: Wow BM: They shut it down, that's why I say they do subtle protests TS: Right BM: Instead of making a big riot or they took it all out TS: And do you remember anything from that night? Or hearing anything? Seeing anything? Next day in school, friends talking about it? Or? BM: No... only thing I remember what little - cause they didn't really say, only thing they said was no whites was arrested they just arrested all blacks, but that was to be expected, and because it was [fire walkie-talkie noise] nothing outta ordinarily you knew what was going to happen, it wasn't a big issue wasn't a big topic, ya know? Okay, you know, what's the next move, you know, everything back then was how do we progress to make to make to slowly implement change to make it better for our people? That's basically, so they didn't harp on things or talk about stuff for a long time, it was too important to just move on, long as nobody was killed or whatever you know you just move on. TS: Right, now in the 60s what does your parents do for work? Because I know one of the things that was ah in the newspaper a lot was the NAACP and CORE coming to Venice and talking about how they wanted more African Americans to have opportunities for jobs be they local factories you know just anything  working. BM: Well origin-, ah ok lemme see. Now the first job I remember my mother having was at the depot, which was a government job and, she didn't keep it very long my mother bounced around - excuse me - on jobs my dad worked up here at the mill, Granite City Steel, where I work, and, they would lay him off, then when they would lay him off he would go to the National Stockyards up here on Route 3, and he 13  worked at a gas station, he would shovel cow manure, rise out, wash out the back of them trailers what they haul all the livestock in, whatever nasty dirty job that it took for him take care of his family, that's basically what he did, so, he didn't have time to worry about a lot of issues that kinda stuff because he had 5 kids and a wife, and you know, so... TS: And now your grandmother lived here as well, um, and did she work in the Venice area too? BM: Right, she was a caregiver. TS: Okay BM: And the guy and the people that she care-gave basically within that little project area so she never had to go very far at all, and that's why I stayed with her a lot, you know, so, um, she considered me her baby boy, so that's how much I was over there. TS: Okay BM: So TS: So, you, so um, the NAACP and CORE coming here didn't affect anything .... BM: You gotta understand in the black community, even more so then as it is now, for change to come about takes great effort and years of perseverance, okay, and it was the only thing that happens to me fast is when people - once the laws are laid down people scatter out the area you know, and that's the only that happen - everything else comes at a very slow pace and it's not really talked about until social media came about like it is now, lotta stuff was just general conversation if someone want to talk politics and blacks very seldom talked politics. (37:29) TS: Okay BM: So TS: Um, so, you started high school in the 70s, um, and even though high school was fully integrated, um can you speak to the racial climate of Venice High School in the 70s? BM: Umm... Only thing at the time was there was this little bit of prejudice, ah, as far as any bigotry ah, I don't know I never - the teachers were you never knew it cause they never showed we had, I had one teacher I thought hated everybody name was Mr. Craig, and uh when I was a freshman I swore this man hated, and he, when I became a junior I went to him and asked, I'm a person that go to people and confront people, so I asked him why did you treat uh, me so bad or treat my classmates so bad, and what said I found to be true, he said, "I cannot stand freshmans and very few sophomores." He said, "Because your hormones are going crazy." He said, "You're complete little idiots." He said, "By the time you become a junior and a senior,” he said, “your demeanor and your attitudes and your maturity has done almost a 180 in just those two years." He said, "That's when I can tolerate you." I said, "Well what why you a freshman English teacher then?" [chuckles] He didn't give me an answer either. And he stayed a freshman English teacher, and I never understood that, but he gave me an answer, but, ahm, that was about the most 14  prejudice that I could think of in a high school. [chuckles] So, that ain't really prejudice he just didn't like freshmen. TS: Yeah BM: You know, but I mean that still prejudiced, but he wasn't bigoted, he was that way towards everybody you know, and then I had some great teachers, but the only thing about Venice that I didn't like was you didn't have the opportunities there. Very small school - budget was small, and so, it showed. The biggest thing at Venice was basketball and volleyball, and they - when I first got there they had track and baseball, and this stuff eventually, slowly went by the wayside as budgets were being cut. And uh, but they always held onto basketball and that's Venice's claim to fame, they won state championship in 19 uh 1973 I think, no, no, ’76. TS: Right as you were in school? BM: I was on the team TS: Oh, okay, I was going to ask, what um, what sports did you partake in? So basketball we know. BM: Well, basketball and track when they had it. Those were the two that I played at - I did TS: What was it like when they had State Championship and all the press cause that was in every single newspaper? BM: You really want my opinion on that? TS: Yeah BM: It gonna be totally different than anybody else you talk to in this whole city or state. TS: Okay that's great (40:21) BM: And the reason being is because I was on the team, and got injured right before the super sectionals okay, I worked diligently, worked my rear end off to push those first five guys to the players that they were and I was like the number 7 guy on the team and uh, ‘cause I was like, I told the star player I want your job, I want your position, you know, and that's what I was going for, and I felt I was in reach of taking his position, maybe they would finish out the year with them players, but I knew the next year, coming back, you know, I would be a force to be reckoned with. My thumb got broke in practice, uh they missed a ball, and it hit my thumb or broke my thumb and uh, it was like they threw me in the trashcan. So, I wasn't allowed to travel with the team, um, I wasn't - when they won the championship they didn't recognize me - I didn't get to ride in the parade, I didn't get anything. They basically threw me to the side, and I'm like “What did I do to the coach for the coach to hate me so much, you know.... and then none of the players stood up and said anything in my defense,” you know, and I got a call last year "We're thinkin' about having a um a reunion for the 73' championship team.” Well they remembered that I played on the team, but they had forgot that I wasn't allowed to participate when we went to state finals. So, when, um, they won the championship and the TV cameras were panning the audience, you know, everybody 15  cheering, only one person in the whole building sat there with a frown on they face and their arms folded and the TV came straight to me, it was me. I was not happy. TS: No, I can imagine BM: Because on the other team, there was a guy sitting down there with a cast on his arm. TS: Why do you think that your teammates didn't stand up for ya? BM: They were from Eagle Park, most of 'em. TS: Okay BM: And then the other white guys were out here, you know, and they didn't want to rock the boat. TS: So you think that it was, um BM: [unintelligible] TS: Okay were you the only person from Venice that was...? BM: Only black male from Venice, yeah. TS: Yeah BM: Wait a minute, now I think it might have been one more, no, no TS: Yeah BM: Yeah so, anyway, they didn't let me dress out, and I wasn't happy, I ain't never been happy to this day that's a sore spot too TS: Um BM: [woman enters Bryan says "Hey Tash...”] Yeah and that ticks me off but I didn't feel it was right, you know, that doesn't show any kind of sportsman, team sportsmanship, loyalty, and for all the dedication and hard work that I had put in, ah like I said, I felt like they had just threw me in the trashcan. TS: Sure BM: Mm-hmm TS: Um, after graduation then, after that experience so you were a junior, and then you graduated in ’77. BM: I didn't go to Venice my senior year. TS: Oh you didn't 16  BM: Because of my grades I was smart enough to enter into a pre-college course class called Upward Bound. TS: Okay BM: Upward Bound was held on the college campus of SIU. TS: Oh, great BM: Yeah so I spent my last year and a half at SIU, and um, so.... ah, I had good grades when I was up there, gotta be a little bit cocky though because I had good grades even when I was up there and uh, oh I missed two of my finals cause I got the dates mixed up and my professor I begged her to give me 15 minutes to take an hour long test, that's all I need I know I was that smart, I begged her to give me 15 minutes to take that test 'cause she knew I would have aced it. And she said, “No Mr. Mathis, Welcome to the adult world, you gotta retake the whole class." TS: Oh my goodness. What was it what was it like then going from like a junior in high school you're 16 / 17 right? BM: 16 TS: And then you're straight to a college campus what was the college environment of SIU like back then in the 70s? Cause it was relatively a new college. (44:20) BM: [inaudible] It was, it was [chuckles] Now that was, they was bigoted as hell. [laughs] boy I tell you ... but I had so much fun it ain't even funny TS: Really... BM: Yeah once again like they say, when you learn your environment and you learn to stay in your lane, you just stay in your lane, you know TS: Okay BM: When you deal - when you confronted with issues of bigotry and racism you learn how to overcome them with social to me grace and charm you know, you can make a person look ignorant by showing them kindness and love. You know, and that's what we - my daddy taught us to handle stuff with - and so where if somebody is doing wrong by you or trying to call you out a name trying to get a response out of you and all you doin' is showin' them - man you okay, why you talking to me this way - you know - I understand maybe you came up from a um family that's poisoned your mind like that but dude is a different way well people don't want to be talked to that way when they tryin to spew evil to you, so, that's always been my defense was um, and then, if you continue to be ignorant, you know, there's two things you do either get away from em' or either be more ignorant than them, I always chose to just get away from em' [chuckles] TS: Yeah.... what was the.... so it was more of I guess a culture shock then going to SIU a little bit as far as like .... 17  BM: growing up TS: that there .... BM: growing up, basically you goin on up and you kinda get into the real world, ah, um.... I was kind at that time, I was very athletic, girls said I was very cute, ah um, you know, I didn't have much fear so, I was very cocky, you know, so, growing up to the school when I saw most of kids up there I'm like "pssh" so what? [chuckles] TS: Yeah what were most of the kids like? BM: Rich kids were arrogant, athletes were ahm um, ignorant, ah, people that was cause you had your geeks up there, and I ended up with, I ended up with an entourage up there of about 15 people that followed me around. (46:07) TS: Okay BM: Now I'm 16 and I got an entourage TS: Why do you think that was? BM: Cause of my mouth.... TS: Okay BM: I was very in your face, very witty about what I said and I watched what I said and how I said it, so most of the kids were from lot of ‘em from East St. Louis and Brooklyn, and, they were mean and tough, well, mean and tough in a college atmosphere is not gonna get it done, you gotta have somebody that's more of a politician and they would get around the issues and stuff and that was me. TS: Okay BM: So I still to this day can pretty much talk to anybody about any subject you know, when I can go from the rich to the poor so whether you from the 'hood or from Harvard you know, we can sit down and have a conversation. TS: Yeah BM: So.... TS: (47:10) What um, at SIU what was the worst I guess maybe experience that you had in dealing with this new population of people? BM: The worst experience? TS: yeah 18  BM: The number of girls up there. It was a total distraction TS: [laughs] okay BM: I mean, that's that was my downfall it ended up being my downfall. You know, because it took my mind off the studies at that time they had all these concerts up there, all these entertainers would come in, ah all these prestigious people would come through, you know, lawyers, doctors, and they had seminars, free seminars, and so, it was just so busy, then you had the youth hall down, I mean down on what's the name center...... ah man, you know what I'm talking about where the downstairs with the tables tennis and the bowling alley is... TS: Oh, the Morris University Center? BM: Yeah TS: Call that the "MUC" BM: Yeah. Okay. Then they had the gym, the bubble gym, the pool, and oh c'mon, there was just so much stuff to do. TS: Overwhelming yeah BM: It was a whole nother world, so I stayed busy, um, always into something, couldn't wait to go to school the next day, you know, but here's the thing about it. If you don't get your studies in, you end up flunkin' out, and I did fine during the regular part of the year, but when I made the mistake was, because I was so - my grades were so good during the regular part of the year, when summer came, I took all these hard classes. I took a full load and it had physics and calc – pre calculus in the summer. Yeah, not very wise. And I had um three upperclassmen come to me and say, “Bryan you don't take them kinda classes in the summer... you just don't, it's too much to do up here, you gonna get sidetracked, you gonna end up flunkin out of school." “Ahhh no!" I said, "I'm different. I got this, I got this, ppsh!" Then the first two weeks I dropped two classes, and then with the other three classes, five classes really? calculus, and physics in the summertime? Yeah, not smart. I was so embarrassed. TS: Yeah, but you but um, it's still such an achievement to go to school at that young age, um, what was what was you said there were great concerts there. BM: There was a group called Nickels, Styx came through, Rod Stewart came through, I saw many Minnie Riperton and George Benson, Chaka Khan, Rick James, am, ahhh ahhh.... oh what's the other crazy guy with umm.... Parliament P-Funk, Dr. Funkenstein, not Parliament came through but Dr. Funkenstein came through. And, it was just group after group and uh that's just some of them ‘cause the Mississippi River Festival was there back then. TS: Right BM: Okay, and, and you know, being a paperboy I had saved up money, so that meant I had my own car, I had money, and that didn't help the issue either. So, it wasn't so much a culture shock because um, even 19  though the blacks and whites - you ever seen a school that's segregated but everybody get along? TS: Yeah BM: That's what - it's not this bad, they say, there's still some of it up there, but not like it was, but back then it was really badly segregated, and you would still be in the classroom blacks were here and whites was here. (50:22) TS: Wow BM: And when you when I got -- they co-mingled but still this separation was there. TS: Mm-hmm BM: And uh a the teachers were professors they weren't pretty much to me interested in helping you, they would tell you, “This is college I'm here to present the information to you, it's up to you whether or not you want to get it you know, if you need help with your homework that's what the tutors are for.” TS: Right BM: You didn't even ask them questions TS: Right. What about the community of Edwardsville itself? Like did you feel anything coming from Venice to Edwardsville? Were you commuting were you living on campus? BM: Yeah actually, the first time ever was taking the bus to school until I got my car. But ah, ‘cause I wasn't allowed to drive to school when the bus was there, in the summertime my father let me take my car, but um, excuse me, the difference I notice when I was up there from going to Venice was ah, Venice was uh ah, like a little small town school if you watch Happy Days TS: Okay BM: The high school with Fonzie and all them, that's kinda way Venice was to me, you know, and then, well when I got up to SIU, it was all these people from all these from all these different places... black and white... and I actually talked to any of 'em and so ah, that's how I ended up with that little entourage, because Upward Bound was desegregated, it had blacks and whites in there, and ah, so, I guess just being a smart ass for lack of a better word, that ain't bad is it? TS: No BM: Um, okay, ah, I just ah, I dunno, I felt more empowered more than anything when I got up there you know? Just stuff that I learned and the people I dealt with, Venice is basically carried over up there, you know, dealing with all the people in the paper route and everything, ah, I didn't have no problem talkin' to anybody. One of the things when we was a junior still here in Venice, we had put on a, we had to pay for the senior’s prom. Right? And so we had to go to all these different stores to solicit advertisements and stuff, and I was one of the people that brought back one of the biggest payloads. Ah, and, all the proprietors of these establishments were white, so as a young black individual askin' for money, you had 20  to oh yeah, being a paperboy, everything became relevant and so when I went up to SIU I used everything I had learned here in Venice, so, ah, how did my dad put it? "Whether the situation you grew up in be good or be bad, learn from as much of it as you can right?" You know, and incorporate it to help you learn how to deal with issues of life, if you don't ever get exposed to bigotry and racism you'll never know how to deal with it. So, um, when I had um, left SIU when I flunked out, I went over to ITT Tech Bailey Technical School for architectural engineering. Now, St. Louis, that's culture shock. Most racist city to this day that I've ever been in, second to London. You know? Ah ah...... London the most racist city I've ever been in, and St. Louis was number 2. And, um, everything about when I was over in St. Louis is just constantly on a daily basis was racism, you know? And, I had a job, I got fired off job because of racism. You know? Ah, white guy, he came in, and he had the easy side and uh, he did his little work, and went and sat down, I had the hard side. The next day I got the easy side, got done, went and sat down, they wanted me to go out and help the little white guy. I told him, “you didn't have him help me, why should I go help him?” So they said I was disgruntled and not a team player, and fired me. And the union, they want no part of it. TS: Right BM: Yea for union, now I believe in unions, but all unions aren't good unions. Okay, so, then I end up working for O'Brien Corporation, there's bigotry and racism again. Only black at this whole company. TS: This was in St. Louis BM: Yeah, okay, owned by a Jewish guy, and so was the gas station I got fired from, but anyway at O'Brien Corporation, I was part time, ‘cause I was working, I was still going to school, and they said once I graduated they would hire me at full time. Well not only did they not hire me at full time, they hired 5 other people around me. They had an engineering department, they did exactly what I went to school for, they hired an engineer's assistant, and so I went and talked directly to Mr. O'Brien, “Now you did invite me to house, having been to your house with picnics and everything else, but yet you didn't make your employees keep your promise?"' Yeah when you graduate Bryan, I got a full time position for you." And dealin’ with that racism, and when I went out looking for a job, the amount of racism in St. Louis was more than I could stand because coming from Venice everything was low-key compared to St. Louis. St. Louis blatant, and in your face, it’s systematic, and it works to perfection over there, and I left, that's when I joined the service. I had to get away from this area. (55:59) TS: So you came to the area, you know you're in Granite City now. BM: They made me come back TS: [chuckles] They made you come back? BM: The military made me come back TS: Okay. Um, when you look at Venice, now, compared to when you grew up, what are your thoughts about it? BM: Sad. 21  TS: Why? BM: Because they - the deterioration of the city, there's no infrastructure here as far as monies coming in to ah, rebuild the city. If you - you can't rebuild a city or do anything if the people don't have jobs, you don't have a tax base, you know, you don't have a business space, they took the school out, so there's no school here, there's basically nothing here from what I remember growing up, and uh, now their Mayor Echols ah, is I think doing a very commendable job of trying to revitalize this area. I look at the park over here, which looks really, really nice, ah, compared to what it did 15 years ago, ya know, and I know the people is working, trying to revitalize this area, so I also know the developers that they brought through to want to redevelop this area here because Venice was really a really nice town to grow up in, ah, between the - even thought it was black and whites, all lived me and harmony, you know, ah the prejudice was here, easy to tolerate, very little bigotry, very little racism that I had to deal with, and I can't speak for others. This is just you know, my father say I used to look at the world through rosey rose colored glasses, you know, ah, I look for things now for truth - they are what they are. And ah, this city, the potential is still here, and what I like to see in areas like this one, when a house becomes dilapidated and it becomes unoccupied you just clear off the land and let it sit ‘til revitalization time comes around okay? Redevelopment, so, this is what I see for this city coming up, but there's still key uh, what you call them? City.... ah um... landmarks .... thank you.... that's right ... this is a landmark, the library is a landmark, there's some houses down here when you first come over the viaduct, when you look over there, those houses was beautiful as they've ever been and basically sets the tempo for what people should expect from the rest of the city. And that's what I will like to see. Hopefully the revitalization of this area, that's what I would like to see, all the houses in this city, look like those. If people take their kinda pride in their property, you know, so, hopefully that would bring back schools, businesses, and stuff like that, I would like to see a resurgence of this area. I really would. (58:58) TS: What um, so you mentioned the high school closed in 2004, because of the... the base for BM: It wasn't enough people that went to that school to justify the building being as old as it is, and trying to keep it open for the number, it just economically wasn't feasible, I mean, and you know when they say dollars and cents, it's also dollars and sense, you know. So um, it just wasn't feasible to keep it open anymore. TS: Yeah, one last question, what's your favorite memory of growing up in Venice? BM: My favorite memory TS: Because looking back you have you know, a great story, um BM: I didn't want to graduate high school, I had too much fun. Favorite memory of Venice... I don't know, I guess living in the projects, because I didn't want to move out of projects either. When my parents bought their house, I never did warm up to that house, it was just something about the environment, would in the projects, where when you walk out the door, you got your friends to the left, to the right, in front, and in back, you know it just kids everywhere, you know, and um, and so, all of us playin' in Venice. Homes, they had their field back there where we would go and make hideouts and forts and climb up in trees and you know, climb up on roofs, BB guns, model cars, it goes on and on and on about some of my 22  fondest memories living in Venice. Mmm... I would have to say when I lived in the Venice Homes, I loved all my friends, and all the people that grew up over there. TS: Nice BM: The projects - when you say projects now - people look at it in a negative sense. I made jokes about the projects and sometime people get mad, but I tell people my memories of the projects has always been fun. The number of people that you knew and met, you know, yeah you might have to fight a little bit or whatever, you know, because always power struggle, you know, but ah, basically you fought and then after the fight was over you just go back and start playin' all over again, you know, wasn't no killin’ or nothing like that, you know. So, I had to say, and I got three brothers, you know, and then my between my brothers and my friends, we were everywhere on our bikes, and that's what I'm saying, when we drove around Venice, you didn't get nobody throwin' nothin' atcha, looking at you sideways or nothing like that. Matter fact, lot of times my white friends would say “Hey wait a minute, we gonna go get our bikes, we come join you," you know, so, you know, and didn't matter whether we was on this side of town, or that side of town, or ever over here, it just didn't matter, when I lived here in Venice, so the social change in Venice was not as ugly and blatant as a lot of areas. I now reside in Granite City. The change that's going on up there - it's getting pretty ugly. The property values are dropping, that breeds anger in people because now they’re not getting the monies ah, outta your property when you need to reinvest when you move on, you know, and, um, and then my only - I don't care who moves into a area long as you conduct yourself like you got some sense take care of your property. I don't care what color you are. And, um, I remember when I first moved to Granite, I was one of the - my house, I got two acres of property, and it’s a two story house, most of the houses are one story, so, I was a black in an all-white area of the town, and I - they didn't make me feel welcome. Whenever I was in my yard once again, they used the old subtle ways, traffic would go in both directions for as long as I was out in my yard, people staring at me, letting me know that they didn't appreciate me being out there. But because of the way that I take care of my property, and what I've done to my property, and the people all of sudden say, "We don't mind you being here." And they actually stop and tell me that. And, that's pretty offensive, because what do I care [chuckles] that you agree - that you don't mind me being here, or you approve of what I'm doing with my property - that's my property. TS: Right BM: But I just got told that just four weeks ago. A husband and wife turned around came back, pulled up on the side, while I was edging my yard, and told me, "You know, we really approve of what you've done in your property and think it's really pretty  job well done." and I'm like “Um, thank you?” [Chuckles] So in my mind I'm like, "Lady! What I care?" You know, but I'm trying to be nice so I'm like, “Really?” [chuckles] somebody could have said your property looks nice you know, cause it’s people in this in this - and this what I'm talkin' about - people come by once a year, even if they live outta town, because they used to be just a vacant ugly field, and they come by my property once a year to see what I've done with it. And take pictures. TS: Wow BM: So should I be flattered, or insulted? [chuckles] 23  TS: Right BM: But I know the issue behind it is bigotry, you know, and I just actually have to laugh it off because I'm like, ah to a lot of people ignorance is bliss, and I just chalk it off with that. But you never learn - but if you step out and you talk to me and you give me five minutes I change your perception of black people. TS: Right BM: And that's how I deal with racism, that's what I learned from growing up in Venice. TS: Excellent. Well thank you so much for sharing your story, I appreciate it. BM: Yeah, you're welcome. 24 
MadisonCounty;David Miller;1943;2018;David Miller 1943 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois David Miller Oral History Interview Trent Morgan, Interviewer St. Louis Regional Airport Admin Building, East Alton, Illinois David Miller July 13, 2018 Trent Morgan (TM): All right, uh, I'd like to introduce myself, my name is Trent Morgan I'll be interviewing David Miller on today's date Friday, July 13th, 2018. Um, Mr. Miller, can you please state your name and your title? David Miller (DM): Yes, I'm Dave Miller, I'm the director of aviation for St. Louis Regional Airport. The airport’s located at 8 Terminal Drive in East Alton, we have an East Alton mailing address, although technically we are completely surrounded by the village of Bethalto. TM: Great, um, can you please give me some background information about yourself? Um, what is your background in education? DM: It, education wise, of course, went through uh, Kindergarten through High School my home town of Solina, Kansas. And from there I went on to the University of Denver, got a bachelor’s degree in Business Administration, then went into the Air Force while I was in the Air Force then I picked up a Master's degree in Public Administration. So, there was an interface there between my military career and my civilian career and those interfaces uh, continued on even to the present day. TM: What, what did you do for the Air Force, may I ask? DM: In the Air Force I was a pilot. I flew the heavies, I flew the uh, KC-135's which is the Boeing 707 that was modified for air to air refueling so it was a gas station in the sky. And from there I went on to fly B-52's. TM: Uh huh. DM: And I have over 2,000 hours in each of those airplanes between all the other airplanes that are flown I have a, a total flying time of about 5,000 hours. TM: Wow. DM: But also realizing that you can't really stay in the cockpit forever, so that's where my, my civilian education kicked in with business, business administration and public administration. So I understand what airplanes need, alright, because I have a pilot myself. I understand what they need when they're on the ground, I understand what they need when they're in the air, but more importantly I understand what they need when they're trying to go from one to the other. So, this uh, was set me up quite well for a career in airport management in my military career, and like the airlines and military and with the Air Force, you get to a certain point in your career, and you're expected to get out of the cockpit. You still 1  may be doing aviation related duties, but you're not pushing a crew anymore. And like the airlines, you keep flying and flying and flying 'til you can't pass physical then you're out. TM: Right. DM: But I was very fortunate with the jobs I had in the Air Force that were not directly in the cockpit. And that included being chief of base operations at Minot Air Force Base, Minot North Dakota, ya? TM: [laughter] DM: But um, the best way to describe that job is like saying I was the airport manager for the city of Minot Air Force Base. So I learned a lot about the administration of air fields, learned a LOT about civil engineering, which you stop to think about, you know airports and air fields and all of the concrete and the tar, tarmac and the taxiways and runways and buildings. I have a, uh, close interface, I'm not an engineer but having a close interface with civil engineering was a, was a big help. When I uh, also were in part of these duties in the Air Force I got into the Command Control element which, in, in laymen's terms is Command Post... TM: Okay DM: ... type duty. And I worked in the command post as a controller for a number of years and then was uh, advanced to the chief of the command control division again at Minot Air Force Base. And this taught me a LOT about having to deal with the, with stress, with the emergency situations, having to make decisions uh, on the spot, the command post is one of those jobs its hours and hours and hours of boredom marked by sharp attacks of... [Laughter] TM: [laughter] DM: ...of chaos. [Laughter] So I was very fortunate that I had, had that kind of uh, job. TM: Wow. What was was your highest rank? DM: I was a Major. Retired as a Major. I had some prior enlisted time, and then uh, qualified for officer training school and then pilot training after that. TM: Wow. DM: The uh, airplanes as I mentioned before, the first operational airplane that I flew was the KC-135. That took me all over the world, had me refueled uh, all kinds of airplanes, some of 'em uh, on classified type missions... TM: Right. DM: Then after accruing I said over 2,000 hours in THAT particular airplane I was fortunate I could cross-train into the B-52. TM: Right. 2  DM: The air in air refueling aspect is incredible, and because of the experience with those two airplanes, I have a lot of experience on each end of the boom, so I know, I know what was going on... TM: Mm-hmm. DM: ...in the airplane and we were able to do some pretty amazing things once you built that trust level between attacker pilot and the bomber pilot. TM: Wow. DM: That helped out in the uh, you may remember, some people may recall the Iranian hostage situation... TM: Yes. DM: I was a commander of the special detachment that flew out of Anderson Air Force Base in Guam. Consider where Guam is, I mean, if you consider where California is and where Vietnam is, Guam is about half way in between the two... TM: Right. DM: And we were flying missions out of Guam all the way up into the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea. TM: Wow. DM: That was to show the flag in, uh, response to that Iranian hostage situation. And some of those missions were like, 38, 36, and 42 hours long. TM: Wow. DM: And because of that, um, those jet engines they are allowed to leak so much, so many drops of oil, so in one particular mission we came back with 4 engines uh, shut down on one side and then had to hook up to a tanker. Well, again, the experience of being on both ends of the boom, we went in there without incident and we got the gas home: TM: Now, the B-52s are still in use today... DM: They're still in use. There were 8 different models of B-52, the A through the H model. I've flown the F Model, the G Model, and the H Model, right now the only um, models that are still flying are the H models. TM: Okay. DM: And they were the newest, they had the turbo fan, uh, blow by engines, which they were incredibly fuel efficient when compared to the earlier models. A B-52 is designed in the mid-50s. 3  TM: Right. DM: And uh, is, is still flying today. TM: It's amazing that wingspan. DM: The wingspan, yes, TM: When it takes off on the runway... DM: Yes. And then there's those um, heh, in the vernacular we call "training wheels" a sectional tip protection gear. It's 147 feet from one, from the left tip here to the right tip here... TM: Mm-hmm. DM: And when you're operating off of a runway that's 150 feet wide, that doesn't give you much uh, much more room left for error. But also amazing, both airplanes, uh, could carry an incredible amount of fuel. In fact, both of those airplanes, KC-135 and the B-52 could carry more weight in fuel than the weight of the aircraft. TM: Wow. DM: So that was um, another thing learning how to... handle heavy weight aircraft and bring everybody home. TM: So my my dad served in the Air Force. He served at uh, Indiana, Kokomo... DM: Okay. TM: He served in Nebraska. DM: Okay, Omaha. [phone ringing in background] TM: And then he served in, uh... Canada, Goosebay Labrador. DM: Oh... boy, huh [laughter]. Well most of my, uh, career, was in the in the Dakotas, North Dakota, South Dakota... TM: Okay. DM: And then a tour of duty in Clark Airbase, when strategic air command when the South East Asia it was always on a temporary duty basis so, although I was never assigned to a base in Vietnam, I have over 888 days [phone ringing in background] flying missions in South East Asia, flying out of Okinawa, flying out of Guam, flying out of uh, Thailand, flying out of Taiwan. TM: Wow. 4  DM: So, um, yea, it's... TM: Well thank you for your service. That, that's awesome. DM: Thank you. I enjoyed being in, I'm enjoying being out, but I'd do it all over again. [laughter] TM: I know. Uh, what, what got you into uh, the St. Louis Regional uh, Airport? DM: The... TM: I know you have an extensive background in ............ but what brought you here? DM: The job opportunity, let me just kind of uh, review here. I managed 7 different airports in 5 different states. TM: Okay. DM: I've actually probably moved more, moved around more as a civilian than I did when I was I was in the Air Force. Notwithstanding all the temporary duties, of course. TM: Right. DM: But, and there was uh, a career progression that brought me to this airport. I... first got, my first civilian airport management job, I was assistant airport manager in Flynt, Michigan. And then that took me to, uh, Bismarck, North Dakota. We had a lot of experience, we loved North Dakota, and a job opening came open and the family said "Dad, go for it!" Ah, well, it's not quite that simple... TM: Right, right. DM: Haveta apply for it. From there, I went to Juno, Alaska. Managed that airport for about 5 years, then slipped down to Ketchikan airport, managed that for about a year. There's uh, a saying that uh, in Alaska and you probably say the same thing about Hawaii... TM: [laughter] DM: ... if you're in Alaska too long, pretty soon you don't fit any place else. TM: Right. DM: So it was, uh, time to uh, return to the lower 48... TM: Right. DM: ...and the opportunity came open in uh, Montrose, Colorado, and that, um, was uh, was a good ride force, had not necessarily had a happy ending. I want, I want to emphasize that in airport management as a career field, people have a tendency to get fired more often because they're doing their job, because they're not doing their job. 5  TM: Right. DM: Running an airport is a complex situation. You have to deal with the federal government, with state government, with local government, and the United States when you think about it, the air space is all controlled by the federal government. The air PLANES, except for the military airplanes of course, are owned by the private sector. TM: Right. DM: But airports are owned by individual municipalities. So, there's uh, uh... a complex process that you need to go through to get something done, and that complex uh, process is not understood by everybody. [laughter] TM: Right, right. DM: And so, uh... that, I mean, there was uh, I guess a difference in management philosophy in Montrose, Colorado, and then I came to that situation that, well, we think it's best if you seek employment elsewhere. TM: Right. DM: So I, you know, I could read the handwriting on the wall, I don't have to be told twice. TM: Mm-hmm. DM: So the position came open here. Now, the part of the issue here before I got here, there was a tremendous um, public corruption problem here at the airport. And in fact the uh, previous staff, the previous airport manager, the operations director, and the uh, secretary all ended up with uh, charges being filed against one type or another, I think in most cases they were either dismissed or reduced. BUT, that was the... the what was going on here. And the, I think this is a good case in point, that the system works because... the people who appoint people to the board stared thinking "Well, we better pay better attention to who we appoint to the board." TM: Right. DM: So, they got relatively a new board in here. The board looked around, said "Well, there's something... we've got to do something better with the airport management." So they went out looking for another airport manager, and I happened to be available because of the situation in, in Colorado. So, uh, came in for the interview, and there were I think 6 of us who came in for the interview, and then uh, they called me a month later and wanted me to come back, now there's only two people they were interviewing and they called me back on a third round of interviews and I looked around, I was the only one standing. TM: Wow. DM: So, I figured well, either I got the job or they, they're going to start all over again. So I came in here, 6  I've got to also uh, give credit to, uh, Dean Sweet. He was the airport attorney at the time... TM: Mm-hmm. DM: Uh, became a judge eventually and, in his career path. But the board kinda knew that because of the public corruption problem they need to bring in a hired gun from somewhere to, to clean things up and so Dean and I worked as a team. It took about, uh, nine months to almost a year to get everything cleaned up but we did clean it up. And now we're moving, been moving forward with the airport ever since. TM: What, what year did you... um, come into...? DM: I came here in... 2003. TM: Okay. DM: 2003. TM: Okay, so you're going on about 15 years now. DM: Right, right. TM: Okay. DM: I'm on my 15th year, that's correct. TM: Okay. What uh, what is the purpose of airport mission and purpose? DM: The... TM: For this airport? DM: The ... some of that is, somewhat generic to all airports. You want to be able to provide a safe environment for aircraft to take off and land. So that is the primary uh, emphasis of the airport. It's uh, safety, is something we just beat into our heads ALL the time. But beyond that, the airport in most communities is a real player for the community. In fact, in our economic impact, we divide everything up into Aeronautical and Non-aeronautical. So you look at Aeronautical, that's things like the, you know, the control tower, like west star aviation, like anybody that repairs airplanes or provides flying instruction for airplane... those are aeronautic concerns. But there's a lot of non-aeronautical concerns. For example, the airport restaurant being one. As you go down Highway 40 a lot of people don't, may not realize this but QuikTrip is on airport property, Arby's roast beef, Ace Hardware, uh... go on down... Helmcamp Auto Service... TM: Mm-hmm. DM: Um, Liberty Bank, all of these are on airport property. Now, in most cases we have no investment in their capital improvements, it's just a land lease and then they, they put on it uh, what they want. We have other things like a UPS sorting facility here. UPS could have an aviation arm, but they do not at this 7  airport. But it's the only sorting facility between Fairview Heights and Springfield. TM: Okay. DM: But, uh, they could, by just putting down some asphalt between their facility and the ramp, and they could bring airplanes in here. And as we speak, I would have to classify them as a non- aeronautical business. A couple of business parks, uh, health care services, that sort of thing. TM: Mm-hmm. DM: Uh, comin' in to the non-aeronautical side of the airport. TM: Okay, so you talked about some of the usage, so the, the big player here is probably West Star... DM: West Star is... the... let's, let's define the airport, let's say it's a small village, it's a town. TM: Right. DM: And it's kinda like my job, well I'm the city manager for this village or this town. West Star is the biggest corporation in town. Now, our auditors have documented that about 60% of our airport revenue comes through West Star in one form or another. It could be land leases, could be building leases, could be fuel and flowing fees, we had no landing fees with this airport... TM: Oh, wow! DM: ...which is one thing that, uh, makes us unique. So we have to make up for that type of revenue, uh, in in other, in other manners. So, that's kind of the relationship, uh, it's been a very good relationship, West Star is built one large hanger about 3 or 4 years ago and as we speak they're building another... TM: Wow. DM: ...large hanger. And we are extending the airport ramp, the airport parking area, to cover the entry way to that new hanger. TM: Wow. Now, um, your private usage, do you get a lot of business.... flights... DM: A lot of corporate traffic... let me.... talk about.... what's called a "reliever airport"... TM: Okay. DM: We're considered a reliever airport for Lambert. Likewise, Spirit airport on the other side of the Mississippi ocean is also considered a reliever airport and the downtown airport is considered a reliever airport. So, we take the... traffic here at these reliever airports because... something like Lambert, you know, big airplanes and small airplanes just don't mix! TM: Right. 8  DM: Uh, um, 747 starts its engines and the Cessna 172 that's flipped upside down. TM: Right. DM: So, uh, this is why we have this reliever airport. Now, we do not have commercial air service at this airport, but you get a lot of corporate traffic, uh, most of the customers coming in from West Star are, uh, corporate users. I'll talk a little bit about their, their balance, here, here in a moment. A lot of privately owned airplanes, uh, Cessnas, Bug Smashers, if you will, there's over 140 of those... TM: Mm-hmm. DM: Uh, billeted here at the airport. West Star aviation uh, wow. With all of their expansion they are truly in a global market. And about 10% of their revenue comes from overseas sources. They have a contract with uh, the Egyptians doing 9 airplanes a year and... TM: Wow. DM: Started out being for 5 years and now they've expanded that contract. I look out on the ramp and I almost have to go to a, a book somewhere to figure out where these airplanes are from. We have one out there from Pakistan, one from, uh, Malta, we've had airplanes in here from the Isle of Mann, all over South America and Europe, and it's to the point that I hardly even consider Canada and Mexico being foreign countries anymore. TM: [laughter] DM: The important part about all this international service is that is bringing U.S. dollars back into the United States right through this airport. TM: Wow. DM: And, the... uh, because of that this airport actually has the status of being an international exporter because the value added to these airplanes before they go back home. TM: Wow. That's pretty impressive. Well, we talked about West Star, um... jobs, generally, how, how many jobs are out here? Um... DM: There's over 500 jobs right here at the airport. There's uh, with West Star, they just topped 400 employee mark at this airport. Now, West Star, they have a carbon copy of this facility in Grand Junction, Colorado, another one in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and they are in 3 or 4 other much smaller locations uh, some of those locations I, I don't even think they have a hanger, for example, in Aspen, Colorado, uh they have a couple of fast-ride trucks that if you have to make an emergency landing out of [??] Nebraska they'll shoot one of those trucks out, to repair you enough for a one-time flight to the depot where... TM: Okay. DM: ... where you can get it fixed. System-wide uh, West Star has over 1,000 employees but 400, uh 400 of them here, they consider this location right here in East Alton to be their corporate headquarters. 9  TM: Wow. I didn't know that. DM: Yeah. Now all the billing comes out of here, all the payroll comes out of here, but they have a real synergistic effect by the other locations. TM: Cool. Um, how many flights do you say a day, a year...? DM: [crosstalk] That's difficult, that's difficult to say. A lot of it is weather related. We may go for, you know, 4 or 5 days and there's hardly any maybe 1, 2, 3 flights a day. Then the weather is nice, a week, a 3 day weekend comes in, and we had several hundred in one day. Uh, all total, if you put it over a year’s average, I've seen it as high as 70,000 a year and as low as 40,000 a year. But, since we have no schedule airline service in here, this kind of potluck... TM: Right, right. DM: ...is uh, is what comes in now. TM: The refueling companies and stuff, I mean, who, who fuels the planes and who... DM: Right now, West Star aviation is the only company that provides those fueling services. It is fairly competitive. I would like to get a self-fueling unit in here for the smaller airplanes, they use aviation gasoline. I don't wanna get into the jet fuel business... TM: Right, right. DM: ...business. But for the uh, smaller uh, airplanes, people like to, you know, save a buck for their hobby, allow them to self-fuel their airplanes. TM: Okay. All right, um, that's great information. Now we're gonna get into the history of this place. DM: The airport? TM: Yes. So, um, I noticed that, that it was created in 1946, uh, what was the purpose, why did 1946 they say "hey, let's build this thing"? DM: Yeah. The 1946 date, that is the date that the... St. Louis Regional Airport Authority was established. Some of the actual flying history off the dirt here goes back as far as 1928. TM: Wow. DM: Uh, Wood River had a flying college here, if you will, and then uh, through the years, that expanded. The thing about the 1946 date that kinda makes this airport unique, it is a post-World War II airport. TM: Oh, wow. DM: Most airports like the other ones that I mentioned, you know, Lambert uh, Scott Field, those go back 10  into the beginning, you know the 1920s. But this was established as an airport authority just after World War II. TM: Okay. DM: Then, uh, the Walston Aviation Company sort of... they were the airport. And they built up a Cessna business that become the largest Cessna dealer in the world. It was right here. TM: Wow. DM: And as the... uh, Walston family aged and grew older, uh, the older Walston's died off, the younger Walston's did not wanna have anything to do with airplanes, and so Premiere Air Center took over. Uh, couple people took that over, named it Premiere Air Center. They ran ultimately into a bunch of red ink, and this was, uh, about the time I, I got here about 15 years ago. TM: Right. DM: And then another set of developers came in, took it over, got it out of the red ink and then it became West Star Aviation. So that's the audit history, first Walston Aviation, then Premiere Air Center, and then uh, and then West Star Aviation. TM: That's cool. Now um... it's pretty 1928, wow. What kind of famous pilots, planes... uh, is there any records of... DM: I... no. I wish we had some type of a log book of all of the famous people that have uh, that have flown in here. At least on my watch, uh... Bill Clinton came in here, this is post, uh, in his post-president years. TM: Right. DM: But he came in here and then um, more recently, uh, Joe Biden flew in when he was the Vice President, and that was a big, huge event, when he came in. And then, uh, other... people that come in here from time to time to get their airplanes serviced. TM: ‘Kay DM: And we do have to be somewhat careful about, uh, that because... you know, if, if people... thought that this particular corporation well if they have airplanes oh let's... that's why my Pampers cost so much at Walmart you know, that type of thing. But, these corporations, they're not stupid, if they could not pencil these things off uh, they would not have aircraft and we saw that in 2008 during the big economic downturn. A lot of uh, people got out of the corporate aviation business. The thing that was unique there is that there were another bunch of companies that were thinking, "Well, maybe we oughta get into corporate a... well, I don't know, it's kinda... well it'll be nice... well, da da da," so that went back and forth. And somebody walks through the door, says, "We can get a Falcon 50 for 50 cents on the dollar." Oh, really? So, there again that's where West Star was very significant in that turnaround because these companies would get an airplane at a very reasonable price, and they wanna have it painted in their 11  company colors, they wanna redo the interior to fit their particular mission, and oh and while we're at it lets upgrade the avionics and make sure all the landing struts are repacked, all that sort of stuff. TM: Mm-hmm. DM: And that's the niche of West Star, they're called an MRO stands for Maintenance Repair and Overhaul. TM: Okay, now how many times did this airport expand runway wise or... I mean, how many, how many runways they currently have? DM: Good question. We have uh, 2 runways depending on how you count 'em, maybe we have 4 but there are 2 runways because it's going to the north one direction and the same concrete is going south in the opposite direction... TM: Okay. DM: ... so that's one run way... TM: Right. DM: ...that counts for 2 different uh, uh, sets of approaches. The thing that is fortunate that kinda gives us bragging rights, these 2 runways are not parallel to each other. They intersect. Is what this means, is, if you have a crosswind, you can find a runway that will keep you out of the crosswind. TM: Mm-hmm. DM: That's happened 3 times since I've been here. Weather front comes through, and typically, I don't wanna get into a lot of weather phenomena, but when a weather front comes through, wind direction changes 180 degrees. So, as it's swinging around, you know, from northwest to southeast or vice versa, quite often the winds will go out of limits over Lambert. And it's happened 3 times since I've been out here, I looked out on the ramp and we have 13 or 14 or 15 commercial airliners... TM: Right. DM: ...on the ramp. TM: Right. DM: Because they came over here because they couldn't land in, in a crosswind over there. And typically they know that the fronts going to be through in 30 or 40 minutes, so the passengers don't even get off the airplane, they just give 'em another round of drinks and then take off and, and go on to Lambert. So having those intersecting runways is, uh, is valuable. Now, if you're training pilots, and you want to train somebody how to land in a crosswind, then you can find a crosswind here, for.... TM: Oh, really? 12  DM: ...for training purposes. 'Nother bragging right we have about this air field is that we're the only airport that's above all flood plains, which is significant when you have the mighty Mississippi that... TM: Yea. DM: ...get's outta control. TM: Yeah. DM: Lambert as an airport, is out in the flood plain which is completely surrounded by the flood plain, so if you're landing there, you can't get home. Maybe you're changing airplanes that's okay. The downtown airport, that's in the flood plain. Spirit is in the flood plain. Mid America Airport's kinda unusual. When they first built that airport, it was not in any flood plain, but then they decided to extend the runway for 'nother 1,000 feet. And that put it in the... TM: Wow. DM: ...in in the flood plain with Creek down there. TM: Um. DM: And, yea. TM: Uh, did Charles Lindbergh ever venture over here, maybe? DM: I've... heard stories that he did land at the air strip up in Jerseyville. TM: Oh, really? DM: But I don't have any... documentation or any information or even any tall tales... TM: Right. DM: ...that he landed here. TM: What about military? I know um... DM: Yes. TM: We got Scott Air force Base and, uh, has this airport been, seen a lot of military action? DM: Yes it has. Before... Mid America airport came in, they had just the one runway down there, so, they'd have to close down that runway for resurfacing, the entire squadron of C-9's operated out of here for quite some time. They still come up here to uh, do practice, instrument approaches, because, for a number of reasons. You look at the other 4 airports, and they're pretty much in a line against the prevailing winds. So that means air traffic control has to protect all 4 airports even though somebody just landing at, at 1 of the 4. 13  TM: Right. DM: In case they have to go missed approach or somebody from another airport goes missed approach, how are they going to protect that airspace? On the other hand, we're located tangent to that straight line, by about 20 miles. So, there's not... they don't have to protect as much air space. Still have to protect it, but not as much. Okay. What's the bottom line to that? That means that, let's say a KC-135 come up, come up here from Scott Air force Base, and they can get 4 approaches in here, at the same time they can get only 3 in at uh, even at Scott Air force Base. So, quite often we'll see that airplane come up here, maybe in a traffic pattern for, you know, an hour or an hour and fifteen minutes, and what it is, I mean it has 12 and 15 pilots on board, and they're trying to get their monthly proficiency training in, so they'll do a touch and go, uh on downwind have a seat change, get the next pilot in, touch and go, seat change, touch and go, seat change... TM: Wow. DM: They're all done, they go home and you consider they can get 4 approaches in here at the same time they could only get 3 down there, what a tremendous savings in fuel. TM: Yeah DM: That is. But I also like to brag about our instrument approaches. We have a legacy of the modern approaches, we have uh, GPS approaches to all... to each end of both runways. We have the instrument landing system, the ILS um, precision approach in here. But, we have 3 approaches that are vastly, uh, disappearing. We have what's called a Non-Directional Beacon, and NDB approach. That radio signal uh, is, like I said is non-directional, it's just a signal that's out there, and the pilot's look at certain instruments on their panel that can figure out and kind of hone in on. And that is located way below the AM broadcast band. I mean, this approach has been, uh, the NDB approach has been around probably since Lindbergh... TM: Okay. DM: He flew things like that. And we have the only one left, uh, here. We have uh, I mentioned we have the Instrument Landing System or ILS, we also have a published... what's it called, a Back Course ILS where pilots can come around and approach the airport from the opposite direction. And then there's what we call a Circling Approach off of the VLR that is located in Troy. The thing that's significant about the VLR approach is going away throughout the United States, but FAA is going to keep 30 of these VLR's as a tertiary backup in case somebody shoots satellites out of the sky... TM: Right. DM: ...and uh, Troy is one of those. Those we'll, we'll have that approach here. So, you know, what, what does it mean? Again, I go back to Scott Air force Base. A lot of the third world countries they fly into, these are the only approaches they have available. TM: Right. DM: So we have the only ones they can train on. 14  TM: Okay. DM: Uh, they'll tell me in the same breath "Well, we can, uh accomplish our training in a simulator, but nothing beats the real thing." TM: Right. DM: Yea. TM: And the... any significant um... crashes or damages. I know, I don't know what year it was, when there was uh, it was an F-18 maybe that crashed? DM: An F-18 Super Hornet. TM: Right. DM: That was just a couple of years before I got here. Let me go back to so why that airplane was here in the first place. TM: Right. DM: This airport, believe it or not, is almost a perfect overlay for the Farm Burrow Airport over in England, big, huge, uh... air show in Farm Burrow every year. So, Boeing was trying to, to sell more of the F-18 Super Hornets, so they wanted to do a good performance at Farm Burrow, and what better way to do that then to practice over something that's uh... TM: Similar. DM: ...almost a perfect overlay for Farm Burrow. So the airplane was in here quite often, even after the crash they continued to use this as a Farm Burrow, uh, substitute. It's interesting about the, the noise, we had the uh, Harrier Jump Jet in here doing kinda the same thing. And the switchboard would light up, not so much people complaining about the noise, but number one, are we being attack? TM: [laughter] DM: No, we're not. Uh, well, where can I park to get a good view? TM: Yea. DM: My grandchildren are gonna be here next week, will they still be flying then? You know that, that... TM: Right. DM: ...that type of response, as opposed to compl... and there are a few curmudgeons that complain about the noise but, uh, anyway the... pilot of that particular aircraft uh, that crashed, this pilot had air all the way, all the way from beginning to end. He was doing an altitude losing maneuver right off the deck, and uh, didn't make it. 15  TM: Right. DM: And I, I guess to his credit, uh, he did not go down in a housing area, did not go down, um, in a populated area. I think some of the firebrands from the crash got onto somebody's garage but uh, I think our own airport crews that responded to that, they knocked down the firebrands so, uh, no private property went up in smoke. TM: Yea. DM: Uh, tragedy to be sure... TM: Right, right. DM: To be sure. TM: That's....Yeah, I remember that story and, uh... DM: Yea. TM: ...that's the only significant, you know, crash I've ever heard that was been here. DM: We've had some smaller airplanes come in with uh, minor things. They had one guy, he had pilot error on the way through taildragger type airplane, you don't land with a tailwind. And he did, and lost all control ability. The airplane is, the tailwind, all of the sudden he's in dead air because he's going just as fast as the tailwind and that flipped him upside down. And uh, but he got out okay. Uh, other minor emergencies, smoke in the cockpit, landing gear won't come down, uh, co-pilot's crying, somebody else is throwing up.... TM: Right. DM: We had, um, uh, two uh... call out's uh, just this month already for minor stuff like that. TM: Okay, ‘kay. I guess you cover a lot of the questions from history, I guess the big thing going to finish up with here's what are you proud about this St. Louis Regional Airport? What, what makes you... DM: Couple of things... TM: You, you've said a couple things, but what... DM: Yeah, uh, a couple things. For one thing, I got to be proud about the way the airport is governed. We had 7 commissioners, and this is out of the salient airports I mentioned earlier, this is the only airport that is governed by an independently empowered airport authority board. Uh, Lambert is a function of the city of St. Louis, Spirit Airport is a function of the county, uh, Mid America Airport is a function of St. Clair County, but poor colleague at downtown airport, that's a function of bi-state development. Bi-state development, of course they have the Metro Link Trains, they have the Bus System, they have the airport and surprise, surprise they have those little gondola's that go up in the Arch. 16  TM: Oh, really? DM: That is not a park service concession. TM: [crosstalk] I didn't know that. DM: ...concession, that they uh, were not going to put any money into it, bi-state development did so, of course they get to enjoy the fruits of, of putting that in. So, uh, my colleague down there is always... has some issues with uh, diversion of revenue which is a big no-no I mentioned earlier in the interview about uh, airport managers being fired more often for doing their job than not doing their job. The FAA is pretty well bullet-proof in the diversion of revenue and, any revenues that are generated on the airport, including fuel taxes, must remain with the airport, not for operations and maintenance but for capital improvements. So, that is uh, a big rub that a lot of people do not understand. TM: Okay. Okay. Um... yeah, I guess bringing up that question, um... uh... any other, um... things that... you know, I, this is the question I was gonna ask, the cemeteries... DM: Yes, yes. TM: ... located on the property. Are those family cemeteries or were they just here before or. ? DM: We have two uh, cemeteries on the airport, neither one of them are active. One of them in particular has lots of room for expansion but to be honest with ya’, I have enough on my plate managing an airport let alone trying to manage a cemetery. TM: Right. DM: But the uh, Pruitt Cemetery which is off of Mooreland Road, that is not exactly a family cemetery but there's an awful lot of Pruitt's in there. And as you look at the grave markers there's about 4 or 5 different ways to spell Pruitt. The thing that is uh, remarkable about that particular cemetery, you know, both cemeteries have Civil War veterans buried in them. TM: Okay. DM: The one uh, the Pruitt Cemetery [phone ringing in background] has a... Revolutionary War veteran buried there, and a veteran from the War of 1812, and the two of them are related. TM: Wow. I didn't know that. DM: Yes, and the DAR's been over, they've done a big, um, ceremony on the Revolutionary War markers been replaced, there's a certain ceremony that those belong with that. So we're real proud of that. The other cemetery, the Montgomery Cemetery's over next to the Belk Park Golf Course. Also has Civil War people buried in it, and a number of other little family plots. There, there the most recent burial in there was in the year 2000 and the... I don't know which died first, the husband or the wife, but they, they were within 6 years of each other and both of 'em are buried over there. So we have the 1994 grave and a 2000 grave, but nothing since and, again, they're not active cemeteries that I really, at this point in time, I don't 17  have the time to go through all the bureaucracy... TM: Mm-hmm. DM: ...of making the, the getting the licenses for opening up another cemetery. TM: Okay. Well, I appreciate your time today, I mean, I learned a lot and can't wait to, to get this information out there. DM: Good. TM: And thank you very much. Thank you. DM: You think of anything comes up in the future, give me another call and we'll publish an amendment to this one. TM: Alright, thank you very much. 18 
MadisonCounty;Dave Knoche;1962;2016;Dave Knoche 1962 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Dave Knoche Oral History Interview Jacob Riedle, Interviewer Maryville, Illinois October 17, 2016 Jacob Riedle (JR): This is Jake Riedle and I’m here with Dave Knoche at his home in Maryville, Illinois. How are you doing tonight Dave? Dave Knoche (DK): I’m doing great, how are you doing? JR: I’m doing good. JR: So, were you originally from the Metro East? DK: Yeah. Born in Godfrey lived there most of my life till after right until I graduated from high school and then I moved away to a couple different areas in Alton or Godfrey, right outside the outskirts of Alton, almost border line in some of the areas right on the edge. JR: So, what was Godfrey and Alton like during your childhood? DK: Well, I was just thinking that you know, that has changed quite a bit as far as what we will have to offer now than what we had to offer when I was little. You know I just remember playing and being able to do pretty much anything I ever wanted to do. You know you go ride bikes, play in the creek you know your parents never really even cared, at this day and age is really not the same. We use to go to uh, there was actually a skating rink that doesn't exist anymore. That that went away a long time ago, called Mr. T’s. There was that at actually kind of close to where my parents live now in Godfrey and now it's just a carwash is there now and a gas station. Shows how much has changed. And we had our mall when I was little was gosh, full of stores, full of stores that we use to go to all time, bookstores, movie stores, CD stores, you know and you just don't have that anymore. We had a movie theater also I remember seeing my, seeing Batman the original Batman there. You know that place closed down and it's been sitting there abandoned for probably twenty to twenty-five years just sitting there just stranded. No one’s ever picked it up, no one’s ever tried to buy it, just a huge lot, big parking lot and a decent sized building just sitting there abandoned for all those years. The movie stores. It just seems like nowadays it is all these chain restaurants, chain stores, gas stations, fast food places that just kind of take over everything. You don't have the real like Mom and Pop like little stores anymore. You know. It’s kind of sad actually. JR: So, what are some of your favorite memories of going to the mall? DK: Well, there was a store that me and my, me and couple my friends used to go to, and we use to buy these little figurines out of pewter, little dragons and stuff like that. We use go do that all time, use to collect them and play with those, and comic stores. We use to have comics and baseball cards and just 1  card stores. There were several of those in Alton, so I remember when we get our allowance, we'd always go there and we'd just stock up on you know try to get all that rare cards and try to buy as many packs as we could and get all the comics we wanted those, those are some fond memories. That, and of course you know just hanging out with the friends and we use to go and play in the creek out behind my parents’ house all the time too. I feel like nowadays just probably not, I don't know, I just don't feel like that's that would be acceptable. You know I don't know if I'd let my kids just run and play in the creek for hours and you know four or five hours and not know where they're at. So I don't know if that would happened anymore. JR: You said you grew up in Godfrey? DK: Yeah JR: What was the house like you grew up in? DK: Oh, goodness. My original house in Godfrey was a little like a ranch style house. We had a little pool in the back, a little above ground pool. My little brother actually jumped into pool quite often and my dad had to go in there with all his clothes on several times to save him. But yeah, it was a nice little two story house in a really nice subdivision. We use to go play around. There's probably like four or five kids you use to go run around with all the time. All the time. Go and play in the woods and just hang out. I just don't know that, I would have been four, five, six years old. I think before I moved from that house and I don't think I don't think that I would let my four, five, six-year-old just go and run around in the woods for hours and stuff anymore, it’s kind of sad but a different time JR: When you moved when you were six, where did you guys move to? DK: We moved to another part of Godfrey. My dad was doing really, really well in his business and he built a house out there. Richland Woods is what the subdivision is called, one of the first houses out there and a nice couple acre plot of land and yeah, it was great, we had a lot of the land and we a nice little pool and just hung out there and play and we use to play in the creek back there all the time to, it was a fun place. JR: What was your dad's business? DK: He started his own business back in ‘87. It's called HGH products, which is hot glass handling products. He makes, manufactures steel and graphite parts that go into the glass bottle industry and the hot end is the take-out tongs, inserts, and holders, like all of your beer bottles, wine bottles, jars, perfume, mason jars any type of jars or any glass, that's all period that has to be glass you know made in the same glass goblet format. It was picked up by these, this our product will touch. You know we have to manufacture different types of products for all these different sizes and different types of bottles. JR: So, did your mom help with that business or, what did she do during? DK: Very seldom, but no she had her own. My parents were both entrepreneurs. She had a Libby’s Bridal and Formal Wear. So, she had her own bridal shops. She had three bridal shops. I don’t remember where all three of them were at. I know Collinsville, Alton, and another one, I know she had to close down one 2  or two of them. She had three different ones. She just ended up leaving the business altogether, was a stay at home mom after that. I don't remember how old I was, probably eight years old, ten years old, somewhere around there whenever she decided to stop. JR: How many siblings did you have? DK: Three siblings. So, there is four of us all together. I got an older sister, a year and a half older, and then two younger brothers, three years younger than me and six years younger. We would always play together, ball with each other. It was good times. JR: Did your mom ever say that was more, like the businesses were actually easier than trying to raise four kids? DK: Probably, yeah probably. That’s probably why she was did that in the first place. Yes. I would have to say she did. JR: So, where did you go to elementary school? DK: Evangelical Elementary School, it was in Godfrey, not too far from my house. I went there all the way up, went there for preschool, all the way up ‘til fifth grade then I went, actually after that I went to Saint Louis, to Oak Hill. It was a boys and girls Catholic school. I went there for a year then I went to Chaminade, which was all boys prep school for seventh and eighth grade. Then I realized it wasn’t for me being in Saint Louis when all my friends were here. So, I went to public school for high school, Alton High School for ninth through twelfth. JR: Why did you go to Chaminade, and Oak Hill? DK: My parents really wanted me to. My mom was really for it, I never really cared for the idea, but I was a pretty smart kid. So, it just wasn’t, it was always too easy for me. We thought about moving to Saint Louis to which we never ended up doing but yeah I went there and tried it out. It just wasn’t for me. So, it’s just you just can't really go into St. Louis that late you know and everybody, it’s just tough and especially at that age you know. You know it’s all boys too and I wasn’t too fond of that either. But yeah I mean after that I went to like I said Alton High for four years. After Alton High, I really wanted to just get out of the area and it was either, I wanted to go to the mountains or to the beach. So, it was Berkeley California or Bozeman, Montana and I chose Bozeman Montana, my two main options, and I chose a great choice. I wouldn't I wouldn't take it back at all its a Gorgeous, gorgeous place, really very, very far 24-hour drive. So, it was a long way but it was well worth it. JR: Backtrack a little bit, what was it going to Chaminade back to public, Alton High School like? DK: Oh, it was like night and day difference you know, obviously, I did have friends you know at Chaminade and everything but you know I had like lifelong friends at Alton. So, going from, you know, not really seeing those guys all that much and then coming back, it was a big difference. It was just being reunited with my friends. So, I got in a lot more trouble being there. It was good times and I wouldn't take it back at all. 3  JR: What did you play any sports, any clubs? DK: Oh, yeah. Well, no clubs. Well I was in, what was it called? It was after, like an after school like academic program which was, was interesting and I didn’t do that for long, but my main thing was soccer. I always played soccer my whole life. So, that was my main, my main passion. I did that. I also played tennis. I played tennis for three years. I loved tennis, I played tennis for, since I was younger. Then I, well, I ran track at Chaminade and I also played soccer there too. But, I didn't continue that at Alton. But yeah soccer, was my main, I played soccer pretty much all year around, didn’t have time for a lot else. JR: Were the school sizes any different between Chaminade and Alton? DK: Yes, it’s exponentially different. Chaminade was a lot smaller. I mean Alton, you had twenty two hundred or so, twenty four hundred students at Alton. In my class was like four hundred something or five hundred, I think it was five something. Yeah it was a big difference. Very big. JR: You mentioned going to Montana for college. How was it? DK: It was, it was incredible. I went there ‘cause I like snowboarding, was one of my greatest passions and obviously going snowboarding in Alton it is a lot different than snowboarding in actual real mountain in Montana. That was a big change. It scared me to death whenever I first got on a mountain but I grew to absolutely love it. It was, I went there for, my original major was architecture. I took some architecture classes in Alton and absolutely loved it, and I’m more crafting, designing, and drafting blueprints. Then I went to Bozeman and it was much different. It was kind of more of an abstract thinking, a lot of stuff about space and it just wasn't really for me, I really just wanted be drafting and doing that because I was very, very good at it. I actually ranked second in Southern Illinois drafting competition. I would of got first but my teacher did not tell me a certain thing and I had to know. He was like, “Oh yeah! I completely forgot to tell you that.” But yeah, after that, I decided to change my major after my first year of college and I switched it to business marketing. I thought that was a little more personal and it worked you know. Also, I minored in entrepreneurship with small business to ‘cause I wanted to eventually own my own business. So, it was great, was in marketing club for two years, did great things with that and took a lot of a lot of credits. Even after switching my major my freshman year, still graduated in four years. So, I did a lot those last few years especially. JR: What was the school in Bozeman, what was it called? DK: It was called Montana State University. JR: How big of a university was this? DK: Like 14,000 or so all together. It was great. They had an entire sorority system there. So, it wasn’t like it was like a really small school or anything. I mean, I know it’s like in Bozeman, Montana which kind of weird but, it was great. It is a really great school, I really loved that school. I would go back there in a heartbeat. JR: The decision to go to Montana and not let’s say SIUE, did it come down the mountains or? 4  DK: No, I just needed to get out of the area. I just, you know just being here forever, I just wanted to see you know, get out and explore and see new things. And kind of branch off on my own, was kind of my main thing, just had to be on my own kind of go off by myself kind of thing. JR: How would you compare then, Bozeman Montana to Godfrey or Alton, Illinois? DK: It’s like night and day difference. I mean Bozeman was like it just such a cute little town. You know it’s like three hundred and sixty degree mountains and you know just it was all like mom and pop type shops you know it’s not like a lot of chains there you know. You couldn’t build a building above thirteen stories because it would take away from the mountains you know that was like a rule there you know. It was, it was just very different. You know being able to just leave and go and hike up a mountain within 30 minutes or go to three different ski resort within a half hour. It’s quite a bit different. You know of course you didn't have a big city like St. Louis next to yah, which I have no problem with that. I mean, I could live in a small little cute town you know out in the middle nowhere you know. I'd go back to Bozeman in a heartbeat. So, it was me you know I've never been in that situation or been there. But I realize that’s more me. JR: So, compared like what would you do there for in Montana for fun compared to what you know you have here in the Metro East? DK: Ah, I mean I was snowboarding I was snowboarding like all the time. Snowboarding, hiking. Those were like the main, that's what I really spent most of my time doing, snowboarding like all the time. Where there’s a lot of, what do you call them? Snow bunnies, and you know like the snow bums that is all they do is like snowboard you know, I can see how they would do that or ski. That's all they do. I absolutely see how that can be a life. You know, I mean it's just amazing. I mean, literally, that's what I could spent my whole time doing that. JR: You got your four-year degree then from Montana State. Where do you go after that? DK: I went to Temecula, California. So, I went to my beach which actually I was forty- five minutes from the beach and I was really close to San Diego about 45 minutes from San Diego. It was not like San Diego at all. I mean it was the like low desert. So, it was, you know, really hot and it was just night and day difference. It just that place wasn’t me either because I was single at the time and it was like a family type of place. I just didn't really know anybody and you know was a lot you know older people in that town. It just wasn't really for me and it was real expensive there. I worked for a window manufacture called, Milgard Windows, and it was great experience. You know I am Inside Sales Rep. Wanted to become an Outside Sales Rep and then I was there about two years, and then my dad's business, he really needed some help. He was, he was really, really busy. I decided you know that place wasn't really for me and I decide to come back and work for him. And that was several years ago when I worked there for a couple of years. And then I decided to branch off after I got him you know back on track. I decided to branch off and do my own thing work for ADT security for a couple years, or for eight months. JR: As a sales rep in California. What was what was that like? DK: I was an Inside Sales Rep, so I was had like, let's say started out with like 15 accounts probably left at like 40 or 50 accounts and I was like their main contact at Milgard Windows for ordering purposes or 5  for questions and customer service. It was neat and it was a great company, great industry, learned a lot through there. I learned I was really good with people and customers and could help people out with no problem. JR: What were like California, Metro East, what were some similarities, some differences? DK: I would say there’s probably no similarities. I mean, that place is really expensive. Like all there was were like these little, I guess all little chains and little restaurants everywhere, I mean everywhere you could see and everywhere you go you had like ten different choices fast food restaurants. It was kind of ridiculous. It wasn't a whole lot to do there. I mean that's the similarity. There was there wasn't a lot to do. If you wanted something to do you have to go like LA or go to the beach or something. You had to travel a little way but there was not anything to do, it was the desert. It wasn't like you could just go out and play. I mean I feel like you know just I guess if you had the expensive toys, which a lot people did, you know like the doom buggies and stuff you can go out do that type of stuff, but just everything there was really expensive. It wasn't for me either. JR: How would you compare the people and this goes with Montana too? DK: Compare the people? I think the people in the Metro East are great. Very, very nice, very caring, giving people. Montana the same way. I mean, they are just really just down to Earth people. They're kind of a little more hippyish out there, I would say, you know, more in touch with their like spiritual side. I would say a lot of like Indian reservations and stuff in Montana. So, a lot of people were, have that culture kind of you know growing up with around that. California people were not all that nice. It just it was kind of night and day difference you know. And plus, there's a lot of Mexicans, so that was a big difference. We were forty-five minutes from the border. So, it was really neat. I mean, I took Spanish in high school and so I thought that was really interesting, especially to visit there. JR: So, where did you move back to when you came back to help your dad? DK: I actually moved back in with my parents because I didn't have a place to stay. I actually stayed with them for quite a long time, 'till I bought my own house, till I saved up. So, it's convenient too, so, I could just ride right to work with my dad. Worked there for about two years JR: So, after saving up what made you decide to stay back in the Metro East? DK: At that time, I left my, my parent's house obviously, bought my own house, but I also left my dad's business, cause I kind of got them back on, back on track, and branch out and started my own you know, didn’t start my business. I went with ADT Security and I was making decent money, and I was like it is time for me to buy my own house, get out of the house, you know, and do my own thing and I was only there for eight months and it was a strictly all commission job. It's just, it's tough, you know. All commission, and that time of atmosphere. It was, was a business to business kind of knocking on doors, cold calling, I'm not a fan doing that. Of you know, going up to businesses and just walking and trying to sell them on a security system. It's kind of, kind of difficult. I know people don't really liked to be bothered that much, especially, you know just some random person walking up in here, trying to sell you something. So, I left there and I actually went to, started working for enterprise. In Enterprise, I was there for almost four years, start from the ground up and I really made a name for myself there. I almost 6  every single thing you need to know about selling, customer service, really running your own business too. I had my minor in entrepreneurship and small business, but there you actually ran your own branch, after you'd been there and you worked your way up and prove yourself, but I ran several branches and we were really successful. That's kind of what really made me want to go back and get back into the manufacturing industry and I left there, went to work for a company called Dow Screw Products and they did. They made there, they didn't have their own product but they made, they had screw machines and machinery and I was sales and marketing manager for them for three and a half years. I got to a point where I'm ready to go and work back for my dad and take over the family business. So, after learning all that experience I figured I'd go come back to the family business. JR: Where were some of these branches and other places you work located at all? DK: All over, well, I started in Alton. That’s my caused I lived in Alton. They usually start you close to where you live at. So, I was probably there eight months or so then went to Granite City. I was in Granite City say probably for four to six months maybe, then went to Saint Charles area, St. Peter's, Paige, Saint Louis too. I work at several branches, probably altogether, probably five or six of them, worked in Greenville for a little bit and Highland. They were off branches of Edwardsville, worked there also, all over the place. The ones I actually ran were in St. Peter's, Ferguson. I was assistant manager out there, gosh I'm just think there was a lot of them, and then Paige was the biggest one. One of the biggest in Saint Louis. JR: So, what did you take away from these businesses that will help you with running the family business? DK: Well, Enterprise kind ingrains in your head that in order to grow, their philosophy is take care of your customers and your employees, growth, and profits will follow, which is I think is a really strong, it’s just a strong statement, you and I saw it the whole time. I mean, one the things I was really, really good was customer service and that was the most important thing to the company and I had some of the highest customer service scores at the company. Some of the branches I worked there ever had and for a continued amount of time. I mean, several months in a row. Every month, you get evaluated against every other branch in the whole entire Saint Louis area. And we were one of the top branches, consistently. Also, you learn how to run your business. I mean, when you are a branch manager and you learn every single thing there is to know about that branch and about being a branch manager. So, you could essentially go to any branch and kind of figure out you know, you have access to everything, you have access to your income statement, you have your return on investment, your revenue, and growth, and every single thing, your bad debt, even had to do collection calls and make sure people are up on payments and it was you and your team doing everything. So, it just you know, I learned how run everything you know do the whole the whole king caboodle. JR: So, you said you ran a shop in Highland, Granite City, Alton, I mean were there any like differences you could pick up on with the towns, or? DK: Absolutely. Yes. I would say Edwardsville, Highland, Greenville, it was all out of the same branch that services different areas, those are definitely the nicest. The nicest. I mean, your clientele is you know, they are usually business customers. That's one of the things, is that each branch had their own little 7  niche. You know, some of them had a niche and all they had were retail customers like Granite City. Alton had a big retail also. Retail customers depending on where you're at, you should bring more money which is, which is great, but it also you know, has its challenges too. There’s a lot of let’s just say, bad customers that wouldn't pay their bills in certain areas. You know, that was just, there's certain areas that were just known for that you know. Granite City we had, at East St. Louis it was you know, came to us ‘cause we were the closest branch, which is a very rough area and we rent to almost anybody. You know, if you were like the they were the only company that would allow you to pay cash. So, you're giving somebody a $20000 car. You have to verify like everything you know, and it's just very different and then you've got like Alton which has a high retail but they also have a lot of body shops. They got a lot of insurance business. So, like an insurance company, somebody got an accident or their car is going to the shop, or whatever reason, they have to have a vehicle so then they would contact, contact Enterprise. So, it was just very, very different. I mean, Edwardsville had a big, big body shop area too but there was a lot of like corporate businesses, corporate customers that would rep the companies. JR: And why did you decide to leave Enterprise? DK: So, Enterprise, they have very long hours, kind overwork you. So, I was going into work, getting to work at 7 am, then not being home till 6:30 or 7 o'clock at night. I just had a newborn daughter while I was with them. So, my main focus was my family and I not being able to see my daughter ever. She was asleep when I left for work and sleep when I came home. That was my big, my big reason for leaving. My family. JR: So, after leaving Enterprises, where did you where did you go? DK: Oh, I left Enterprise and I worked for Dow Screw Products Company. They make bolts of all different sorts, shafts. It's just like an, we have probably 6,000 different individual products that we've, that they made over the years. And they, the owner, bought that business in '86. So, I mean, just over the years so many different customers. They work with Emerson, was like one of their biggest customers you know, which is in Saint Louis you know, local kind of yeah, a local, kind of, yeah, down there in Saint Louis business but they, they, they made your part for you, you know, you would give them a blueprint saying, 'hey, you know, can you make this? I need this many parts.' And you know, they would that, would actually come to me and be like one of my customers or even a new customer. And I developed, and it would be like a different type of bolt of some sort of. We didn't do a lot of screws or anything that, but I know it’s called Screw Products but there were screw machine that kind of, we would be able to set up to make kind of whatever we needed to, like up to 3 inches in diameter, heck, we made some that were all the way up to 3 feet long, you know parts. So, it was neat. I was a Sales and Marketing Manager, learned a lot about a shop, there was like 45 employees there, you have to learn a lot about, a lot about that industry. You know, a lot of connections with the steel industry manufactures, raw materials, steel, and just I had a lot of customers so I got you know, great like, Cooper Industries, you know, Cooper Eaton was big customers. Husky was one of our customers. So, I really, really got to meet some really, really interesting people, really network. JR: Where did you go after leaving there then? 8  DK: There, I ended up leaving them. I just, I didn't really care for the way the company was being ran by the owner. It just rubbed me the wrong way. He would treat the employees and he was too involved in the business. It's like almost like, 'hey, just let us just do this, we got it.' And everything and it would be running smooth, but I got to the point where I was working at my dad's business, HGH, at night for three or four months. So, I would leave St. Louis at 4:30, drive all the way to Godfrey which is a 45-minute drive for me and I would work until nine to 10:00 o' clock at night and then drive back to Maryville. Which is where I currently live. And after doing that so long, I was talked to my dad and I said I would really like to come back and work at the family business and eventually take it over and buy it. But that's where we're at right now. JR: So, what made you want to have that talk with your dad about possibly taking it over? DK: Been wanting to own my own business for a long time and he's you know, my dad's you know, 70 years old this year, or 2017 he'll be 70. So, he's going to need to retire soon and if something ever were to happen to him, I mean the business wouldn't be able, there would be nothing we would still be able to do cause we didn't know enough and be able to do enough. So, I thought it was a good time for me to go, learn all the aspects of the business and be that person to be able to take it over, eventually, and also you know, more of a stable income and stable you know, job, you know, it’s been a very stable business over the last seven years. So, we really like that in our family, a little more flexible for us too. JR: What would you say, you kind of been off and on there for the last, well since you were a little kid? DK: Yeah. JR: What do you think has been able to make it run 30 years when so many other places are leaving, and closing shop? DK: Well I mean, the glass bottle industry is not going to go away. Just it won’t you know, and I you know, over the years it's, it's just been increasing. I mean you think of you know, maybe there's more plastic and aluminum but there's also a lot more bottles. You know, beer bottles especially I mean, you got craft breweries popping up like it’s their job. You know, in all these places have different types of bottles that are being made now, and it's just a lot a lot of bottles out there. It's just something that's not gonna, not going away, and even if it dies out in the United States, it's national. I mean, it's you know, global. It's uh, we do business in Dubai, we do business in South Africa, Mexico, all over the world. So, it's just not something that's just gonna, just gonna go away. It's very stable industry, now granted, there might be some companies switch hands like they have. You know, we got Anhueser- Busch which is In-Bev, there it just changed names a lot, you know, companies come and go. But those businesses don't just usually die  somebody else buys them. You know, cause, it’s, they’re not, not need bottles you know, unless we went to full plastic which would be a bad choice you know, glass is recyclable, it's reusable. I mean, glass is made from recycled glass you know, so, it's made from natural resources. So, I think it would be stupid to get rid of it. JR: You mentioned doing a lot of business internationally. Is that where most your business? Do you still do some in the Metro East? 9  DK: Well we never really did business here locally. I mean we, we do business like Park Hills, Missouri, Pevely, Missouri. But, I mean it's where the glass factories are, and we send, you know, parts all over the U.S. But I mean, one of our biggest customers right now is Mexico. They buy a lot, a lot ‘cause it's one customer, one guy we have over there that buys for us and supplies a lot of factories. So, that is a big majority. I mean you get an order from them it's going to keep you busy for a while. JR: So, what are some challenges like having this business in Alton when you are doing a lot of business with Mexico? DK: I don’t know if there's, I mean, all that challenges. You know, I mean it's regardless it doesn't matter where we're located. I mean you know you got Mexico's whose gonna buy from us regardless of where we are at. You know they pay freight, they do all that, so it's, I don't think it really matters that we're here we're able to get you know our material. I mean that would be the biggest thing. If we couldn't get our raw material, then that would be a big issue, but we have a local company that we buy all of our steel from. Graphite is a different story. That’s something a little harder to get, but we have, you know, we have a place that we get that from that’s not a problem. So, I mean as long as we're able to ship from where we're at, it's, there’s just no issue. And being here, and being able to ship anywhere in the world. I mean FedEx, UPS, they will pick up from wherever, so, that’s a beautiful thing. JR: Who are your suppliers, where do you get your steel and graphite? DK: Graphite, the company that we did get our graphite from is actually no longer in business. We bought about five years worth of supply from them. So, we have graphite upon graphite upon graphite at our shop. We are already working with another Graphite company, actually that company was called Graph Tech and they no longer do this side. They just got out of that, that side of the business altogether and we took advantage of it. You know, we bought it all and we already before that were talking to other suppliers. We already have a new supply that could make what we need. Steel, I mean steel is easy. I mean the place that we used to get steel from did close, but someone else bought them and they are just running them, just, they're really local. We're talking five minutes from our shop, we can call them up any time and deliver immediately. Being the fact I worked with Dow, I got good relationships with other big steel manufacturers that are huge manufacturers. The one in Alton really small I'm talking Alro Steel which could supply us with millions of pounds if we wanted them to, when we only get a couple hundred pounds you know. So, that's nice to have them if they ever were to happen. A local supply of, we could easily get through them. JR: So, where do you see the business going moving forward, where do you see it? DK: Well I would, I would like to get out there and grow  just grow and grow. So, we have lost business over the years. I mean we have, we can't say that we haven't. You know, there’s, in the beginning there weren't that many companies doing what we do. There still isn't. But, there was a point when we had, we got some bad material from one of our suppliers and we manufactured it. And there's no way of us telling the way we manufacture, we just can't tell how the material is. Graphite it's, it’s a different substance to use. You know, our tools still cut through it the same way. You can't really tell until it's actually in production being used and it was, it wasn't holding up as well as it had been and we lost some customers for it, and you know my dad has just been way too busy to be able to go back, go out and do that. It's just 10  such a, you don't have that many employees. So, that's, that’s been definitely, and I guess something that we're going to be looking forward to change here soon. We are getting to the point where we're pretty much caught up. We're going to be doing some things that increase our efficiencies, which is overall increase our margin, which always helps being able to do more with less staff and you know once we get all caught up we're going to get out there and hit it hard and go get back all that business we lost at one point. JR: How many people do you employ? DK: We, it's just me, my dad and two other the guys. I mean its small, small, small little business but we do pretty good. So, and we're able to do everything we need with what we have. One of the guys is going to be retiring soon and we don't think it will be a problem, still doing with you know, just going on normal just what we are doing with one less person. JR: So, the shops in Godfrey, why do you live in Maryville? DK: Well I moved to Maryville before I was working there. We really like Maryville a lot, we really like the area, we could get Godfreys a little out of the way you know it's we like going to St. Louis. We like having a lot of the amenities that Edwardsville provides, which we’re right there. I mean we love it. We like the school districts out here a lot. Not that Alton’s bad or anything, but we like our area a lot, and at the time we had to find a house pretty quickly too. And this was the one we like the most. That was on the market at the time too so, we could very well see ourselves moving closer once I take it over. JR: If you had your choice where to move, where would you want to? DK: We have actually, me and my wife have been talking about that, a lot actually, lately. I would like to be out, out like in the country if it was me. I would like to be probably 15 minutes closer to the shop. You know we're not far, we are like 25 minutes so it would be about 10, 15 minutes away from the shop so it would be like kinda out on the outskirts a little bit, kind of outside of Edwardsville. I would say maybe, maybe even Godfrey, I don’t know. We'd still like to be able to get to Saint Louis quickly though, other than that, I mean we would move little, little closer that way, even its five, 10 minutes closer. It’s still closer. You know my wife works over in that area too, not in the city but closer. So, it would help her commute also. JR: What does your wife do for a living? DK: She’s actually a middle school math teacher. She teaches sixth grade math. JR: What school? DK: East Alton Middle School. So, its, she's got a little bit of a drive too but not as far as I do. So, I wouldn't mind getting closer to that area. 11 
MadisonCounty;Carrie Davini;1971; 2018;Carrie Davini 1971 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Carrie Davini Oral History Interview Tyler Swanner, Interviewer Evermore Gallery, Edwardsville, Illinois October 11, 2018 Tyler Swanner (TS): The following interview was conducted with Carrie Davini on behalf of the Madison County Oral History Project that is part of Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois. The interview took place on Thursday October 11, 2018, at Evermore Gallery in Edwardsville, Illinois. The interviewer is Tyler Swanner from Southern Illinois University Edwardsville graduate M.A. program. So, first off I would like to start kind of talking about your childhood a little bit. Can you tell me a little bit about that? Carrie Davini (CD): Oh, wow, wow. Okay, I grew up in Rockford, Illinois. TS: Okay. CD: Um, I moved here probably about twenty-five years ago, with a boy, a college football player. Um, that didn't work out. Um, my father was a graphic designer, back in the day of cut and paste, you know, or no computers. And when I started tattooing, we didn't have a computer in the shop you know. So, um a lot of what I... like, trying to transition into modern technology has been hard for me because I want to cut and paste everything, you know cause’ I learned that from my dad. Um, uh, Rockford was pretty boring, it was a small town at the time. So we found stuff to do and got into a lot of trouble, I was a bad kid, I was a bad kid. Um, moved out of my house as soon as I was uh 18 and um then came to St. Louis. TS: So, can you tell me a little bit more about your, your dad or both of your parents? CD: Uh, my dad could talk to anybody, to the point where it was obnoxious, and I think that I gained that from him, you know. Um, my mom was isolated a whole lot. Um, she really wasn't present a whole lot and I gained a little bit of that from her as well. So, you know I had an okay childhood, I was just a bad kid. I hung out with, you know, I was a gangbanger, you know, I hung out with, you know, a rough crowd. Um, but it got me where I am today, and I appreciate all the shit I went through [chuckle] to get here today. TS: Yeah, Definitely... CD: Yeah TS: ...definitely. Um, so how did you get into, um, I guess, besides your father, like art and drawing, like what, how did that come about? CD: Oh gall, I don’t know, it was probably my dad mostly. I mean, he had a skill, like Thomas here can, he can just draw right out of his head. I’ve got to see something, you know, I’ve got to have reference. Um, so I think that was a huge influence. Um, the whole tattoo world though, I um went to Chicago and 1  went to a tattoo shop to get my eyebrow pierced, super nerdy right. Um, and there was a female tattoo artist there and I had never thought of tattoos as art, I always thought: “oh you get a name, you get a mom heart,” you know, stuff like that. But, when I saw the art she was doing, I was like “that's what I want to do.” And being a female in the industry, especially back then, was way harder to get in. You know, because everybody mocked, nobody wanted a female tattoo artist, you know. Um, so that was the hard part, is getting in. But when I saw her and saw what she was doing, that was my goal. And then I eventually ended up getting tattooed by her, so that was pretty cool. TS: Yeah, that is really cool. CD: Yeah. TS: That is really cool. Um, so I know you mentioned uh that you briefly went to uh SIUC for a while. Can you tell you tell me about that experience a little bit? CD: Oh gol- TS: And what you were doing? CD: Oh god I partied my ass off way too much. Yeah, so I didn't really, um, you know, I did have art classes there. But, I was just a stubborn kid, you know it was the artist was the grass is green, the sky is blue, and I’m like no way. So, we had this art show that we had to do and I was not allowed to be in the art show because of the subject matter that I was, uh, drawing. It was um, bondage type art, which is weird, I mean it’s not something I’m into at all, I just thought the pictures were very interesting, you know, and I wanted to recreate those on charcoal, so yeah I was banned from the art show. Um, so a lot of it was me playing the victim role, you know, and so when I came back, and I was supposed to go back yet another semester, I balled my eyes out. And I was like, “I just can’t do it, I don't want to go back, so just please don't make me.” So then I, you know, did community college for little bit in Rockford and then I just, you know, I just, for me for an individual it is more important for me to be street smart, rather than, you know than college smart. TS: Yeah. CD: So, and that got me where I am today too, so. TS: Definitely, um so you talked a little bit, you know, about coming down to St. Louis and how you have been here for so long. What made your decision to come to St. Louis? Like what [chuckle] were some of the things, that um, made you think St. Louis is the place where I want to go? CD: Uh, I had to leave. TS: Mm-hmm. CD: Um, I guess I can’t really tell you the reason why. TS: That’s fine. CD: So, hard to say, uh the guy I was dating was moving here. It looked like an easy out to me, to where 2  the position I was in. So, when I first came here I just, oh my gosh, I thought St. Louis was the biggest city ever. It was so overwhelming I’m like how can I do this, this is crazy. And his parents lived in Chesterfield, you know, which is whole different part of St. Louis, you know. Interesting the first time we went out, you know, they were showing me all the sights and stuff, they took me to the loop because that was like, you know where I would fit in. Um, and his dad had an open Heineken. I mean we are talking like in the morning, just driving around, and he waslike welcome to St. Louis and I was like, oh my god. Part of me is like, “this is great, but not good for me.” Um, so yeah I just thought it was the right move, the right direction and it ended being the right move, so yeah. TS: Mm-hmm. Definitely. CD: It was an easy out and I took it. TS: Yeah, definitely, definitely. So when you moved here, um what were some of the or like the first job you had or what did you do once you moved here? CD: I’ve always been in the service industry... TS: Ok CD: ...and I’ve always worked my way to the top of the food chain. So I always worked fine dining and that is a huge part of my life. I, oh my gosh, Anthony Bourdain’s suicide is still messing me up. So, I was going to go to culinary school. And um, I’m glad I didn't because most chefs I know are just so tired, so burnt out, and just not happy. And so now I love to cook as a hobby and I love my job so, you know I think I made the right choice for sure. And then there is a part in there where I was going to be DJ. TS: [Laughs] CD: C’mon. [Laughs] TS: Do you want to tell me a little bit more about that? CD: No, that was kind of just like a thought in my head. TS: Just a thought. CD: I guess it was just mostly the music I was listening to at the time, you know. So, um an opportunity happened that got me into a tattoo shop, so. TS: Oh, really. Uh, can you tell me about that opportunity? CD: Yeah, for sure. Uh, so, uh I’d been begging and begging and really super nerdy. And now being in the industry, I see how kind of nerdy it is. You know, I brought in my drawings andstuff like that, it was just cheesy stuff I had traced, you know. Um, so basically it’s work ethic and that's what we look for in the tattoo industry because artists are flaky as can be. And I’m sure you've dealt with some, like I’ve thrown art shows and its seriously like five minutes to the opening of the art show they are getting their art work on the wall, if they get their art work on the wall. So I had the opportunity to work the front at a tattoo shop. Um, it took me about two years until they started training me and I had to prove myself, you know. 3  They saw that I had a strong work ethic, and that's what got me in the door basically. TS: What tattoo shop was that? CD: That was Iron Age. TS: Iron Age, Okay. CD: Yeah, Yeah. And that was when it was above Vintage Vinyl. TS: Oh, Really? CD: So I worked there and worked at the newer location as well. TS: Okay, did you enjoy your experience there? CD: It was tough especially being a girl. I never let them see me cry, I would always go in the bathroom. I had never been talked to like that by anybody. Which is crazy considering how I grew up. Um, the things they would say to me, here’s an example: I was dating one of their friends and they said “That's the best thing about female shop fronts, is they'll sleep with all of your friends.” So at that time I was living in the loop, and like an idiot I walked home, right, like to prove myself, you know, I’m like: “I’m out of here!” I didn't let anybody know I was leaving and that was the time of caller ID, so Iron Age pops up on caller ID, their like “Where are you?” I’m like, you know, I was just like I couldn't confront them, you know, I’m like “I just went home”, their like “Well can you come back?” And I walked back and never said anything about it and that was me trying to be tough. Which yeah I didn’t prove anything, so basically I just kept my mouth shut and just did what I was told and my apprenticeship was ridiculous. I mean it was very old school, like when my boss was out of town, I had to take care of his mom, I had to walk his dogs, just ridiculous stuff like that. It still goes on a little bit nowadays with apprenticeships. I feel nobody should be belittled or earn an apprenticeship in the way that I did and nobody ever will here, you know. But, there is also, we worked really hard to get where we are at. So, when see tattoo artists that just sneak in and, you know learn how to tattoo in a couple of months, it pisses us off, you know, because we had to work so hard to get where we are at. TS: Yeah, definitely. CD: Yeah TS: Do you think there has been some of that transition away... CD: Yes. TS: ...from those type of apprenticeships? CD: Yes, Yes. Well it depends, women are still taken advantage of in this environment, um not only getting tattooed, but as being a female working in a tattoo shop, if you let them, if you let the guys. I mean and there are girls that are, that live off of giggling, you know, and that's how they, that how they get their job, you know. And that pisses me off, [laugh] you know. TS: Yeah, definitely. So moving kind of backwards a little bit, uh what was your first tattoo? 4  CD: Oh my gosh, this is so nerdy and awesome. So, somebody’s basement right, my friend Jim had gotten a tattoo on his head, which is weird, like a yin yang. And all he could talk about is how bad it hurt and like an idiot I’m like, “I want one!” like what? So, of course it was, it was like a big production, you know, and now it’s like, it is what it is. So, it was a black lizard, that I drew myself for Jim Morrison, because you now, I was a huge fan. Well got it done, in some guy’s basement, you know, it was horrible. Went to another shop and got it redone, you know still horrible and now it’s covered up. So, I don't have it anymore, but I was fifteen when I got my first tattoo, um awkward experience. I think this is what people, you know, kind of expect still today, the guy’s basement was covered with like naked chicks on Harleys and stuff, you know, and like Jack Daniels bottles around and stuff like that. So I think some people are still intimidated by tattoo shops because that's what they think are going to get and we definitely are not that type of shop. TS: Yeah... CD: At all TS: ...definitely. I mean I’ve been tattooed here as well. So I mean, it’s definitely a different experience than that. CD: Yeah, so, we’re not a bunch of tough guys and yeah, we’re all equals you know. Cause there is that, and there always has been in this industry a lot of ego and a lot of better than and I’m not better than anybody else, you know we’re all equal. TS: Definitely. Um so after you moved from Iron Age and your apprenticeship. Can you tell me about you got your first job as a full-fledged tattoo artist? And how that came about, I guess I could say. CD: okay, actually the guy who I can’t stand who owns Iron Age, don't put that in there, but I think most people feel the same way about him. But he stood up for me, I couldn't believe it. There were two business owners, one was business, one was art. TS: Yeah. CD: So, the business side saw that I had a strong work ethic, you know. So he kept his mouth shut, he left me alone, you know. And he was actually very kind to me and awesome, he wasn't to everybody else, so I really admired that and he respected me because I was a hard worker. Now the other owner, the art side, artist mentality, you know, was a whiny little baby. And it was, I would always go in early, stay late and when I would hear that door open [Door opens], and I knew that he was working that day my stomach would just flip, what mood is he going to be in today. And how I left that shop, that's a great story, that's going to be really good too. So, um yeah that was back in the day, when we were making needles, so I would go in early and would be making other people’s needles. So, um he is actually the one that stood up for me, and so finally after two years, I’m like, “Hey guys when can I get on the floor, is this a thing?” And he likes, “Yeah, either you guys are going to teach her to tattoo or I am,” and that's when they bucked up and everybody taught me a little bit. So I wasn't apprenticed under one specific person, it was just gaining knowledge from a little bit of everybody. TS: So, before we move into how you left the shop. I’m more curious right now about how you've seen, what kind for changes took place, in terms of like, the technology of tattooing, like things you have seen personally. You've said in terms of needles and other things like that. 5  CD: Um, there’s been a lot of change and for me I don't like change, nobody likes change, you know. And I’m a little weird and superstitious and I had a hard time replacing the chair that I sit in because it was a buddy of mine, who was part owner of this shop, it was his chair and I was weirded out. I was like, “Oh my gosh, if throw this chair away, my tattoos are going to suck,” you know. So, I have hard time trying out the new stuff. Machines have changed, there are rotaries now, they make no noise whatsoever. Um, they are already tuned up for you, you don't have to tune them or anything. I’ve never used one, you know. Some of the guys use them here, they love them, I just have never picked it up and used it, you know and Bouie is like always setting it in my station, like “You should really try it.” I don't know why, maybe I should. And um, making needles, uh gol, that was very time consuming and for me to change into actually buying needles, it was like they are going to be more expensive, like it’s you know, it’s more cost efficient if I make my own needles, and then finally I just gave up, I’m like “I don't have time,” you know. So, um, inks have also changed, there was a period where red ink was causing a lot of issues with people’s skin, people were breaking out. They were putting plastic in the ink, is what it was. I don't know why it was specifically the red, um but it’s different companies, that’s what I like to use. It’s like certain companies have better reds, certain companies have a better blue, but inks have changed definitely. They are brighter, they go in a lot easier, but it’s just kind of um, you just have to try it out and see what you like. I’m trying to think if anything else has changed as far as technology, well computers! Yeah, you know, like I always did, lettering is huge right now and everything I always did by hand because that's how I was taught by my dad. That's how I was taught at Iron Age, you know. So that's changed, and within the past month I just got an iPad and I was so against it, you know I’m like, but I have a drawing to do tonight and I’m not mad, [laugh] you know because generally it takes me forever to draw something and for somebody to be last minute. Hey, I’m going to take this appointment, this is want and I’d be like there is my whole day off, you know and I’m not mad, I’m like wow, I get to draw tonight on my iPad and I’m kind of excited. TS: Mm-hmm, yeah, Definitely. CD: So, that has changed for me and has been very helpful. TS: Do you think, now, that you have seen that transition with technology and you being before that technology, do you think maybe have a little bit of an advantage over maybe some newer tattoo artists that have not been exposed to other side, before technology existed? CD: I personally do not, there are so many good tattoo artists out there right now that have been using this technology, I mean, you know, five to six years. Um, my tattoos have not changed because of it, I’m still super slow. [laugh] I wish my speed would pick up, because yeah I would make more money, but money is not a motivator for me, my my clients are, that's the most important part of this job for me personally. Um, so time saving yeah, that has changed and that has been very helpful, but as far as, yeah I guess yeah time saving really for me, that has been the most helpful part. TS: So I know there is, and you have brought it up yourself, but some stigma around tattoos and either tattoo shops or people with tattoos themselves. CD: Mm-hmm. TS: Um, have you seen some of, of that taking place within your experiences, whether inside the tattoo shop or outside? 6  CD: Absolutely, more so back in the day. When I started getting tattooed, I would wear long sleeves everywhere, I didn't want people talking to me, people would give me the weirdest look. And it’s, you know me now, right. And so for, this happened, for me to stand in line at a Target, have a parent pull their kid closer to them because I’m behind them and they think, you know, like what am I going to, and now you know me, you've talked to me and you know I’m not that type of person. My buddy Ryan, very, I call him very preppy, you wouldn't imagine he would have tattoos. He started going off on a friend of mine that had a face tattoo, or maybe it was somebody that had walked in, I don't know, but they had a face tattoo. And, I go Ryan if you didn't know me and were just looking at me and judging me would you think I was a huge Satanist or something. He’s like, probably. Now, today if you don't have a tattoo it’s weird. And I don't get looks as often and I think a lot of that was more mental for me. I had to say hey Carrie when walk in a room, not So it definitely has changed, now it’s not so much an oddity, but now I think people because of the shock value, now they are putting them on their face and stuff like that, you know. So you do see um, more hand, neck, face tattoos and back in the day we would never do that if you didn't have sleeves already because it was kind of like you had to earn it. Um, now were like if you want this stupid thing on the side of your neck, awesome, you know. So that definitely has changed. TS: Yeah, definitely. So, then moving back a little bit then from your transition, like I said to your first tattoo job, and then, where was that again? CD: Iron Age TS: At, Iron Age, and where did you move after that? CD: I went to All Star Tattoo. TS: So you went to All Star, can you tell me a little bit about your experience at All Star and where that was? CD: Okay, so All Star is in St. Louis as well, Olive-170 area. Um, both of the owners of All Star also worked at Iron Age and absolutely hated it as well. Iron Age is very McDonalds, it’s turn ‘em and burn ‘em. My bosses would constantly come in and say how much time do you have, time is money. They would say that in front of my clients, we hated it there. So I knew that they were going to go open a shop, you know. They had left before I did, I was sticking around, you know, knew in my head I was gonna leave. And then it came to a point where I had to leave and um my boyfriend at the time beat up the owner [laughs]. And I missed every minute of it, which I would have loved to see, man. There were no windows and it happened out back, um and he got what he deserved, he’s an ass he really is an ass and it sucks that I missed that. But, in my head I’m like alright I’m going to stick around until the weekend and then tell them some, you know, he made it very uncomfortable. The day that I decided that I was going to leave, I said “Hey I gotta talk to you guys.” I had went in and the Sunday before packed up all my stuff so it would be a quick out and kind of set it aside so they didn't know. And he said “You need to wait until the business side of ownership comes in.” So I had to work that entire day knowing I had to have this conversation with them, you know. They knew exactly what it was about and they knew what I was going to say and they said get out. So, I was probably ten minutes, I got out of there. I was, Van Halen was on the radio, I was blaring it, I was like life is so good. So then I went to All Star and we basically built that from the ground up, which is pretty awesome. I learned how to lay tile, you know, stuff that I’d never done before. Um, and we got a lot of our clients from Iron Age, um but still they’re still attitude at that shop, you know. They put me in the front because they knew I would talk to people. Um, it is nicer to see, um 7  females are more approachable you know, so it is nicer to see a female up front. Um, but, it just got to the point where I was doing everything, you know. Um, and getting overwhelmed and um and yeah, the attitude, there was still attitude there’s still better than um. And I just don't work well in that environment, and maybe it’s an insecurity thing, or it just ticks me off really. TS: Mm-hmm, definitely. CD: yeah, so I worked there probably for about four years or so, three to four years. TS: And that was from when to when? CD: Oh, gol, I don't, my dates are so bad. TS: like relative. CD: Ok so, let’s see, Iron Age would be like ‘99. Oh gol, uh... man I don't know. That would be a rough one to, I’m going to say. I’m going to say 2012, is when I started there, roughly. TS: Okay CD: Yeah TS: So, moving from Iron Age to All Star CD: Mm-hmm TS: And through that you’ve mentioned a lot about being a woman in this profession. How has being a woman, how has that experience affected you personally? CD: Um... as far as... TS: As far as, being in the profession and from where you were to where you are now. If that makes sense. CD: uh, meaning how has that changed as women in the industry? TS: In particular, yourself as well. How has your role become. CD: I’ve taken over. TS: Taken. Mm-hmm. CD: Yeah and, and not to be an ass or egotistical, but it’s um, I’ve worked pretty hard and people recognize that. So, I have feel like I’ve earned my way in um so I am proud of that. And it has gotten me an insane schedule, where I am booked two years out and for me, I don't get. The biggest trigger for me is getting overwhelmed, and that's what I can’t do, you know. Um, so it’s just like week by week, I see what I draw for that week. And I think the hardest part for me now is telling people: wait for a cancelation, wait for, because constantly I get like five texts a day, you got anything, you got anything. And I don't, I can’t be a dick, you know, I’m grateful that people want to get tattooed by me but I don't have enough 8  time, you know if I could I would. So, trying to fit people in right now is probably the hardest part of my job, besides that I got a great clientele and I think I’ve really with my personality weaned out the assholes and even the people that started off as assholes, now they respect me and realize oh she knows how to do her job, maybe I should let her do it, you know. Um, I just have one client now like that now and he’s chilled out, and it’s funny because I used to work for him, he was a chef. TS: Really? CD: Yeah and had that chef mentality and now he’s kind of chilled out, and so yeah I have a great clientele. So that's what I have gained for sure. TS: Have you seen the, um the same experience that happened to you at Iron Age happen to other women in the profession? CD: [Laughs], No, no I have not. I’ve seen a lot of women with short skirts, giggle their way to an apprenticeship and sleep with people, you know, like. I have not seen, yeah. There is, we do have a very rare jewel that works here and she is amazing and she has earned everything. Um, and she is not that type of person at all. Yeah and it’s like... TS: Who are you talking about? CD: ...it’s our piercer Miranda, and she is going to be tattooing soon. Um, I will think of something that needs to be done and she is doing it, you know like I’m about to cry [chokes up], sorry Matt. She is getting married on Saturday too, like I am so fortunate to have her in my life and to actually, hey there is a person like that, that's a female that still exists and yeah she has earned everything she has gotten. TS: That's awesome. CD: Yeah TS: Yeah, that's very awesome. So then speaking of Evermore, um how did this come about? How did you get your job at Evermore? CD: The owner died in a drug-related accident. Um,actually don't put that in there, he died in a car accident. Um, the drug part yeah that's what I’m saying, I wouldn't put that in there. Uh, and when I was at the funeral and I saw his body I just fell, I fell to my knees and just started balling. So, I went to the other owner of the shop, who is amazing and has done so much for me and put up with my shit for years, you know, because I’ve pulled some shit. I really have. And um, he has seen past it and I walked up to him and I said I feel there is a reason, I said, “I want to work at Evermore, I feel there is a reason I need to be there” and he’s like, “When can you start?” That's how I got the job. Yeah. TS: And did you become manager right away or how did that work? CD: I did, [laugh] which didn't work out too well because, you know, there’s guys in the shop and they still back then, there was a little bit of the stigma of a female. Um, so he saw that, he already knew I had a strong work ethic because he had come and visited me at All Star, and he wasn't even in the tattoo industry at that time. But, the owners of All Star were frickin’ pissed that he was in their watching me tattoo because they thought, “Oh what is he stealing?” you know. He ended up opening up successful shops, he 9  is an amazing person and that's how I... I look at the person, I look at the individual, you know, I’m not looking at the stories that you tell me about them I look at how... and he’s amazing. So, I will, I will never leave this shop because of him, I will follow him everywhere and I will... yeah, he’s done so much for me I would never leave him stranded. Respect. And he even says that there is no respect, there is no loyalty anymore because there is so many tattoo shops, that you . . . we have a boss that's done everything for us, you know. He buys a lot of shop supplies that normally most shop owners don't. And then you have people, you know tattoo artists, that just walk out, shit all over you, steal, you know, so that's part of this industry that sucks, but you get that in every industry, you know. So, right now we’ve got a great crew, I’m very, very thankful. TS: Um, Definitely. Can you just tell me a little bit more about your experience, in terms of managing Evermore? CD: Um... TS: Maybe some of the difficulties or some of the things you have done or... CD: Um, the shop really manages itself, as long as you have great employees, you know. Um, my job is to everything so they don't have to do much, all they need to do is tattoo. So, I try to make it so that’s what it is all they need to do is tattoo. It’s just pretty easy, just ordering supplies. The hardest part [laughs] is having to fire people. TS: Mm-hmm CD: and my boss, you know what he told me is, “Carrie it's a business decision.” Still you know it’s hard, it’s hard but there are some people that make it pretty easy, you know. Like, you’re, we, yeah. There have been some interesting experiences for sure and where people make it easy. Easy to fire them, but then hard, it’s like, oh my gosh you pulled all this shit and now you’re begging me for your job back and you're crying. Um, it gets easier each time, you know. Um, there was one time in particular and it was pretty hard and actually that was the first time I had to do it. And to my boss I’m like I can’t believe you’re making me do this, he goes “Carrie I’m not there,” he’s like, “You see everything, if it’s coming out of my mouth,” you know. So, I had to buck up, you know and it does, it gets easier each time but right now we got a great crew. That was probably the hardest part, but another part is smoothing over angry clients and we don't get that too often. And, um it's a lot easier when they get a woman on the other end of the phone or when they see a woman come up front because then they start relaxing and kinda easing down. Uh, still confrontation I’m horrible with, I sound like I’m crying when I’m angry and I don't stop, my voice gets real shaky. So, I’m not intimidating whatsoever, so usually I can kind of with my wits, smooth people over. Um, so that's another hard part but besides that, that would be it for me, yeah. TS: Yeah is there any particular customer confrontation that you remember, that you would be willing to share? CD: Yeah, when I was at All Star. Um, there was, in St. Louis you can sign for minors to get tattooed. There was a woman that brought her fourteen-year-old daughter in and wanted to get her fourteen-year- old daughter’s boyfriend’s name on the side of her neck. There was no confrontation there because there was no explaining to her why she was a bad parent, you know. But I do remember that, I do remember that, I also remember a girl coming into Iron Age that had a small swastika on her ankle and she wanted 10  to get covered up, she said she had gotten it done when she was twelve and I said, “Oh my god who did this to you when you were twelve?” And she said, “My dad.” So with this you hear a lot of stories, you know, and I am part-time therapist, you know. Oh, here is a great confrontation. This is a good one, and this happens here. There was a guy here and he came in very pleasant, it was super weird. Um, he came in with, I’m assuming both of his daughters. He signed for one, I’m not sure what type of piercing she was getting, it was something like ear, or something like that. Busy Saturday, shop’s filled, filling out paperwork, you know like copying IDs, all that stuff. She is back there, he just starts getting real... Oh wait! Oh, he went to his car with his other daughter, then comes back and is just acting really weird, where he starts pacing. When people start pacing, it makes me uncomfortable, you know I’m like something’s up. So he comes up front when it came time to pay, the price was forty dollars. I was tattooing at the time, the counter person said, “um, Carrie do we have receipts?” and I was like not really, I’m like I can write something up. This guy wants a receipt for his piercing. So I come up front, I’m like we don't have any receipts, I can, I can, you know I am just trying to ease him over, this is what I can do for you basically, but he didn't want to hear that. Why is it forty dollars? It took five minutes. So, I started to explain and he was so angry and crazy and out of his mind, like his daughters are crying, they’re so embarrassed. So, then I realize its past the point, the guy doesn't care why it’s forty dollars, he just doesn't want to pay for this, you know. So, his daughters are crying and that's when I go, “Cool dad.” And like I just starting laughing, because it’s a funny YouTube video. But I was like cool dad, your kids are crying in front of all these people, you know. So as soon as he left everybody applauded, they were like that guy was such a... and this is what he said as he left, “I’m going to call the better business bureau.” Okay, what? So that was pretty entertaining. TS: I can imagine you get something like that every once in a while. CD: We do, not too often. We are not open late enough that we get a lot of the drunks. But, definitely he was on something. And I’m always good at “name that drug,” I think he was on meth. But, the thought of him going to his car with his daughter and coming back different, that freaked me out. I’m like “Are you doing this in front of your kid?” You know. Yeah, I see all sorts of things. TS: Speaking of, [clears throat] coming in with people intoxicated, do you ever get any experience like that, I know the Stagger Inn is right across the street and there are a couple of other places around here, but. CD: Not too often, [coughs]. I am better with confrontation now and telling people what needs to happen. I mean, back in the day I would be like I’ll just deal with it because I don't. Honestly people that are drunk, it’s, if you've drinkin’ a lot the night before your blood is going to be thin. Honestly if you drink two hours before it’ll be fine, they move they don't realize what they’re doing, they are just hard to deal with. They are just really obnoxious and it takes forever to get a tattoo done. We don't get too much of that  we did have St. Patrick’s Day here. We saw this guy he had a pair of overalls on, he kept coming back in, coming back in, is it my time yet? It must have been on a Saturday  it must have been a walk-in day. He had filled out paperwork and we saw him, he would go across the street, stand outside with his green beer, come back like even more intoxicated. So we were just having fun with it at that time. “I filled out paperwork and everything.” Were like, our counter guy was going through everything ridiculously, like stickers and business cards, just like I don't see your paperwork anywhere, you know. So we were having fun with that one, but it’s never gotten, we’ve never gotten like angry people or anything like that. Iron Age, Oh my gosh every night, every night. Yeah that was . . . And I didn't have to deal with that because we had counter people that dealt with that. And Iron Age the rooms were more private so I didn't see a 11  whole lot of that, it was just more I heard a lot of it. TS: Mm-hmm, definitely. Yeah, I can see that being a bit of an issue sometimes, especially down on the loop. CD: Oh my gosh, yeah. And a lot people at Iron Age, just wanted to see what it’s all about. Yeah and the worst people, and it’s so funny because being a counter person then, I’d be like there is a tattoo waiting for you guys. [Sighs], I’m not going to do it. Because they were rich yuppies, the owner would not tattoo rich yuppies. I’m like “What?!” This is ridiculous, so yeah artist mentality and dealing with babies. Yeah. TS: Definitely. Because this is a small business. Um, is there any difficulties that you guys run into? That you would be willing to share. CD: Oh yeah, when we first opened up. Um, especially being in, I want to say this location. Our old location, nobody could ever find us because we weren’t allowed to put a sign out. TS: And where was that? CD: That was right next to Goshen. TS: Okay. CD: Um, so when we got this spot. We knew we needed a bigger spot. We knew we needed um, and our business each year has gotten better, being on the corner and I think just being nice, you know. Um, but yeah when we first moved in here they asked us can you please close all your blinds. A cop came in and he was embarrassed that he had to tell us this, nobody wants to see what’s going on in there, we are having complaints that you are tattooing people naked and they’re walking around the shop like that. I could see like, hey we're doing a chest tattoo and a guy has got his shirt off, but nobody's running around here naked, you know. So yeah, then we just kind of forgot about it, we smoke out back and I think I’m only smoker left, which is horrible, I need to quit. Um, so we’re not standing out front like a bunch of juggalos, you know we don't. We are a respectful shop  the town knows us. Um we’re respectful to every business in this town. Um, and yeah I think that's what it all comes down to, just being a honest decent business and. We don't even think about it now, our blinds are open. We have not had a complaint since and we do tattoo, I want to say like seventy percent of our clientele is military or first responders. TS: Really, that was the next thing I was going to ask, in terms of like your clientele. Who are, I guarantee there is quite a variety, but who would say the general majority of people who come and get tattooed here? CD: Women. TS: Really? CD: Yeah, a lot of women. Um, working class, a lot of working class. Um, college students for more piercings and smaller tattoos. Um, but that's not a huge amount our business, I would say working class would be the biggest amount of our business. TS: What kind of tattoos? Or is it all over the place? 12  CD: Oh gol, being in Illinois, it was browning symbol, a lot of deers, a lot of, Cole gets to do a lot of that work because he does photorealistic and that's the type of style that working class generally gets. So he doing a lot of deer, he’s doing a lot of American flags, uh gol, what else does Cole do a lot of? Counter Person (CP): Hour glasses, clocks, lady faces. CD: Tiger Heads CP: Tiger heads CD: Lion Heads CP: Tigers CD: Bears CP: Maps CD: Yeah, but a lot of American flags. CP: Yes TS: Really? CD: I mean he probably does an American Flag a week. Oh! Eagle, got to throw an eagle in there. Yeah. TS: Definitely. Um, sorry. So, you said there are some students here and you said the students... Do you get a lot of SIUE students coming in or CD: We do, yeah. TS: Is it, so would you say, I don't know, if you could give somewhat of a percentage or something like that, would you say your clientele is generally? CD: I’d say fifty percent. TS: Really? CD: Yeah, I think that we treat better other, we treat people better than most of the shops around here. I’m not talking shit on the shops around here, they all do great work but we are nice to everybody we’re not going to push any business out the door, you know. Because a lot of them are like, it’s that better than, I’m too good to do an infinity knot kind of thing. And were not like that we’ll take it all. Yeah. TS: You mention the other shops, um opening up here on Main Street in Edwardsville. CD: Uh huh. TS: Has that done anything to your business? Or do you have any type of relationship at all? CD: Um, I do. They have always been great to me, well I’ve always been great to them. If I’ve ever 13  needed anything, I’ve had to ask and it sucked and was humiliating but they were, [Laughs], they. In the beginning they weren’t quite as friendly but then you know smoothed them over and yeah. We’re on great terms and if I ever need anything or have questions I’ll go right to them and I think that is better for us. We don't talk shit on them, they do great work and it would look bad if we talked shit on them. There was a shop that did open up on Main Street. We were not worried about at all, you know just because of his demeanor and because of his attitude, we were like “This guy is not going to last at all” and it didn't, he did not last. TS: Mm-hmm, definitely. So I have done a little bit of, you know, some preliminary research and have seen that you have partnered up with organizations like Got Your Six and Worked On fundraisers and stuff like that. Can you tell me a little bit about how that came about and yeah...? CD: We get a lot of people coming in there, like their kid has a cold and they want a gift card, you know. So it’s like you kind of have to wean that stuff or else were just giving everything away. So it was a busy day, my now friend, Heather comes in and she’s like “Hey Carrie somebody wants to talk to you.” And I’m putting a stencil on and in my head, and it gets me every time and I’m bad at judging people, and then they always smooth me over and I’m like that's what you get for judging people, you shouldn’t do that. So I’m like great, you know. I go, give her a $25 gift card, actually she wants to talk to you, and in my head I’m like, god I don't have time for this, whatever. So when she told me what the cause was for, um I am the type of person, when I say I am going to do something I’ll do it. So I said let me talk this over with my boss, you know. She had asked if we could give anything, really. So you know when she told me what it was about, when she told me it was about PTSD. I have been diagnosed with PTSD, at the time I was dating somebody who had PTSD. To see a two hundred and fifty-pound man that was in the Air Force, and him finally telling me what he had to do, balling, and you can’t help him. It was so hard because I want to help everybody, you know. So when she told me what it was about, I was like I’m on it. So she, she is good, she’s like alright, I’ll call back on Monday.And I hadn’t talked to my boss then and um, so I told him what it was about and I asked for a Saturday, you know which is, it’s rough that's a lot of money he’s giving up, you know for a Saturday, do it. So, I said how about we’ll pick this Saturday and one hundred percent of profits go to Got Your Six. She started crying, she’s like “Oh my god Carrie,” I was thinking like twenty percent. So now we do it every year and the line is around the block, you now. And um, it’s selfishly, that's not the reason why I did it. I’m not doing it to get more business here, but it has brought more business here, which is awesome. Um, now that’s been part of my life too, so I am part of that organization and trying not to get overwhelmed but I’ll do anything to help them, man, because they are really helping a lot of people. These dogs are amazing what they can do, it’s unbelievable. TS: Definitely, I did some research and I, it seems like a very good cause. CD: Oh, they’re great. Yes. TS: Definitely and I looked there is training and other things you can do to get your dog involved and I thought that was really, really cool. CD: And that I leave to them. And I hate when people say anybody can train a dog because that is not true whatsoever. I went to one class and like alright I’m going to leave it them. So I uh, what do you guys need, I’m the money hustler and um yeah, so that's how I got into that organization. TS: Is there any other partnerships you have gone about um doing with either another organization like that 14  for instance or a partnership with another local business, say like Cleveland Heath or anything like that around Edwardsville. CD: Um, well with Got Your Six we do use a lot of the local businesses, but as far as other organizations, no. Personally, I do go speak um to women that have suffered from um sexual and uh just like, that have PTSD as well. I will personally go and speak at certain places, um but as far as us as a shop with other organizations, no. My boss does own another shop in Centralia, he also owns a coffee shop right next door. TS: Really? CD: So that's his part and then he, he’ll do everything to support us and Got Your Six because we do everything to support him, for, sure. TS: So, being here, you said you've been here for how long again? CD: Oh gall, [Talking to an artist in the shop] How long do you think I’ve been here eight years? Tattoo Artist (TA): You? You’ve been here fourteen years. CD: I’ve been here fourteen years? TA: Fourteen yeah. I started right after you and I’ve been here thirteen. CD: Fuck. TA: 2006 CD: God, I can’t believe I’ve even been tattooing that long. I think like I’ve only been tattooing, twenty years is a long time. I’ve been tattooing longer than that? TA: Yeah because you had All Star and Iron Age before that. CD: Yeah that's like when we were like dates, I’m like oh golly, here we go. Yeah, yeah. That's insane, crazy. TS: So since you have been here for so long you have probably have observed some of the rise and fall of other businesses going on. Has that, because Edwardsville has kind of been rising a little bit as of recently? Has that um had any growth in your guys’ business, since you've been here have you seen that? Or you know what, how has Main Street kind of changed? CD: Yeah, I’ve seen a growth in business um but I personally think it’s because it’s who we are. I also think the location helps to. Being right on the corner, you know people are right at the intersection they’re forced to look, you know. And also word of mouth is the best advertisement. We don't do whole lot of promotion, social media wise, or anything like that umm word of mouth has been our best promotion. Um yeah, but business has gotten better each year for sure. TS: Definitely. Alright, well is there anything else you would like to share with me today? 15  CD: Hmm... no I guess that's it. I’m truly grateful to be where I am today. Um and being a woman in this industry was very hard, it was very hard. Not so much today, but uh I’m just truly grateful to be where I am at, yeah that's it that's all I got. TS: Well I do have one last question for you, um... CD: Yeah, yeah. TS: Um, what would say your, or one of your favorite things to tattoo is? Or kind of tattoo. CD: Flowers, that's the first thing that came to my mind so I’m going to say, I love doing, doing girly stuff and love doing bright colors, so flowers. And this lady today that I have to draw for, she’s like do what you want and I’m like I’m drawing a flower, you know. I love doing flowers. TS: Is there any specific tattoo that you can think of that you've done, that has been um your favorite or one of your favorites, or particularly doing. CD: I would say, Dr. Doom tattoo, a lot for people see that, a lot of people love it. And I think it’s just the size of it, it’s just its intense and I’m pretty proud of it. That poor kid man, wow. TS: Was it... what kind of, where was it located? CD: It's a back piece. TS: Oh, it's a back piece. CD: Yeah, but I think that just because of the size and just the subject matter, that's probably the first thing that pops to my head. It’s probably one of my favorites. TS: Well thank you very much. CD: Absolutely. TS: It was wonderful interviewing you today. Thank you for doing this with me, I really appreciate it. CD: Yeah, yeah. 16 
MadisonCounty;Elizabeth Christian;1966;2018;Elizabeth Christian 1966 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Elizabeth Christian Oral History Interview Libby Christian, Interviewer Florissant, Missouri October 24, 2018 Libby Christian (LC): My name is Libby Christian and I am interviewing Elizabeth Christian, formerly Busarow, for the Madison County Historical Project. Let us begin. Tell me about your childhood growing up in Madison County. Elizabeth Christian (EC): So, I grew up in Collinsville, Illinois, I mean it was a rural town of about 20,000, 25,000 when I grew up and it was a safe town a quiet town, not a lot going on. We, it was pretty normal childhood. I grew up in the 70s, went to grade school in the 70s, and high school in the 80s, mid 80s. We rode our bikes, we had skateboards, we played out till dark, after dark. Rode our bikes all around town. So. What I would consider normal now not normal for the kids growing up now. Um went to, swam at the bath and tennis club in the summers, and uh pretty normal, I guess. LC: So where did you go to school, grade school? EC: I went to grade school at the Lutheran grade school, Holy Cross Lutheran. Um, my dad was the minister at the church, so I had to ride the bus to school, so had to ride the bus to school and home from school. Um, went, there, from kindergarten to 8th grade had girl scouts, all of that stuff. Um, there it was primarily um all white school, so that is much different now, um rode the bus with the catholic school, that was interesting. Um. LC: And you guys didn’t live to far from the school? EC: No, we lived about oh probably a mile and a half, two miles from school. But I didn’t ride my bike to school. We bussed and, the we had to listen to the radio for school closings ‘cause they didn’t call and no internet or any of that so um but no we didn’t, I didn’t walk to school we rode the bus. Um. So. LC: And what about your transition to high school, how many of your friends went to the local high school versus EC: Um prob, so I went Lutheran high school in Edwardsville, Metro East Lutheran High school. And probably um I would say it was about half and half that went to the Lutheran High Scool and half that went to Collinsville High School, so um and it was an easy transition to Lutheran high, Lutheran high was very small. When I went there my class was the first graduating class to start in the existing building and graduate out of that building. All of the other classes before me they started in um a church in Wood River and then maybe or they even started on SIU campus and then got shuffled around a little bit till they got a building um so. Um but mine was the only one that started in the building and graduated out of that building so there were only 31 in my graduating class out of the high school. 1  LC: What was the demographic like when you were in high school? EC: So, when I was in high school, maybe when I was a junior uh, I don’t think a senior there were only, it had to be a junior. Um maybe a sophomore, there were only um maybe one two three four, four black students, in the school, they weren’t in my class, um I didn’t have any black students in my class. There was one black girl, two grades above me and she didn’t start with that class, I don’t know where she came from, what uh neighboring town she came from, maybe Edwardsville. And then, um the class below me had two students a brother and a sister and then another grade maybe in that same class there was another um black student and they came from maybe East St. Louis so there were just the four and um no other, no Asian no Indian, that’s it. LC: Do you think with the SIU campus that the demographics had anything to do with that? EC: No um the two, the brother and the sister, their father I believe was some kind of minister and the gal who was two years ahead of me I don’t know what her parent's occupations was, and then the other boy he may have come because of the other two. So, I don’t think SIU really had anything to do with it, I believe it had everything to do with probably getting a better education then what they probably would’ve gotten um where they were at. LC: Well isn’t Collinsville, didn’t most of the area schools or areas kinda combine into Collinsville High School? EC: So, it depends on, on where they came from. East St. Louis had a high school, Cahokia had a high school, Granite City had a high school so depending on what the dividing lines were it all depends on where they went to high school, Edwardsville had a high school so kids from, depending on where they lived in Glen Carbon they would’ve gone to Edwardsville, Maryville went to Collinsville. Fairmount City they went to Collinsville High School, Venice, Venice had a high school, Lovejoy had a high school, or Venice and Lovejoy may have combined, Granite City had their own. So those areas, I'm not really sure about but, I know about Venice and Lovejoy because, Lovejoy and Venice we played in high school, so I know about their them having their own high schools but Collinsville drew from a few of the surrounding areas but not too far out. LC: How many other areas of Madison County did Metro draw from, do you know? EC: Lutheran High drew from all over the surrounding areas. Lutheran High drew from um any of the surrounding churches that were called association churches, so they drew from Alton, Wood River, Edwardsville, Collinsville, Granite City, um Bethalto um Staunton Worden, Prairie Town, um they drew from uh um Mulberry Grove they drew from the Belleville area all though not too many came from Belleville. Um and that uh Alton some folks came from Alton not too many but a few. Um so the surrounding Metro East area. LC: And I know you were going to Concordia Mequon after high school um why did that change and why did you stay in Madison County? EC: Um my dad died when I was 16 so he died in December of my junior year um so really, I stayed back to stay with my mom. I was the only child left at home, so she wasn't ready for me to leave home 2  yet. LC: What was it like starting at SIU in the later 80s for you? EC: Well I started SIU in the fall of 1985 so it was in the middle of the 80s. So um it was interesting it wasn’t really a huge change from high school other than you got to meet a bunch of different people and really it was um interesting to see people that you went to high school with who were a couple of years older than you and um experience them in a different way see them in a different light, because it was really the time of what the Midwest might consider the punk movement, more of maybe the new wave so you see these people dressing in combat boots and the army, the long army coats and expressing themselves that way and then you have you got to be friends with people from Alton maybe who they were a little bit more progressive and so it was interesting and fun to branch out and meet people and learn about people that way. Um LC: What were you originally going to Concordia for? EC: Um I wanted to be a lawyer at one point, so I was going to study paralegal studies um at Concordia. LC: What did you end up studying at SIU? EC: I was a psychology major and a biology major. LC: So, a double major. Did you um join any student unions or clubs while you were there? EC: At the time, I don’t know if they still have them, but the fraternities had little sisters, and I was a little sister to the Sigma Pi fraternity. LC: What were the demographics like in your class at SIU? Were they different from Metro? EC: Um, there were, from what I remember, there were mostly white students in my classes, from what I remember. I know that um a lot of students from East St. Louis were bussed in. There were busses that brought students in. I do remember that um around that time I believe was when the Martin Luther King Jr. Holiday was becoming a holiday and SIU, I don’t believe was going to celebrate it, so there was a big protest um, I remember that. Um, other than that I mean it was pretty unremarkable, uh so there were the Sig Pis had VFW, they had parties every Thursday night at the VFW in Edwardsville and the guys had to be 21 and the girls had to be 18 to get in, so that was different. LC: Were you around for the expansion of the dentistry school in Alton and the Center in East St. Louis? EC: Um no, not that I can remember. LC: What about the cougar on campus, I know that you had siblings that went to SIU? EC: So I have a brother who's ten years older than me and he went to SIU and I don’t remember, I don’t think the cougar was on campus when I went to SIU but the cougar was on campus when he went to SIU and I remember seeing the cougar um when he went there and I believe it was kept over they had a religious center and I think it was kept over there and I remember seeing it when he was there. Which 3  would have been he graduated from SIU in 1981. So, it would’ve been LC: Not too much before you, a couple years, back to the Martin Luther King Holiday ordeal, were you around for the protests or do you remember anything about that, did you attend classes that day? EC: I think they had classes, I remember going to the one Science Building and there being some kind of a hubbub around um but LC: What was SIU like while you attended there and being a little sister to a fraternity besides the partying did you do anything else run charity events or anything? EC: Um no charity events um it was just it was much more a commuter atmosphere when I went to SIU then I think it is now maybe they didn’t have hardly any they had some apartments and um not very many of those you just kinda came in and did your went to your classes and hung out maybe in the university center with your friends and then that that was it. There wasn’t a whole lot of time that you spent on campus. LC: Were there any parties thrown on campus or was it a dry campus? EC: I never went to any parties on campus  the fraternity had a frat house. And um they had parties. LC: Did you ever go to the Grainery or other nightclubs in Madison County you hung out at? EC: So, I didn’t go to the Grainery, that was more when I was in high school, um I know where it was, I didn’t go there. Um Collinsville had a place called Panama Jacks um. LC: Is that where Wild Country is now? EC: Yeah, um and they would have concerts sometimes, um but I didn’t I just didn’t do whole lot of that stuff. LC: But you went to parties at the frat house? EC: Oh yeah LC: Being from Madison County these towns are kinda like rural towns but with a city like vibe, what did you all do for fun? Being in high school and in college. EC: Uh well in college it seems like a lot of time was spent at the um fraternity house, in high school there were people, friends who had property out in the country, so we'd go out there. Um and there were always parties out there, now it's all built up. Um and otherwise we would just go to, Lutheran high didn’t have a football team they had basketball team and soccer, I was a cheerleader so there was that on the weekend nights. There was, it might still be there, a Pantera’s in Edwardsville we'd always go there after games. Um or um sometimes I'd go to the Collinsville football games with friends, um but we just all hung out with our friends. My friends weren’t huge party scene friends in high school we just hung out in a big group. 4  LC: Being from Madison County what, which town was the most progressive and I guess which was the most rural? How would you distinguish the towns? EC: Edwardsville is probably the most progressive. The kids from Edwardsville were definitely more progressive they were um there was always more money in Edwardsville. Um and the town was always seeming to expand more, Collinsville was more kinda I don’t know uh maybe it more country I suppose. But um maybe because um Alton seemed to be more progressive, I suppose and that could just be my perception because of the people I met and encountered. Um so we always seemed, Collinsville always seemed a little backwards I suppose. LC: What about Godfrey and all of those little towns out there? EC: I never did a whole in Godfrey or um any of the other places. LC: Was Wood River considered almost uh factory town? EC: So, Wood River has a high school um and we were would play them in sports because of the size but it was definitely small and definitely a factory town because of the oil tefinery and the oil and brass LC: Did St. Jacob have a high school or were they a part of Troy? EC: Um St. Jacob did not have a high school and we never went over there, it was just one of those places I never went to. LC: Where did you mostly hangout I guess in Madison County? Just Collinsville? EC: Um I actually probably hung out more between Collinsville and Edwardsville. LC: Was Maryville a bustling town like it is now? EC: No, Maryville was, uh 159 was a two-lane road street and you never sped through it cause only a couple cops that sat there and um it was tiny there was 159 and uh main street was teeny tiny. LC: What about Pontoon Beach or did you mostly consider that Granite City? EC: I just considered Pontoon Beach Granite City, and I never went to Granite City. LC: You never went to Granite City? EC: Never LC: Were you around for the high schools merging or at your time was it just one high school in Granite City? EC: I didn’t know they merged, oh yeah there were there was north and south. Wasn’t there? LC: I believe so. 5  EC: Well I didn’t pay any attention. LC: Being from Madison County, what is what has changed the most since college and high school? EC: Um well Edwardsville is huge and um Collinsville doesn’t seem to be quite as nice as it used to be. Um but Edwardsville keeps getting larger and larger, but Collinsville is just not as nice as it used to be which is sad. LC: When you lived in Collinsville how many Lutheran churches were in Collinsville? EC: Well there were three, and then uh I guess Maryville has, I always forget about Pleasant Ridge, which I guess is Maryville, not really Collinsville. So, there's a teeny tiny one and then there's the two larger ones. Well one’s larger now but when I was growing up it was small. LC: And is that Good Shepard? EC: Yeah LC: Good Shepard seems to be taking over the schooling besides Holy Cross. EC: Well there's, Collinsville's more built up on that end of town, so which to me would make sense. LC: Do you thinks that’s because of just the way people are moving into town, they're moving towards Edwardsville instead of back towards Fairmount city and all those other cities back that way. EC: Well there's no place for Collinsville to grow that way, so it's just logical that Good Shepard would expand because Collinsville has grown out off of Keebler and all that country where people had all of that land where kids would party off Sugarloaf Road is all grown up, big houses out there and young people are moving in and they need a place to educate their kids and there's no place out there so where are they gonna send their kids, they're gonna go to Good Shepard. LC: So, all those subdivisions in Maryville, I guess you remember when that wasn’t there? EC: None of that was there LC: How much of Maryville and Glen Carbon and all of that really picked up? EC: Well Keebler used to be after a certain spot it was just nothing, it was just a tiny country road that was fun to drive down and now Keebler runs into Maryville and all of these subdivisions. It was really easily to kinda get lost back there and now I drive back there and I'm trying to remember where these people lived or where their property was that you would go and there would be parties after the football games you can't find it because. LC: Would you consider Collinsville a mining town when you were growing up at all? EC: Well not an active coal mining town because now I don’t really think about it, if I sat and thought about it sure because uh that was the thing, like where I grew up, where my house was um there were old 6  coal mines and we would go back in the woods growing up. My brothers, I'd go back with my brothers or had ride his motorcycle back there and back where Gaslight was there were old coal mines back there and they weren’t properly closed so if you really wanted to you could get down there which would not be safe but um it was fun to go and explore and now there are some houses back there which I'm not sure how safe that it is and there's the other end of town which probably gets closer to Troy maybe where there are mines um so um yeah I suppose in the old days you could see where there were old dunes like that were covered possible old mines, could look like coal there um so yeah. LC: And back by Collinsville's city limits by Troy is that back by what is now called the Seven Gates of Hell? EC: Yeah, you know they didn’t, I never really heard people talk about it so much but you could go back there and it would be kinda creepy we used have some older friends that lived back there, had a huge farm back there, um and uh it was just an interesting area to go back there you just didn’t go back there. Um LC: Was that a really old part of town back there? EC: It was the country and you just didn’t go unless you needed to go back there. We would go back there a couple times a year for various types of events. I never, I’ve driven back there a couple times but it was just not an area that I frequented mostly because I wasn’t familiar with it and then I couldn’t even necessarily drive back there now and know where those areas are. LC: Growing up in a congregation what would you say what mostly those occupations were and how was it growing up as a preacher's kid. EC: Um I didn’t have any problems growing up as a preacher’s kid I wasn’t rebellious or any of that because I was a preacher’s kid and I had to prove something that I wasn’t um but mostly the occupations in the church they were varied there were some farmers, there were just business people in the community um that was probably mostly it, you know. LC: What were the demographics in the congregation versus the demographics now? EC: Um they're close to the same, mostly white. There might be um there's probably an Asian family, a couple Asian families, there might be a black family, I'm not really sure. There might be some in the school or maybe mixed. Um but I think that’s about it, I know there is a Lutheran congregation close to East St. Louis. LC: Being from Collinsville what would you say the most dangerous part of Collinsville was growing up? EC: Um that would have to be if you went down by what would now be the area by 255 and St. Louis Road um that intersection down closer to Fairmount City by the race track. LC: Oh, is that how you get there, to Fairmount? 7  EC: Yeah. Down there LC: Isn't that where you grew up? EC: No LC: Well off St. Louis Road EC: Yeah but it wasn’t dangerous there but if you went down that hill, farther down, um that’s where I would consider that to be dangerous. I didn’t really consider any part of Collinsville dangerous um but if you went down there, I would probably consider that area past the race track. LC: Do you think that nowadays that’s how people are moving out starting at St. Louis Road and 255 kinda dwindling up to Main Street and then towards Maryville and towards Glen Carbon and Edwardsville, do you think that’s the path that people are taking to move out cause now it seems that that area of Collinsville is not necessarily uninhabited but it doesn’t seem like it is progressing. Seems like that area is just failing. EC: I think there is still some nice areas there, homes are still intact I just think that they're smaller and people want bigger homes and when the young people move in, they want a bigger home, they want something nicer. They don’t want to live on that end of town they want to live on the end of town where there is more amenities, there used to be gas stations and pizza um a pizza parlor, and there was a drug store and there was an ice cream place and there was a little pantry where you could go and buy things, it was family owned places and it's all gone now and people aren’t putting things back in there, there's nothing, it doesn’t seem like there working to build up that end, people put so much effort into expanding 159 on the downtown side of things that that’s all there doing. When I go back to Collinsville, I don’t see a lot of effort in revitalizing Collinsville. Um I mean even Home Furniture is closing and I am sure it's because they can't compete, nobody is going downtown to buy anything I don’t go back to Collinsville for any festivals because why, it’s they're not, it's just don’t see a whole lot there, they have put some really nice bars in they're nice but they aren’t drawing a whole lot of people in there. So, I think they need to put more of an effort into just revitalizing things. LC: Speaking of Home Furniture and Main Street, how many home businesses or small-town businesses have moved out of Main Street, I know since vie been a member and can drive, Ashman's Pharmacy has closed and now Home Furniture. EC: Um Ashman's closed, Home Furniture's closed, Evers pharmacy has closed um Bert's Chuck Wagon moved, um I'm not sure where it moved, did it move to Fairview Heights? LC: No, its downtown, it's in a bigger building. EC: Oh okay, uh a lot of places, I think there's quite a few places I know there was a fancier, more upscale dress shop, Mary-Ann's, that’s gone but I can't say but that’s been gone for a long time. But um so many things are gone, from when I grew up like there was a P-Herschel that was like a five-and-dime kinda place, um yeah so, many places, have closed but the pharmacies are gonna close because they can't compete with Schnucks and Walmart and CVS, and Walgreens they just can't compete. Um so I don’t 8  know how many doctors' offices have actually closed and now they're located in the hospitals, or close to the hospitals. Um so there was pizza place that closed, close to where I grew up. So yeah, a lot of places. Um there was an Italian restaurant way out on 159 that closed  well they merged the names I don’t know if the families still own it. But yeah, a lot of places. LC: Do you think that mainstream businesses are taking over rural towns such as Collinsville? EC: Well I think definitely cause you see the chains coming in so. LC: When you were growing up downtown Main Street and all those family owned businesses were most of those families' members of Holy Cross? EC: Well some of them were, and some of them were members of, you just had essentially you had a couple smaller a few small churches and then you had the small Lutheran churches, and then you had Holy Cross was the big Lutheran Church in town and then you had the Catholic Church. So, I don’t know how many went there. LC: Do you also think that with Good Shepard growing and even with that side of town bustling do you think that Holy Cross is not losing members but per say but is smaller, gotten smaller over the years, because its hidden away, it's not on the main street it's not most people aren’t going downtown anymore, they're not moving in on that side of town obviously. EC: No, I think they have had I don’t think that’s it, it's just politics. So, I don’t think it's necessarily has anything to do with location. They have their own struggles. LC: Now there's still some family owned businesses on Main Street like the Herr family or the Herr Funeral, even now that’s starting to dwindle it seems with other main stream funeral homes and just EC: Well Herr Funeral home is not even family owned anymore they sold, it has the name, but they sold to some other company. So that’s not even family owned anymore, LC: And most people don’t seem to be choosing Herr anymore or EC: There going to it seems they're going to, so there's a gentleman who used to work for Herr funeral home that now has started his own funeral home in Maryville, and that’s where it seems like a lot of people are going. LC: Do you think that’s just mainly because of people moving or just it not being family owned so it's just not as good? EC: Well I think that you have to look at a lot of things and of course you have to look at the consumer and see what the price is because you are still purchasing something. Even though when somebody dies you don’t think about purchasing, being a consumer, and buying something even when somebody dies you have to look at the cost. LC: Well do you think with younger people moving in that and older people that knew Herr family just 9  as an example um since those younger people don’t know them or maybe not a part of Holy Cross Congregation because most of Holy Cross Congregation did choose Herr family um do you think being in a younger generation people don’t know or know the connections that are known they just know the main names EC: Um it's possible LC: And there's another funeral home on Main Street isn’t there? EC: Um yes, I don’t ember the name of it. LC: So more on businesses in Collinsville and Madison County, what, you mentioned Gaslight earlier with the mines, and your childhood home. What was Gaslight to you? EC: So Gaslight was one of the bath and tennis clubs, well it was a private pool club, well there was that one and Town and Country but Gaslight was the one I belonged to it was back behind our houses in a nice area, close to a the mines so it was a members only club there was a swim team and uh tennis team. Um and they were open all summer long and go and swim and hangout all day. LC: Where was the other, I guessing swim club? EC: On the other end of town and I never went so I don’t know a lot about it. Gaslight seemed to be more of the affluent swim club in town. LC: How long was it open do you know? EC: Uh it was open for a long time. I think it might still even be open now it might be closed, I think. It was a members only club and you have to pay for it every year to join, it was a not everyone got in. LC: Do you know what the going rate for it was? EC: I don’t, I don’t me just know that you had to be of a certain level to get in, not just anyone could get in. LC: Was it a certain demographic, salary range? EC: It was definitely a certain demographic. A white-only club you could bring guests but you still, I babysat for two summers for a family and um they had two adopted children and one was white, Tim was white and the little girl, Mindy she was black, and she might’ve even been mixed and prior to the parents adopting these kids they were members of Gaslight and they had to fight really hard to keep their membership and to let the little girl go, and they were probably 7 and 8, she was probably 7 when I started babysitting her and it was a huge fight to get her to belong and she was the only one. LC: When did the demographics do you think started change and started to take affect and really show in the community, what were their responses? 10  EC: Well I don’t know I think that it still might be a bit of a struggle depending on where you're at, having gone to private grade school and private high school and having belonged to a private community all of my life I think it still is still a struggle sometimes, for to change. Um but I think that it might be changing for some of those that might be one reason why Gaslight closed, I don’t know I haven’t been back in Collinsville for so long. Um but it still seems like that Collinsville seems to be a white area, Edwardsville had always been rather integrated um but Collinsville just didn’t they were more of um like Fairmount City was not an integrated area, East St. Louis was definitely was not and if it was it was because of the old people who couldn’t get out and cause a long, long time ago East St. louis was white, and they started moving out in the sixties. LC: Do you think that Collinsville was mainly white because of the Italian and German settlers that really began that town or the rural setting or the farming? EC: Um probably usually because of who are the settlers in the town LC: Was Gaslight the only instance um anyone of color turned away? EC: Well they weren’t turned away they just had to fight to get in, and then no other there were no other members of that color. I just never really thought about it that I knew. LC: With demographics and you know your friends and growing up in a small town, what was it like knowing the police chief in town at the time? EC: Oh, I mean I don’t know I just knew him it wasn’t I knew the police chief, I dated a cop, and there was no weirdness. It wasn’t like it was now, where I stood. LC: What do you mean it isn’t like it is now? EC: Well there was no fear of the police, like people have the fear of the police like their gonna get you know the police is gonna chase you and they're afraid when the policemen pulls them over that they're gonna get beat up. Or anything like that there's no fear that way, I was always told you know don’t tell them you know me or you are friends with me because that’s not gonna help you get out of the ticket, there was that but um it didn’t really do anything for me and I didn’t I didn’t spend, when he became police chief I didn’t even live there so much anymore. He was a sergeant when I lived there. So LC: With everything going on nowadays with race tension and police, what really, I know I asked earlier, but what really has changed, in Collinsville um has it fallen behind the times, is it struggling to keep up do you think Collinsville will ever bounce back to what it was before or compete with Edwardsville? EC: Um I don’t I just think they are struggling to keep businesses to keep up I don’t know if I feel like they are struggling to keep residents in that town in that city, um so much seems to be moving out um it seems like people are moving out to Maryville and Glen Carbon or Edwardsville, it could just be people are leaving Illinois, that could be it to, I would like to see Collinsville be revitalized but maybe it can't, I don’t know that their city government looks like, um what their plan is it would be great to see it. LC: What is it like to see it Home Furniture close and you know Ashman's moved out and the Sandwich 11  shop is closed now and Herr not being family owned and Holy Cross you know failing to keep a congregation, you know all of the things you grew up with leaving or falling away. EC: Well I think it's sad, um I think I think that Holy Cross is coming back but I think it's very sad to see that. Because they could I think that Collinsville could be a great place of everyone could work together, there seems to be competition mostly between Collinsville and Edwardsville and now you’ve got Maryville in the middle and seems to be sucking people out of Collinsville, and Edwardsville or Maryville seems to be the one in the mix that is pulling it away, I don’t if Maryville will ever have the stores and that that a Collinsville has, I think that as Maryville continues to grow that your gonna see the west end of Collinsville continue to fail that end that’s closest to Maryville, that area isn’t so bad it'll have some of the stores but that end of Collinsville that’s closest to 255 and Fairmount city I think that’s gonna continue to not do so well. LC: Well with that being said it seems like that could be a positive um future Collinsville, let's hope for bettering I used to be really nice and lots of stores and just the homey feelings. Thank you so much for doing the interview and telling us about your childhood and the demographics side and what you grew up with. EC: Thank you. 12 
MadisonCounty;Cindy McGrew;1963;2018;Cindy McGrew 1963 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Cindy McGrew Oral History Interview Rhianna Neel, Interviewer Traveling Tails Inn, Glen Carbon, Illinois October 8, 2018 Rhianna Neel (RN): Okay, the date is October 8, 2018, and I am Rhianna Neel, and I am interviewing Cindy McGrew who is the owner of Traveling Tails Inn in Glen Carbon. Hello Cindy. Cindy McGrew (CM): Hello Rhianna. RN: Okay, so can you tell me a little bit about where you grew up? CM: I grew up in a small town, about an hour south of here, um, thirteen hundred population, so I attended school K through 12th grade with the same class of 30 people. Real small town. RN: Mm-hmm. And when did you decide that you wanted to become a teacher? CM: You know, I love learning, and I loved school for myself. And so when I went to college, I thought well if I love learning so much and being in school, then I must love – I will love teaching school. RN: And what was your time in university like? Did you have any experiences that shaped your career? CM: Well, I went to SIUE, and I did spend some time volunteering on Special Olympics. I worked very briefly in the child daycare center, preschool, so that gave me a lot of insight into the future as working with kids. So that made me say I probably want to lean toward older students. RN: When you got into the workforce as a teacher, what was your experience teaching? CM: Well, I feel like teachers have the least amount of training. [pause] Well let me just say this– a-and I hear this from veterinarians too – so they’ll teach you everything you need to be a vet medical-wise, but they don’t teach you how to manage a vet clinic. When you’re a teacher, you’re really a manager. And I can know my subject, and I can present it in a fun way, but if I don’t know how to manage a classroom and all the politics that go with a school, I think that’s something that was missing from my education or uh learning for going to school to be a teacher. So, when I was quickly thrown into a real big learning experience with a classroom of kids. RN: And would you say that that experience has shaped how you approach the daycare situation here with all of the dogs? CM: Yes. I learned that I had to step back, make my own plan when no one makes one for me, like in the teaching career, and, um, just be very organized and prepared. Think things through. 1  RN: Um, so, I know that you backed out of teaching and decided to go back for your counseling CM: Right. RN: Licensing. And did you like counseling more than teaching? CM: Uh, I loved school counseling. Um, being – I am more of a person who works better either one-on- one or by myself. So, I found that being in a classroom of 30 or 40 students, whether they were middle school, elementary, those were the two levels I taught, um, I – I like relationship building and I like talking with people, so being a school counselor allowed me to talk one on one with parents, one on one with students, and so getting my master’s in counseling was a great career move for me and a much better match with my personality. RN: And did the experience you had while working as a counselor or a teacher shape the way that you manage your employees or even the dogs in daycare, or you know, communicating with the customers here about how their dog is behaving? CM: Absolutely. I think that’s one of the main reasons why our business has been so successful and grown. Because it’s based on relationship building, whether it be a dog, uh one of our staff members, or the customers. And, so, in order to have a business like this you have to be able to build relationships with all those three people. [laughs] I talked about, I call dogs people sometimes. So yes, my counseling background has made the culture of this business different from a corporate environment, and different from really just a mom and pop. It’s different. RN: It is. Um, so how did you meet Chris? CM: Chris and I met um, in 1996, and um, just through a, a group of friends. RN: And what made you two decide you were gonna come up with this crazy plan to leave teaching behind and open a doggy daycare? CM: Well, one of the things that um, allowed Chris and I to become pretty close friends was our love of dogs and animals. And we would do activities with our dogs together and so, um... [pause] Ask me that question one more time? RN: What made you decide that you were just gonna leave behind teaching and pursue opening TTI? CM: Okay, um, well, first of all, I saw a need. Because when I tried to find a place for my own dogs to stay, I didn’t really find exactly what I would want for my own dog, and um, not that there was anything wrong with it, it just wasn’t what I envisioned of how I want my dog – where I want my dog staying when I can’t be with her. So, that’s why Chris and I basically just decided to leave education slowly, we didn’t leave right away, and open a business and give it a try. RN: And can you explain why TTI is so much different from all the other daycares and boarding facilities around here? What makes it unique? 2  CM: Well, I think it can be--it can apply to any business. If you want to have a unique small business, you have to be a people person. You have to build relationships and trust with the public. And today’s society where we have so much, uh, social media and not – people are less and less understanding how to communicate one-on-one and pick up on social cues and things like that because we’re all texting, doing social media. When someone walks into a business and they find the personal touch and feel that someone really is interested in what you’re doing in their business, why you’re there, then you build a business culture that is different and I don’t care if you’re taking care of dogs or selling turtles or selling cars, I don’t care what you’re doing, if you do it in that way, you build that culture of “we care about you individually, we get to know you individually,” and that is [beeping] the foundation of a good small business. RN: Mm-hmm, that is. Um, and, just explain what the daycare layout, too – what makes TTI unique. CM: Okay, so, most um dog kennels, uhm, [pause] have a business model where dogs come in, they are put in a kennel, and then they’re rotated around for play time. And there’s, there’s a lot of talk in the industry about what’s best for dogs. We know dogs need rest breaks but for me personally, and for my own dog, I don’t want my dog sitting in a kennel for hours. I’d like my dog to be with people, I’d like for my dog to be with other dogs – as long as my dog enjoys being with other dogs. So, our business model is very unique in that our daycare dogs spend the whole day interacting with other dogs, and people, and then they’re kenneled at night, and we’re here 24 hours a day. Um, so it’s almost like we make a second home for a dog. We try to mirror their schedule at home. Although they probably do sleep less here. [laughs] So. RN: Especially if Ernie’s boarding. [laughs] CM: Right. RN: Uh, did you or Chris have any background in dog training or grooming before you opened this business? CM: I had absolutely no experience in – in dog training or grooming, um, but I have always been interested in dog nutrition, doing what’s best for my own dogs, um, now Chris, she had a background in uh, dog training. She had worked and taken a lot of obedience classes and um, so then she became certified while we were still in education as a dog trainer, and she went to grooming school, so she brings the most hands-on experience. RN: And did you have any business experience prior to this? CM: Absolutely none. RN: And have you uh, picked up business knowledge just as you go? CM: Well, I quickly found out that I would have to become a learner again, because I – I was in the business and I thought, okay I know dogs, we know dogs, and what we want for dogs, woah, there’s this whole other aspect of business. And so we went to seminars, we talked to other business people, we joined a group called Score, where uh business leaders will help people who are just starting out. So any 3  resource I could find, I really went to because no, we really knew nothing about the business side of it. RN: And, did you face any challenges such as finding a place that was zoned properly or getting loans to open this place, um, any financial setbacks? CM: We opened in 2008, during one of the worst recessions in this country. However, we were both educators, and when you work in a school you’re kind of sheltered, so we didn’t really know we were in a recession. And yes, it financially almost destroyed us opening this business. Zoning, we were lucky that we found this place and that’s difficult – most places don’t want dogs in the business district, so this was a good place to find, it’s way too expensive a building to have doggy daycare in, and that was part of the glitch in our business plan, but we worked it out. RN: And how would you say the number of doggy daycares in the area has changed since you opened? CM: I think that before we opened, now out on the West Coast, doggy daycare has been going on since the 70s. Around here, people still, I don’t think, get the concept. Because when someone says we do dog daycare, how they do it is so different from how we do it. So, I see more businesses that would be kind of competition, but no one really does what we do, so I don’t really consider them big competition, and they’ll say “we do doggy daycare," but no one does doggy daycare all day like we do, but they are trying to maybe change that because they see our perceived success, and then they find out on the bottom line side that really, really jacks up your payroll. So you have to really be careful when running a business where you have all-day daycare, but I think people are trying it out. In fact, someone moved in down the street, much smaller. And for me, I’m great with that because we have people to refer dogs to that we can’t fit in. RN: And how would you say small business that is dog oriented has changed around here? Such as the food stores, and the treat stores. CM: Mmm, I think that everyone used to just spend lots of money on their dogs, and now I think people spend lots and lots and lots of money in every area – nutrition, uh grooming, anything for dogs. And um, these stores in – in Edwardsville, Four Muddy Paws, um the nat- all-natural health food store has really brought together a community of people who basically will spend any amount of money on their dog. They’ll give up something personally to put the money on their dog. And that’s the kind of atmosphere of this community – and a lot of communities, that’s why it’s a multi-billion-dollar industry. RN: And would you say, too, the number of dog parks and dog owners and all that has shot up since this place opened? CM: Yes, and dog parks are a little scary to me because when you have a business model like ours, people might look at it and say “oh that’s just like the dog park!”, but it’s not, because there’s no one there who’s trained in dog behavior and knows what to look for. So I think people just want to do a lot with their dogs, but I think that the owner has to be an advocate for their dog and make sure they’re taking their dog to a safe environment. But yeah, it’s crazy – dog parks everywhere, dog food stores popping up. RN: And uh, would you say that the way people who--ah, treat their pets has changed since 2008, like, has it always been a trend that people “oh, my dog’s my baby, this is my child” or has that become a 4  recent development would you say? CM: I think that when we opened in 2008, there were a lot of people who wanted to be that person you just described, and they didn’t have any place to go. And I think we became that place for them. RN: And what would you say about pit bulls? How has their reputation in Edwardsville changed over the years, what do you think? CM: Well, I know there’s a lot of legislature in different states about banning the pit bull, and some states have banned them, and some kennels won’t take them. Um, but we um, have a, an evaluation process in which I’m not going to discriminate on the breed, I’m gonna look at behavior and play style. So, I think a lot of people are, were much scareder of the pit bull a few years ago, and it’s becoming more accepted that pit bulls can be very good pets, just like any dog can be bad or good, it’s the owner that makes the difference. RN: And wouldn’t you say a good portion of our customers are pit owners? CM: I’d say they all love those pitties! And if they have a chance to get one, they’re going to, or it’s gonna be a mix, you know, it’s your true pit bull category is a mix of that bully breed, so. RN: Oh, yeah. CM: Yeah, they love them. For the most part. That’s why I think when one of our competitions moved into Maryville and they banned pit bulls and I think that might hurt them. But obviously they have a reason for that, which I don’t know. We don’t feel that way. RN: And what would you say is the hardest part of running a business in Madison County? CM: In Madison County number one, the property taxes are sky high. Financial issue there. Um, you have to be prepared to pay a lot to have a business even in the state of Illinois. Pay roll taxes. Madison County has been very cooperative as far as zoning, and accepting of our business, um, so I haven’t run into any roadblocks specific to Madison County. RN: That’s good. And whenever you opened the business – I know Chris has talked to me before about some of the issues – flooring changes, and becoming... CM: [laughs] Right. RN: What were some of the transformations that the building itself had to go through to become what it is? CM: Well, this building was a warehouse with nice offices in the front, warehouse space in the back. So we had to totally transform the warehouse into a place where dogs could be and not your typical kennel look. So we had to make it look like it wasn’t a kennel. So we had to try different kinds of flooring, and then we quickly found out that real grass out there lasts about two weeks when you have about ten dogs. And um, so we spent a lot of money. Trial and error. What works best for dogs. Cause you know when 5  you have one dog in your house the destruction that can take place, multiply that times 100. So, did that answer your question? RN: Hmm, I’m looking for, um the story in particular of how we ended up with turf and not...I know we went through several different... CM: Oh, okay. RN: Types. CM: So outside, and this is just another thing I’ve watched small business owners and they...you can’t foresee something happening and then all of a sudden it’s a need. So, pretty soon we have a back yard full of mud. Oh no, what are we gonna do. So then we put pea gravel out there, tiny rocks. Well, the dogs are sinking down into that and they’re eating the gravel. So then we get rubber mats and we cover it up with that. Well, then those uh, smell because urine goes under there and gets caught, and they’re heavy. So that didn’t work, it wasn’t good for our employees. So finally we said we’ve got to put down turf. So that was a big investment. And we’ve done it twice now. So, it’s kinda like, you have to have good financial backing, because you will have to spend some money, and you will have to make upgrades. If you want to be something that no one else offers in the area of dogs. You know, and, just the main thing - the building. You can’t have dogs running around in the mud [laughs] you know. RN: And— CM: This is one tiny example. RN: And are there any others that I haven’t heard stories about? CM: Oh yeah! I was up here at midnight uh, a few years – five or six years ago, painting the floor in the daycare because we would paint it, every so often, and then it would chip off, and on the webcams, which by the way that’s another thing unique to our business, we have the webcams where people can see, and still businesses don’t usually have that. So I was painting the floor. Well that lasts about three weeks, then it looks like poop back there because the flaking off on the camera. So we then spent a bunch of money to have a professional put down epoxy, and as soon as he got it down it looked beautiful, but guess what. It was slick! And then we had to deal with that. And so, yes, lots of research. Lots of – it’s good to get in a group of people who own these businesses all over the country, which I am in, and then you can maybe try to avoid some of those mistakes that are costly, They'll give you that heads up, because they’re pretty nice in this industry, to help each other out. RN: And, would you say in this area you faced any discrimination as far as being a female business owner or being a member of the LGBT community, either from you know, people that you have to go to, to get your permits or customers or-- CM: Mm-hmm. RN: Any of the employees? 6  CM: I think that um, in the beginning when we were applying for a business license and Chris and I being a couple, we did hit some roadblocks, maybe, uh, a white male wouldn’t have hit. Because we are women and because we are a couple. So, I think it made it a little harder. Now, that was in 2008. So now here we are 10+ years later. Customers don’t care about those things when you take good care of their dog. Um, and employees, I haven’t had any--anyone have objection to that, but you know, you have to be transparent in a small business, but you also have to be careful about your personal life too. But that’s a good question. No, we fortunately haven’t had to face much discrimination unless it was talking behind our backs, but you know that happens to everyone about everything so. But, but they, and I will tell you this, there was one couple who said basically that they would not come here because Chris and I were lesbians. And they went to another place and about 3 months later they were back, full-time customers. So, when you take good care of someone’s dog, that’s really all that matters. RN: And what do you see in Traveling Tails Inn’s future? Do you think that you will expand, or do you want to stay in one small location and stay...simple? CM: Lots and lots of people have asked us that question, do you want to franchise, why don’t you put another one here, there, customers move away and “will you please build another one in Florida”, you know, if they leave, they want it where they moved to. And, um, Chris and I made this change late in life, so we are older now, I’m 55, um, we are looking more towards retirement, so, um, even if I wasn’t looking towards retirement, I would say that franchising this business would cause it to lose some of its appeal. That I find if I’m gonna own it, it has to be there. That personal touch. That knowing each customer, knowing the unique things about the dogs. When you start franchising, you have to have a really tight business plan and you have to have all of those procedures down and then you have to talk about staff. So, that’s not something that I would be interested in at this age, and even if I was younger, someone would have to really do some talking to make me think that we could franchise this and duplicate it everywhere, like a McDonalds, you know. Pretty much you get a hamburger at McDonald’s in California, it’s gonna be the same as in Edwardsville, but I don’t know that that works for doggy daycare. RN: I feel like in doggy daycare, every day is different depending on which pack shows up. CM: Yes. So it’s hard to get systems down that work consistently because this variable is these different dog groups, where at McDonald’s you have the same machine, same meat, same, you know, you have a lot of same things you deal with. We’re dealing with dogs, it’s different every day. RN: And it definitely creates a challenge for the business. CM: Yes. RN: Uh, creating formalized procedure and policy when Charles is gonna decide “Nope, I’m kicking this wall in.” CM: Right. RN: And, um would you say that your experiences running a daycare have shaped the way that you approach training and handling your own dogs at home? 7  CM: Oh yes. Definitely. We, um...Because we’re always learning, and because we try to provide our staff as much um, professional development or ideas all these up and coming things, so we learned that too, it’s important. So, then, of course, we have to try it out on our own dogs any new classes, like we do scent detection work and we’ve learned--what we’ve learned, I would say just to summarize, is have fun with your dog, not just here at daycare and bringing them here, but plan things to do with them on your own. So you have to have a good balance for your dog. And I think we’ve learned that, you know. We were just with our dogs all the time and we need to let our dogs come here and be a dog, and then we need to spend some time doing one on one quality things. It’s not about quantity, it’s about quality with your dogs. RN: Mm-hmm. And, um, what words of wisdom... CM: Did I answer your question? RN: I think so, yeah. CM: Yeah, okay. RN: Uh, what words of wisdom would you have for pet owners in the area as far as, you know, I know you’ve had several dogs in your life that have lived their lives with you and moved on. What would you say to the pet owners who have young dogs now? CM: I would say the number one thing for dogs is nutrition. Because everyone loves their dogs, they want them to live a full life, and nutrition is so important, and as a puppy, socialization, which we provide. I think those are the two most important things. RN: And crate training. CM: Yes. [laughs] Crate training. And potty training. RN: Please crate train your dog [laughs]. CM: Right. RN: And then I have just a little fun question uh, to lighten the mood a little, too. CM: Okay. RN: If your dog could understand perfect English for one full minute, what would you want her to know? CM: Oh, I would want her to know that I would risk my life for her, I would buy her anything she needs, and that she fills the void in my life that is unbelievable. And that I love, love, love her! [laughs] And that she's so cute! [laughs] I think that’s more than one minute. It’s hard. That’s a good question, I like that. RN: Alright, is there anything else really that you want to share about insights you’ve learned from running a business, or uh, from having dogs in your life for your whole life, or... CM: I think, running a small business will go down as the biggest learning experience of my life. And I 8  have learned – had to learn that I don’t just report somewhere and do what people tell me to do, I have free time, so I have to be organized. I have to have good time management. And then the other thing is, running a small business you have to just be really prepared, but you can’t be so anal that you can’t be flexible. Because anything can change from day to day, and then you’re always on, so even if you don’t work in the business, like Chris and I do not work in here physically forty hours a week, um, but, it is never out of my head. So if you want a job that you can leave at the building, do not open a small business. RN: And then, would you say- CM: And with pets, I couldn’t be happier, I feel like over the last ten plus years, Chris and I have had, we went to school here, SIU, we’re part of the community, and we have had so many people in the community when we’re out and about say “oh thank you for taking such good care of my dog, or my dog did this or that”, that’s a good feeling cause everyone wants something in life where you can kinda say-- not your--well kinda like a legacy, you know, so these two lesbians Chris and Cindy, they came and opened this crazy place where dogs just run around all day with people, and it’s a new concept, and it worked, and people are thanking us for it. And, and so, that’s one of the top ten happiest things in my life. RN: And, too, you know, another part of the challenges this business has faced, that I think we’re working towards a lot of positivity is keeping employees— CM: Yes. RN: Updated on what is the newest training, and the "Dog Guru" things that we’ve been doing. CM: You’re exactly right. And in any--in life, relationships, small business, it’s about communication. And it’s so hard to have good communication in a work setting, but then one like this, it’s just so crucial. And we just keep trying to reinvent it and make it right. And that’s one thing we’ll never do as long as we own the business. We will always keep working to improve and support our employees and do what’s best for dogs. RN: Alright, well I think that will conclude the interview, so thank you for your time. CM: Thank you for interviewing me. I appreciate you thinking about me. RN: Alright, I’ll stop the recording. 9 
MadisonCounty;Bob Gibson;1942;2017;Bob Gibson 1942 - 2017   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Bob Gibson Oral History Interview Jeff Manuel, Interviewer Edwardsville, Illinois March 11, 2017 Editor’s Note: This transcript was lightly edited by Bob Gibson for clarity. It may vary somewhat from the original audio recording. Jeff Manuel (JM): This is Jeff Manuel. I am interviewing Robert Gibson or Bob Gibson in his home in Edwardsville, Illinois. It is March 11, 2017, uh and I am interviewing Bob for the Madison Historical Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive of Madison County, Illinois. Uh good morning Bob and you do prefer to go by Bob correct? Bob Gibson (BG): Yes I do. Mm-hmm. JM: Okay. Uh, so Bob if we could start from uh the beginning I guess, just you could quickly give me uh are you from the Madison County area originally or were you born outside the region? BG: Born outside the region. I moved here in ‘77 to go to graduate school at SIU Edwardsville um and I have been here ever since [laughs]. JM: Where did you grow up? BG: Rockford, Illinois. Uh it was my growing up years when I was a kid. And uh moved to Western Illinois University for my undergraduate work and then uh came down here luckily. JM: Now did your family have any connection to mining prior to you getting this job or is it something that kind of came out of the job? BG: Serendipity worked in terms of getting the job uh no my family had no history to it uh if you go to Indiana you’ll see that there’s uh Gibson Coal Mines there in Gibson County but no relation. JM: Uh so you said you, did your undergraduate degree at Western Illinois University? BG: Yes I did. JM: Okay, and then came down to uh Edwardsville or Southern Illinois University Edwardsville? BG: Yes I moved here actually on New Year’s Day 1977 so JM: And what program brought you to SIUE? BG: Back at that time there was, they had earth science, geography, and planning. That was one group 1  area and that intrigued me, the earth sciences were my background. I have a geology and engineering background as well as earth sciences and so the idea of looking at land use and the problems caused by adverse geology intrigued me and that, that got me down here. JM: Had you been planning on a career tied in with mining or extraction industries prior to that or was it like you said more serendipity? BG: Serendipity. I was, I always wanted to work with the Illinois State Geological Survey that was where I really wanted to work. Umm and as I came down here I got fortunate and I got hired under contract to do some research for them uh involving some backfilling operations that were taking place in Maryville, Illinois, as well as two others in Belleville. And part of the work that I was doing at the time was learning how to distinguish subsidence damages from damages caused by some kind of soil problem because there were a number of homes being damaged. At that time period we just didn’t understand what was characteristic to subsidence and so uh that was part of the work that I did. Now I mentioned that there was backfilling projects. The US Bureau of Mines had what they called demonstration area wide backfilling projects. They conduct backfilling projects in neighborhood having coal mine subsidence problems by drilling holes from the surface to mine level and then fill the mine by injecting materials with the intent of preventing subsidence. They were more optimistic than they should [laughs] have been uh they put a lot of work effort into it but the results were not good in my mind. JM: Was the US Bureau of Mines, now defunct of course, was that, were they pretty active here in Southern Illinois at the time? BG: No not really. Um at the time they were, they were pretty active nationwide and so they were doing a lot of backfilling out East and I think Illinois recognized that we have a large history of mining and that subsidence was a problem and would likely continue to be a problem into the future. The reasoning was if something could be done to help the citizens out, protect them, we should look into it. And so I think it was more of an active grant process that was done cooperatively between the Illinois State Geological Survey and the US Bureau of Mines. I specifically was hired, like I said, as a research assistant and what we did was we surveyed a number of homes that were having problems uh and measured the ground movements, again with the intent of trying to better understand the mechanism of subsidence and we could we use that information to a) define exactly that it is coal mine subsidence and b) uh learn more about it so that when remediation efforts were put forward that they would be effective in controlling damages to keep people safe and to help them out by limiting damages. JM: Now in these years and maybe prior to this I know there’d been a lot of nationwide talk about sort of the problems of uh, some problems of mining, erosion, concern about strip mining, things like that, had that been something that was on your radar prior to this or was it something that kind of came once you started doing the research work? BG: Everything kind of came together in the, I will say, middle seventies. Um there was a lot of, I think careful thought starting to go into the environment, in that it is finite, and that we need to look after and protect it, so I think as a result of that, mining was one issue. There will, in my opinion always be a tension between mineral development and environmental protection. The tension is that, you need the mineral resources in order to grow an economy and to have a lifestyle that people want to live in, but by   2  the same token, here in Illinois in particular, we’ve got uh phenomenal farmland and so you need to protect that resource as well and so the idea was is that if you just throw enough money at it and enough research into it, then you can overcome just about any problem. I think that was the mentality at that time period. And to a degree it was the correct assessment in that you can do an awful lot with replacement of soils and strip mining operations to make the land productive again at least for crop production. I have concerns with other aspects of developing over surface-type mining but we can discuss those later if you wish. JM: Okay. Um just to return a little bit to your own career trajectory, so you’re, were you, you were doing the research work while you were still getting your Master’s degree at SIUE? BG: Yes. While in grad school I was working for the Illinois State Geological Survey Monroe Flynn who was a local legislator and uh um by golly I can’t think of her name right now, I didn’t think I’d ever forget it (Celeste Stiehl), when their constituents voiced complaints about having sudden damages occurring to their homes, they would contact us and we would make an inspection of the damages to determine the cause and origin of damages. It turns out that Belleville and Maryville were experiencing frequent subsidence problems at that time and we learned a lot from our inspections about coal mine subsidence and soil problems. Mr. Flynn and Ms. Steihl, were two local state representatives from the Belleville area and they were instrumental um in trying to establish the mine subsidence reinsurance fund in Illinois and uh they did a lot of work with that. There was a person in particular, Dr. Tom Stubblefield that lived in, in Belleville who was very active citizen and because of him and these legislators we now have mine subsidence insurance that was mandated by law. We wouldn’t have it otherwise uh they were remarkable people. But in terms of my work and profession we would be contacted by them and we would investigate homes that were being damaged and we would see first of all figure out if the damages were due to subsidence, then try to help them understand what to expect, what things could be done to make their house safe. At that time there was no mechanism in place, if you were unfortunate enough to have subsidence problem you were pretty much on your own in terms of figuring out what was causing damages to your home, dealing with the economic impact associated with damages caused by subsidence, and keeping yourself safe. As part of my graduate school studies, I wrote my thesis on the strength of loess. Loess is a wind blown silt deposited during glacial times and is about 90 feet thick on the west side of Madison County and thins to 40 or so feet on the east side. A researcher named Dr. Richard Handy was studying the collapsibility of loess in Iowa. My thesis attempted to replicate his research in Illinois to determine if the homes in Madison County were being damaged by loess collapse. At the same time, my work with the geological survey was geared towards trying to figure out and document the mechanics of coal mine subsidence. Turns out that I was unable to find evidence supporting loess collapse but was able to contribute to our understanding of coal mine subsidence and related damages. JM: So right at the time that you were getting your Master’s Degree working on these things is right when the Illinois law first kind of comes about? BG: Yes, starts kind of about then, that time period, like I say I was working for the geological survey and we were preparing on getting the basic information about the problem, trying to assess it, how big a problem was it, how common, what were the kinds of problems, what could be done to alleviate some of those symptoms. That information was aggregated and then brought to our local legislator, as supporting information for the legislature in proposing, passing and implementing a subsidence insurance bill. The 3  AML program was in existence and it was only a two-person operation, an executive director and he had a secretary. Allen Grosball was the, was the executive director at the time and if you are driving north on Interstate 55 near Staunton look up, there is a railroad bridge overpass and on the left hand side (west) there is an old coal mine and that was reclaimed as part of the science foundation study. The National Science Foundation came in and studied how to best take care of that problem (reclaim mine acidic mine spoils) and Al was probably one of the guys pushing that one along getting the, the funding for that. That was one of the first projects done in Illinois in terms of reclamation. (09:22) JM: For, just to return to the Illinois state uh, uh subsidence insurance program, for anybody who might not be familiar with it or just for sort of posterity’s sake, what is that? I mean as it was put in place at first. BG: Okay, Illinois was the second state to offer subsidence insurance. The Illinois subsidence insurance law went into effect in 1979 and at the time subsidence insurance was not available, so if you had subsidence problem, like I said before, you were economically on your own. Well, the Illinois subsidence insurance was modeled after and much like a fire insurance, you could purchase if you wanted to. What made the Illinois program kind of unique from subsidence insurance offered in Pennsylvania, was that we decided as a state to spread the risk in order to keep the cost of insurance low. In Pennsylvania, the only people who buy subsidence insurance were the people living next to somebody whose home was being damaged by coal mine subsidence. The cost of insurance was very high compared to that offered in Illinois. So if you look at the coal regions in Illinois, there are 32 counties where 2 percent or more of the land surface is underlain by old underground coal mines. In these 32 counties coal mine subsidence insurance is automatically included when you purchase your homeowners insurance. So you make an homeowner insurance payment there’s a fee taken out for subsidence insurance. Part of the rationale behind that, besides keeping the fees low, was we have had over 5,000 mines in Illinois and we’ve got maps for roughly 2,500 of those, of the mines. So we know where some of the mines are at but we don’t know where they’re all at, and so what we didn’t want happening is for people say, “Well I’m not undermined, you know we’ve checked that maps,” and then we have subsidence problem. So the rationale was to keep the fees low enough so that people maybe wouldn’t question it and keep their insurance. Now, in those 32 counties you can sign a waiver saying you don’t wish to pay that insurance and in which case you would be taken off. And that makes sense if you on the Mississippi River bottom say down in Granite City you don’t want mine subsidence insurance, there’s no coal there, um there are a few other areas uniquely like that. But in the remaining counties where there’s mining, you can request subsidence insurance. By the passing of that law in 1979, it made it mandatory for the insurance industry to provide that coverage. Prior to that it was an act, considered an act of God and, and you weren’t insured. (11:34) JM: In your opinion uh what caused that to change in that 1970s, late 1970s period like you said there had been of course subsidence before then so what, what do you think sort of pushed that to the point where, you know, it was passed into law at that time? BG: You know, I was a young person and, and I don’t know if I fully appreciated all the things that were going on but from my perspective now I think we went from a period of, of you kept your problems to yourself in the ‘40s, ‘50s, and ‘60s. During the late ‘60s and ‘70s you have people speaking out at all kinds of issues and problems and talking about subject matters that was never discussed in public before 4  and so if you looked at the homes here say in Belleville and Maryville that were having problems, these people were still in their youth and they were having issues and they saw this as something that the public needed to be protected from. They, they experienced a bad problem and so they spoke out and I think that was as big as anything. Overall there was a social conscience and awareness of environmental problems and the need for people looking after people were greater at that point in time something that seems to be disappearing from today’s world. (12:54) JM: So, I’d like to next maybe uh shift a little bit from sort of you go from receiving your Master’s Degree and then did you start right away at the Illinois Department of Natural Resources? BG: Yes I did. Initially, I was hired under contract by the Abandoned Mine Lands Reclamation Council which was just starting up. We created an emergency program within the AML to respond to suddenly occurring and life threatening hazards caused by past coal mining activities. And, and I was hired on to start that group up, write the rules, implement the program, and, and get it started. So we were seeking grant monies from the federal government to address mine related problems. At that time, there was transitioning from how the funding for abating mine related problems was achieved, how mine problems were address. uh the US Bureau of Mines was being torn apart and was subsumed by what was called the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement and what they did is for every ton of coal that’s mined in the United States there is a tax levied on it. For underground mining as well as strip mining at different rates. That money’s collected by the federal government and then redistributed back to the states in order to take care of mine problems. Half the money goes back based on a formula that is based on the history of mining in the particular state. So if you had a lot of mining a lot of coal mines a lot of production you got a larger slice of that pie. Early on the federal government reserved twenty percent to run their operations, office of surface mining, and to fund emergency work. Emergencies were by definition, unexpected mine problems, immediately occurring and life threatening, we the Illinois Emergency Section would make the initial inspection. If the mine problem was severe enough, we’d call the feds, they could come, make their inspection and confirm our assessment as to whether the problem was mine related and dangerous enough to qualify for federal funding. If so, they would allow us to tap into part of that 20 percent OSM set aside federal money to be used in remediating the problem. My job was to make that inspection, make the case for why the problem qualifies as an Emergency, do all the paperwork, and then we’d come up with a design to solve mine problem. When the AML Emergency first started off, like I said, I was under contract to the AML as a project coordinator and I had a subcontract with uh the University of Illinois um engineering department and they provided me the engineering services that I needed to make those structural decisions um and I would do the geology aspect of things and so we worked as a team and, and many of the problems that are mine related end up being a combination of engineering and geology problems and so I, I thought the approach we implemented was uh effective. Typically within 24 hours of receiving complaint of a suspected mine problem, we would make an inspection and if needed be we would work the night through collecting data and drawing up plans to eliminate the hazard. In the early days uh a lot of our designs for the extremely dangerous problems were drawn on paper towels. We would be sitting at a local Hardee’s restaurant at two o’clock in the morning and drawing on napkins and then we would have contractors show up in the morning and then we would start work uh we would shake hands and say, we can’t spend more than this [laughs] much money, uh this is what we want to do, can you do it, and will you do it? And uh that’s the way business was handled early on. Like everything, it gets codified [laughs], and so uh through the years we became much more uh structured, we now prepare formal bids and formal specifications and those kinds of 5  things. When Illinois received complete authority to administer the AML Emergency Program in June, 1984 We insisted and always did retain the authority that if push came to shove and something was really serious and really going down fast we would solve the problem first and then paperwork afterwards and that still, that, that um thought and practice is still in place today. (16:22) JM: So, uh, when you first started on it under contract with abandoned mine lands were you based out of your home or did you have an office here in Edwardsville or ...? BG: I maintained office space on SIUE campus that I had when I was working for the geological survey. The Illinois AML Program provides the rent money for office space and necessary accommodation such as phone, copying and mail service. What really worked out nice in my mind uh was that we were always able to tap into the graduate students there and we’ve maintained that philosophy. A practice that was started when I was under contract with the Illinois State Geological Survey. I was hired by the ISGS by a guy named Paul DuMontelle who was a program manager for geotechnical division of the geological survey. The ISGS is based at the University of Illinois campus and uh they hired a lot of students and like I said I was appreciative of that opportunity and I learned a lot as a graduate student, things I wouldn’t have learned otherwise and so I always tried to keep that practice alive by staying on campus and hiring students to help collect data. I saw this as a mutually beneficial practice that was good for the State. I had ready access to a talented student pool, that I could train them in the specifics for what needs to be done to abate mine hazards, and they the students can use that as part of their degree work and then uh go on to careers elsewhere. Um this practice is still happening today and that’s something that I guess I’m proud of I take great joy in that. We’ve had probably 300 or more students that have worked for us through the years and uh you know uh it’s been a good symbiotic relationship (17:47) JM: Was it just you in the office at the time or was there a couple people? BG: Just me. Yeah it’s kind of scary [laughs] uh to think about you know at the time I'm 24 years old and uh it’s just me going out making these inspections and then I would call in and get the engineers’ help when I needed it. But like I said I was establishing the program for Illinois um and we later applied for and received authority in 1984 from the federal government to administer and operate the abandoned mine lands program and an emergency program. Programmatically the advantages were mostly associated with economics. Instead of requesting money from the federal government, on a case by case need be basis, once the State received program authority grant money was provided on an annual basis. At that point in time, uh in the early ‘80s to about 1998 maybe 2000 um, all money for emergency projects was discretionary federal money that was kind of doled out when needed and in addition to the AML funds that were provided to take care of the large-scale environmental reclamation projects. The logic was that the number of emergencies and the amount of money necessary to abate such hazards could not be predicted and therefore budgeted. If the discretionary money was expended, OSM would make an appeal to the US Congress for additional appropriations. Um if I’m losing you please jump in, um but we would, like I said, initially we would turn in a budget estimate that guessed how many emergencies would occur and about how much it would cost to take care of the problem. After a few years, I would look at the number of cases we had and the kind of problems we encountered and money that was spent and then turn that in budget based on statistical analysis. We usually got most of the money we requested but what was nice about it back then was we did have a couple of projects, one was a major gas leak in Benton, Illinois, and that ended up costing us a million dollars way beyond the money 6  we had available in our budget request. When you’re 26, that’s a lot of money [laughs] and having that kind of responsibility was kind of um, um unnerving um more importantly is you always thought that this is pretty serious problem there's going to be an expert out there that could come if I needed, you know if I needed technical help or tweak a problem and that they’re going to rescue the day for us if need be. In a way I guess they did. By working with University trained engineers and geologist, there was a lot of science knowledge available and you applied that theoretical science and understanding to solving an actual real world problem and that's the beauty of the Illinois Emergency Program and that's what kept me involved and intrigued with my work. You always had a different kind of problem you, you really didn't have a firm solution but you used science and you rationalize it out and you worked as a team. We sat down and we talked and we argued and discussed points and, and my logic there was you’re going to make a mistake somewhere along the line and if you have enough people voicing differences, um versus following the law and rubber stamping you’re going to minimize the chances of making mistakes and that is crucial. The repercussion is if we make a big enough mistake somebody gets harmed as a result of an oversight or just not understanding it. So we spent a lot of time studying the problems and thinking of different ways to take firm data measurements that we could use to prove or disprove our thoughts and, and, and we still maintain that even today um we’re always trying to figure out what did we do right what did we do wrong and, and one of the things that I think I have discovered through the years is there was a great emphasis in the ‘80s and ‘90s you always had to be right on everything. I think researchers seeking grant money chose projects that they knew could be done and it was of course always effective. But I am not so sure it advanced our understanding as much as research with uncertain outcomes would have provided. Well you learn more from your mistakes and I think acknowledging those and, and really trying to understand what went wrong provides better and more information. I think in many instances the AML emergency section was forced in applying science principals to problems with uncertain outcomes, while hoping for successful outcomes we continued to collect as much data as we could to further our understanding. We did do that I think more often than I would like to admit but uh we've published our mistakes and we've published [laughs] our successes as well. (21:41) JM: Uh rewinding just a bit uh do you remember the first time that you sort of saw a case of mine subsidence? BG: Yeah, [laughs] I have a couple of them that basically scared me. We were in one place in Herrin, Illinois, uh where we were called in uh and I got there, it was a winter day about 6 o'clock at night so it was dark and there was police department and a fire department with their lights flashing uh there was a water tower uh where the water line had ruptured so we had a fountain of water shooting up maybe 20 or 30 feet into the air and creating a mist over the area so this flashing lights would shine and flash on the fountaining water in a surreal way. Then we walked into one of the homes and went down into the basement and, and you could see the doors bending in front of you kind of like an old horror movie uh that house dropped three and a half feet across its length that night uh and uh we, wrote our design specifications on paper towel napkins. Fortunately, we were able to contract with a house mover and had them pick up and support the three homes that were subsiding that night. Because of the work we did that night, the homes didn't collapse and all three of the homes have since been put back on new foundations and repaired. That’s one example where the AML Emergency Program and the Subsidence Insurance Program dovetailed in to provide the homeowners the help they need in cases of severe subsidence. I didn't explain this earlier when the AML program was created, uh the laws were established limiting how federal funds could be used to abate mine related problems and one of the limitations is that they can be 7  used to prevent mine problems but cannot be used to make repair. Congress established SMCRA and President Jimmy Carter signed it into law in, 1977. When Congress established the Surface Mining Control Reclamation Act (SMCRA) – they were very specific in that they realized that there were too many mine related problems nationwide to fix so it was set up to be a program of last resort as a means of keeping federal funding to a minimum. So SMCRA was created in such a way to keep people safe and do only what was necessary to remediate that hazard, but we couldn't effect a repair. So with Illinois, um we decided that a homeowner insurance program was necessary to provide the resources for making the actual repair to the damaged home. It doesn't do a homeowner much good to put a house up on bracing and leave it there when their foundation’s totally destroyed. To replace a damaged foundation with a new foundation on a typical house you're talking 20, 30, 40 thousand dollars depending on size of the house it could even be more and so the two programs worked kind of hand in hand. There was tension early on, I think the insurance industry was concerned that uh we (the State AML Program) would be looking over their decisions and fighting them on different things. But that was resolved early on um and both programs learned to work together collaboratively. I think it works pretty well now, there are areas which I wish could be improved but I don't know how we would do that necessarily. For instance, if you have a sag type subsidence problem a type of mine problem we can discuss later if you wish, um but they’re long term problems that can last 15, 20 years and while ground movements are active um any repairs you do such as replacing a foundation will simply break back up requiring repeated attempts at repair which drives up costs. So there is a long time period where repairs cannot be economically made during which the homeowner is faced with living in a home that continues to crack up. I know I am jumping around and I apologize... JM: Totally fine... BG: But when a person has a subsidence problem there are really, I think, three factors that go into making decisions about what to do. First, you have the emotional aspect of it. You know this is someone’s major economic investment and they may have an emotional attachment to the house as well. You know my family has been living here for generations and I'm living here, so there's that part of it. You also have the economic aspect of it, how am I going to afford to repair this, do I sell and take a loss, can I afford to buy another house when I owe on this house and having to live with the problems in the meantime. And then the third thing is, what do I do? How do I fix it? And um so whenever you walk into a house or a situation like that people are experiencing a severe problem they’re under great emotional stress and I am amazed at how human people become in that situation. Ah, people become so gracious at the time and they are going through a tough time and that always amazes me um if you walk in the same neighborhood, the people who aren't having problems in the neighborhood they're less gracious uh so that, that was kind of another of the joy besides wearing a white hat when you know you can help people out. (25:51) JM: Yeah that's great. Um how would those calls reach your office I mean what was kind of the process for that? BG: Good question. Um what happens normally is, let me back up, I ran the emergency section through the Abandoned Mine Lands program, which is part of mines and minerals, which was a part of the Department of Natural Resources so you have this long name no one remembers. What happens is people have a problem they usually call police or the fire department, so one of the first things that I did when 8  we started creating this program was we sent letters to every city and to the mayors as well as the police department saying, here we are, this is who we are um you can reach us at this number if these kind of problems come up. So that was one thing that was done. We also worked with a State agency that at the time was called, uh Illinois Emergency Service Disaster Agency. And we let them know, gave them our personal information so if there was any kind of ah mine problem out they would know to call us. Typically, people contacted either the fire or police department when they first realized they were having major damage to their home. They in turn would call the disaster agency which would get a hold of us um some people were savvy enough at that time to remember our agency and call us directly because they saw a newspaper article a mine problem or our agency, um not like today's world where we are on the Internet and you simply type in the word subsidence who do I contact. Overall I think the process worked well and like I said we had a mission and that mission was we would respond to any complaint within 24 hours and if we had to work the night though to solve that problem we would and, and we did do that. JM: So a call would come in and you'd get into the car and head out to wherever it was in southern Illinois? BG: One of the things we did right when phone calls came in we would keep very copious notes, as well as taking notes when we got there. So we learned to ask questions from people and get a better sense of how serious a problem was and could better prepare ourselves in making sure we had what we needed to make a thorough inspection. Um yeah every once in a while you get fooled, some people, will understate the problem and when you walk onto their property you say holy smokes you know [laughs] this is crazy [laughs] but uh, uh learned to conduct a better phone interview so when they called in you ask what is the problem, and have them explain what they see. We would also ask them about details of how their house was built again so that we have a better idea of what of problem we were getting into. And then we would go make an inspection. Now mine information back then was hard to get to, the maps themselves where stored on microfiche and we had only one microfiche reader which was in Springfield and it took a long time to get that kind of information. Copies of maps would arrive at our office a week or so later by U.S. mail. So one of the things we did right I think in the AML program was we always assumed that it was undermined and when we would go to a site it was going to be a mine-related problem that we would have to deal with. And then we would go there with the idea we were gonna prove ourselves wrong. You know we’re a safety program so we, we wanted to make sure uh we did everything right and that we were prove to ourselves that we were doing things right. So we, we spent a lot of time studying the mechanics of subsidence so we know what mine subsidence damages look like and how the house is positioned relative to the ground movements and from that information we can pretty much tell how severe damages were likely to become, so that's how we made our basis on whether it's an emergency or not an emergency. Programmatically, if it's not an emergency it’s strictly an insurance problem we continue to survey damages to make sure that we’re not wrong in our assessment. By surveying, I mean we're taking actual elevation measurements on the house and on the ground and what we’ve learned is that as the ground moves so does the structure. It's, it's almost one to one um, um again we can talk more on that if that becomes a point of interest um but I know that’s kinda getting into the weeds [laughs]. JM: No that's okay, uh I mean just big picture, what was, you already touched on this a little bit, but what was your relationship with the insurance companies like? BG: Early on I sat in on some of the technical talks that were going on behind the scenes that helped 9  established insurance policy. Now most of that technical work that helped shape and establish the subsidence insurance law was being done by my boss Paul DuMontelle at the geological survey. Later in my job with the AML, I was asked to testify on a couple Senate committee hearings where I would answer technical and programmatic questions about subsidence to the legislature so they could change or alter parts of the law uh for the insurance law. When the insurance law was first started there wasn't any actuarial data so there were a lot of questions such as, how does an insurance group afford this? What rates do they charge? How many homes are being damaged and what are typical repair costs? And so the State of Illinois established a pool that I think was something like three million dollars if I remember correctly and that was a pool of money that legislatures put out there saying, okay the insurance industry you’re going to charge such-and-such rate uh you can collect against this pool to pay your claims. And if need be we can adjust the insurance rates or the pool to keep you solid until we can get the data um the idea was that this would last for a few years the insurance industry would uh pay back that money that they borrowed from that pool and that pool would be dissolved and it was. So not it's strictly uh a fee- based you know rate structure. Um the insurance coverage at the time was limited to fifty thousand dollars that was the maximum you could get up to the value of the home and there was a deductible of, of, of uh not to exceed 2 percent of the loss or five hundred dollars, okay. Well with today's extremely large homes that coverage now is up to $750,000 is available but again it's tied to the value of your home so if your house is $100,000 home and it’s a total loss the most you could collect would be $100,000. I do know my recommendation to people would be uh to have replacement value on insurance uh because subsidence can last a long time and inflation is part of it so uh if you had $100,000 coverage on a $100,000 home it might cost you $125,000 to replace that home by the time repairs could safely be made. The end result being that you have inadequate coverage at that point in time. So for that reason, having replacement insurance covers the entire cost of repair and that would be my advice for most people I think. (32:20) JM: Um, I guess what I would like to talk about if we could is just some memorable cases of mine subsidence here in Madison County. Uh if any that you specifically remember, I know one that I had noted just in going through some notes was uh I believe there was an Illinois State police district headquarters that had a major issue or had to be abandoned? BG: Yeah, uh that was one of the earliest, I think that was our first., When Illinois took over the emergency program from the federal government in ‘84, um and assumed full responsibility of the program, that was our first emergency case I believe. And uh the Illinois State Police located in Maryville and also the Department of Transportation facility was right next door to it uh to the south. Both buildings started having subsidence problems now what made this case somewhat unique is that uh it was a district headquarters and what that meant was all the police communication for eleven counties came through the Maryville state police building’s 350 foot tower receiver/transmitter that was located on the edge of the subsidence event and um, uh subsidence events can expand outwards so that was a major concern because if that tower went down the guy-wire supports would slice through the building and, you know, kill people as well as knocking out communication for eleven counties. The building itself was kind of small for the State Policy needs and they were thinking about expanding the building by building additions when the subsidence occurred. So what you had take place there was kind of a perfect storm. They needed more space for their existing operations and room to grow into. When subsidence started causing problems, they couldn't make repair, and they couldn't go through with plans for the addition, and they had the concerns with the tower and possible loss of communication. So the reason why the state 10  moved the State Police from that facility wasn’t so much that the building was going to collapse and kill everybody other than like I mentioned the guy-wire was, that was a concern but rather due to expediency and cutting their losses. Um that day of investigation was a memorable one. They held a big press conference at the facility and I’ve never saw such a sight again. A couple of our guys were on top of the roof [laughs] making inspections and before you know it, there was a group photo with all these dignitaries up on a roof which is pretty funny I thought, I’m sitting down there on the ground snickering but anyhow it was kind of fun. (34:42) JM: Uh another one I noted was the uh the Dorris School in Collinville... BG: I forgot about that one... JM: Yeah BG: That, that was a very important case. Um like you said Dorris Elementary School in Collinsville started subsiding when the school was closed for I think it was Easter vacation and they left there Friday everything was fine and they came back and they noticed that there was damages occurring to the building on a Monday morning. JM: What kind of damages, do you know? BG: Uh, cracks were forming in the brick work and in the floors, doors were sticking and in general things looked anomalous to them. We got a call asking us to take a look at it. Sag- type subsidence is a bowl-shaped depression that’s gonna be something on the order of 350 to 500 feet in diameter in most instances and as you go from the outer edges to the center you get more and more dropping that takes place. So it will drop roughly one-third the coal seam thickness in this case the coal seam was a little over six feet so we’re expecting two feet of subsidence. The school was a T-shaped building and the center of that sag was where the T meets, okay? So you have this building that’s kind of folding in on itself and taking that shape of the ground. Um as a result of that, the one-story portion of the building was being thrust into the gymnasium which is multiple-story high and it's a concrete block wall and so collapse of the gym was within the realm of possibility. The school district now has, I think 600 kids in the school if I remember correctly and there, you know there's a lot of concern with the parents as you would imagine, cause you walk in there and you see these large cracks and things are actively moving uh and they’re very concerned about it, well so are we [laughs] uh and so we, we were addressing the problems as they popped up. Uh part of what we learned to do was, like I said, anticipate how the ground’s gonna move, we anticipate the kind of structural damage that will take place and then we, we concentrate our thoughts and efforts there to keep, keep it safe. So part, part of the question we had there was how do you assure the public that we’re keeping their kids safe, so we had a lot of public meetings to keep them well informed and to answer their questions and concerns. At the same time we were trying to keep up with the technical aspects of what we had to do to keep parts of the building from collapsing and then you had the incidental things which you can't rule out make everything entirely safe that would be, you know, ceiling tile that maybe would come down, or since the building is used by the public, high heels become a trip hazard if you get a crack in the floor, just those kinds of issues that you have to worry about. But uh to make a long story short the school district wanted to know, do they need to evacuate the building, and they were making plans that if they had to, to move the kids out to other schools but they wanted to try to 11  make it through the year if they could. And that was where we learned to predict how much subsidence is going to take place over a certain time period and uh that, that was one of the things we developed that was unique to anywhere else in the, in the country and uh we’re pretty good at that we, we can tell you how much subsidence will take place um and where you are in that subsidence curve in terms of time settlement. And, uh, we used it to, to our great advantage in that case. They did make it the school year through as our calculations predicted, no one got hurt, we did do emergency work, we had to replace certain wall segments, uh we put bracings in we, we worked with their engineer on various issues. You know part of any problem there is that of establishing credibility. At that time period you know there was a perception that you can't just trust the state, so they bring in, and we recommended that they bring in their own engineering people to look at it uh because we didn’t design that building so you have a lot of forensic engineering going on. When you have to work with people who are not used to subsidence and who are engineers, there's a learning curve for them and so you get to kind of work with them, teach them and give your experience and uh there's a period of trust building uh that takes place that's, what I find is an interesting dynamic uh hard to put into words but it is interesting nonetheless to me. (38:53) JM: Were there uh other cases specific to Madison County or kind of the Metro-East region that really stand out to you and you reflect back on that time with the uh Illinois? BG: Yeah there's two more cases I maybe could bring up that I think would be interesting. I'll go with the shaft first, um the Madison County number 4 mine which was called the Thermal Mine, uh it was, it was a initially a Donk Brothers mine which was a major producer in Madison County. Um, the shaft that they had was a rectangle in shape, uh the shaft it was 24 feet by 16 feet wide and when the mine was abandoned it became a foundry. Or a foundry was placed on there and they had a night watchman and this vertical shaft is 220 feet deep I just gave you the plan dimensions of it. He had a piece of plywood laying across that opening, and the shaft itself was enclosed by a little building in which he stayed. And he had a refrigerator um a TV set, a cot that he slept on at night, all of that on that piece of plywood. Nothing between him and, and down below uh when we were notified of that [laughs] we couldn't believe it but uh, uh Keller’s since then bought the property so uh they have a lot of heavy equipment and, and machinery that they use to make pre-stressed concrete. And so bottom line, we filled the shaft, using AML funds. We filled the shaft from mine level with rock up to uh about 30 feet and we put a large concrete plug in there by filling the remainder with concrete. To seal it off so that they could carry equipment on there. Um I, I’ll come back to this later on because it is not Madison County specific, but there are mine gasses that are a big problem that we come across that maybe something worth discussing. Um, so that was kind of neat, it was just huge and it’s just the circumstances of being local and, and somebody living that way over it was pretty remarkable at the time. Um the other case I wanted to bring up was in 1926 in the Edwardsville Glen Carbon area. Madison County had what a was tuberculosis sanitarium, it was built in 1926 and it uh was open for two weeks when it started having subsidence problems and if you look in the literature and read on it, it’s fascinating in that, you know the coal company was blaming the county for the construction of a heavy building that was causing damage to their mine. In a countersuit the county was saying, hey you are damaging our new building, to the point they moved all the patients out of that building because it was getting so heavily damaged. They borrowed tents from the navy from out of Chicago and the people lived in the tents at least two or three years, um and when you read some of the doctors reports, well you know they’re doing great, you know, they’re even more robust than they were in, in the sanitarium uh but what was neat about that place is they hired an architect out, out of the University of Illinois to come and help them with some designs and 12  they got a contractor out of Alton and what they did as a solution was they cut out pockets within the foundation wall and they put in these wood screw jacks, eighteen hundred of them and they severed the foundation from the superstructure and then they tightened these eighteen hundred jacks up and they leveled the building, raised it leveled it off the foundation, so as the ground would continue to drop they simply increased the height of the individual jacks so that the damage to the superstructure was minimized and it will, like I said, was in the place for a couple, 2 or 3 years I. I was unable to find out when they went back and made the actual repair. But I was able to secure some of the plans that they had and some of the damage measurements and I came across them again serendipitously and, all that information is now at the Madison County History Museum and you can take a look at and study them. After awhile, they put it back down and fixed the foundation back up and it was of course used as a sanitarium for a number of years and then it became the Madison County nursing home and health facility I believe which was abandoned circa 2000. I did go back in 1996 while it was still being used and I got permission, to survey the floor in the basement and I do know for a fact that it dropped 1.3 feet across the length of that structure so the North end of the building dropped 1.3 relative to its south side which was the solarium, sun room for the patients. It had lots of windows to open up for fresh air and sunshine. I spent a lot of time just observing and making careful inspection of all the floors and walls within the building. It was a three-story building, made of brick, and I looked to find any of the repairs they made. I wanted to know, did subsidence reactivate and cause more damages after building repair or after later additions? You know, one of the questions we, we still haven't resolved is, is that when subsidence occurs we believe it comes to completion. From a physics point of view I can make an argument that unless it, the mine, pancakes it could reactive sometime in the future, I don't know for sure if or when but it could. But that was one of the things that I wanted to find out. Here was one instance where we knew when subsidence took place, we basically knew when they made the repair and we had roughly 90 years of lapse and we didn't see any re-triggering of subsidence. When they tore that sanitarium down in order to build the Dierbergs shopping mall complex now apparently the screw jacks were left in place when they made repairs and they, they had faced over the foundation with a concrete mix. And I wish I could get, could have grabbed one of those screw jacks when they tore it down because that was just a neat case. (45:00) JM: Interesting, so fairly recently just to kind of touch on some other stuff but just to wrap up your time with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and Abandoned Mine Lands, you then, you have retired from there fairly recently, correct? BG: Yes, I retired in June of 2016. JM: Okay. Was that, what prompted that, was it just time or things changed? BG: There was a number of reasons for it. I, I think part of the reason for retiring was that the goals and objectives that I wanted to accomplish I, I think I accomplished those. The Mine mapping was a major goal, protection of that program and making mine maps publicly available in the future was something that was very near and dear to me. I wanted to get that through the big hurdles in terms of being able to build the AML program and, and, and innovate things I was kind of running out of ideas and so my job became more maintenance, now I still, I still like my job, I love my job, but an opportunity came up to get new experiences and new perspectives and so I, I jumped on the opportunity and took the federal position and so that was one of the reasons that I was looking for, for new challenges. Also I had hired a 13  couple of people that were in place and are just really good and capable people and it’s time for them to kind of grow and to, to take on and, and maybe take the AML Emergency Program to whole new and better direction and, and these are capable people so it worked out well. JM: When you think about the state of Illinois's handling of these issues versus other states, I am just wondering what stands out to you? Were you in contact with you know other equivalent agencies in other states that have a lot of mining in them or...? BG: Yeah, I always made contact, there's a group, Abandoned Mine Lands Association that meets annually and the whole idea is to share techniques in abating subsidence or any kind of mine problem and reclamation problems and, and it’s where everybody gets together and, and, and discusses and cusses all the ideas. And that's always a good thing to go to. We did things in Illinois a lot different than anywhere else, like I said, we took a science-based approach and, and tried to use that to our advantage. The other states treat the symptoms and in my position as a fed with AML and Regulatory program oversight responsibilities some of the things I see, I question. I wonder about the logic being used particularly in instances where you have an abnormally high rate of failure. What I find frustrating, is they have absolutely no idea why the remediation failed and steps are not taken to figure out why. Instead they just keep going back in and, and top dressing whatever the issues may be. I look at it somewhat differently and my perspective is the Abandoned Mine Lands program is a sunset program. What that means is, it is designed by Congress that after the certain amount of time the program simply shuts down and they don't fund it unless of course they decide to extend funding for AML reclamation. And they have extended it several times, originally it was to run through, oh boy, I shouldn't even guess those numbers, but several times, but anyways most recent one was done in 2006 and it will, it will end in 2021 unless it’s carried through by Congress again. So what that means is, if you, if you do not abate the problem totally and completely then when the problem redevelops again in the future there won't be a mechanism in place to take care of that issue. So what have you gained? In my mind, in such instances you’ve wasted money or you achieved a slight temporary reprieve at best. Equally important, is, say for instance, it’s a shaft and you fill it with material and it, and it fails in the future, well someone’s going to be building over there potentially and they’re going to be in a, a world of hurt real quick and that's why the AML programs exist today. And so it doesn't make sense not to solve the problem totally. If you can't then you need to take steps to ensure that that property is well known and what the limitations are so that people who get it can, can work around it. But, it's like an earthquake engineering studies, it's always gonna get better and better as long as you have a, a vehicle in place to carry it going forward, if that makes sense. (49:29) JM: We touched on the relationship with insurance companies but did you have any relationship with the mining companies? BG: Indirectly JM: I know in many cases you are dealing with companies that are long defunct but in other places probably with some active mining BG: Right, yeah, like I said, the Abandoned Mine Lands program, was designed to take care of all the problems associated with mining that took place prior to 1977. So it was after that date modern mines would be in place, and the mining companies would operate under the laws established under the Surface 14  Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). In Illinois, it is the Department of Mines and Minerals that have regulatory authority and they issue mine permits and, and make certain that laws governing mining established under SMCRA are followed. So the coal company is on the hook for post mining reclamation and any problems that should pop up. But yes there’s a number of instances where subsidence took place and they the coal companies would call us and ask us for, for help and/or our perspective, put it that way. One time there was subsidence affecting a commercial chicken coop [laughs]. The mine also had overhead coal conveyor systems being impacted that they wanted us to look at. But if you have ever been under a commercial chicken farm structure that's subsiding and looking up at the structural various structural elements to see how they are being affected by subsidence, it’s not a pleasant place to be [laughs]. Hard hats don’t do it [laughs]. I am sorry I got sidetracked. JM: [laughs] No that's fine, and I know you have only been there for a little bit but tell me a little bit about your current position with the feds. BG: My current position, I’m an, AML (Abandoned Mined Lands) and a Regulatory Program Specialist. Part of my responsibilities is that I oversee the states’ handling of the mining laws governing active mines, and are they making the coal companies doing the post mining reclamation work that they're supposed to be doing? We provide evaluation of the overall program and try to help them improve areas of weaknesses, if there is a limitation in the laws that needs to be changed then we would make those adjustments but mostly it’s just an oversight to make sure the public and the environment is protected and that the regulatory authority, the state, are doing their job. We also evaluate their Abandoned Mine Land program, that they are using the monies efficiently so we look at the on the ground reclamation that is being done and make an assessment as to whether the grant awards and reclamation that is taking place are appropriate. There are a lot of legal issues that pop up from time to time that OSMRE has to deal with. I am sure you have seen in the news by now where Peabody is getting ready to come out of bankruptcy and part of what was is being done in post mining reclamation by some of the major coal companies has guaranteed funding in case of default, called self-bonding and they are allowed to use the company’s assets as a means of providing surety that the area will be reclaimed to standards established under SMCRA. We (OSMRE), we’ve spent an inordinate amount of time on these kinds of cases right now trying to establish better policy and to make certain that the law and intent of the law is being upheld during the bankruptcy transition and that complete reclamation of mined lands is accomplished. If not, you have environmental groups that are ready to bring legal suit on one side, State Regulatory programs ready to protect their legal interests and the coal company has yet another legal and programmatic opinion. Very interesting perspectives and challenges that can be gleaned from the place I am currently observing from. JM: Are you willing to share any of those or would you prefer not to? BG: I can share [pause] I think I best not at this point and time since, since it’s an emerging issue. But I think what I can say is that the criticisms that were leveled against self- bonding, I understand what they’re saying and some of their perspectives. But I can also say that as the three major coal companies have gone into bankruptcy and emerged all of them have replaced their self-bonds with surety bonds, meaning go to commercial bonding capability. So the system did work and it did not fail. I wasn't sure if it was going to work for a while, but it did work and in today's corporate world I don't know if those companies that are providing surety bonds, what keeps them from toppling, you know you had Lehman 15  Brother go down, so if you’re depending on the companies that on paper are solvent and guaranteeing that there will be sufficient money to accomplish complete reclamation, if they go down where's your recourse? With self-bonding, the coal companies that want to continue mining in the United States they would have to make good on reclaiming mined lands otherwise they wouldn’t be allowed to continue mining. Now, who knows? You know, coal companies are now off the hook, because they, they are following the laws and they bought the insurance to guarantee that reclamation takes place and then what happens if they the insurance companies potentially go bad, so I don't know if there are any answers there, other than what we had in place worked. (53:57) JM: So, maybe shifting gears a little bit to just thinking more broadly about coal mining in Madison County and I know, you know, the geology doesn't exactly match up to the county boundaries, there's obviously some overlap, but what were what were the basic types of coal mining that happened in Madison County? BG: Good question. First on the geology aspect of it, Illinois is a structural basin, a bowl-shaped basin and that the southeast part of the state is the center and deepest part of that basin. The outer edges are closer to the surface, so the coal mines here in Madison County are near the outer edge of the Illinois basin. If you go along Route 157 down around Caseyville you can actually see the coal exposed in, in, in the bluff there. If you go towards Troy, Illinois, the coal is 350 feet below ground surface so it steepens fairly quickly across Madison County. Most of the mining took place where coal is for the most part shallow and easy to get to. When the coal, was very shallow, let’s say either exposed or say 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 feet deep in the early days they could use a shovel to scrape off the dirt and mine the coal. There was only one mine in, in Madison County that really did that and that was up in the Moro area and operated from like 1930 to 1935. Almost all the coal mining in Madison County was underground mining, which means they’d either started mining at locations where coal was exposed or they sunk a shaft to get to that coal reserve. Then they would mine the coal and leave some coal behind as support., For those listening to this interview, the coal seam is basically a layer, think of a stack of pancakes, and one of that pancakes is coal seam, and when they come in from the surface they will either sink a shaft that’s vertical opening that taps into the coal and then work their way outwards if it's deep, or if it's shallow they can “drift” into it by digging a shaft on a shallow angle if the coal is below surface. But anyhow once they get to the coal seam they mine the coal and in Madison they did what is called room- and-pillar mining and all that is, is that they would make a cut, remove the coal, and that leaves a void called the room and the coal remnants in place are called pillars and so you end up with a checker-board type pattern overall. Now in the early days that mining pattern was very irregular, the geometries of the coal pillars were different size shapes and they just kinda went willy nilly all over the place and it really wasted a lot of the coal reserve. But that tended to be smaller mines. Larger coal companies came in you had people coming in from different countries and they would bring their experiences in and they would start mining the coal and if they had developed problems in the mine, by that I mean stability problems, if they started having subsidence taking place in the mine, what they were concerned about is a) maintain their air quality to whatever standard was law at that time, b) getting the coal out. In early mines, the coal was hauled in carts by mules. The mentality of the coal mine operators was to protect the mules at all cost. People to mine the coal they can always get, okay, so that was kind of the mentality in the early days. But room-and-pillar mining was what was how mining was done in Madison County. It became though the years, became much more mechanized and coal extraction more regular in geometries and so you get a little bit better recovery of the coal itself while achieving short term stability while coal is being 16  mined. JM: I know this might get fairly technical but so, so in laymen’s terms how does the room-and-pillar mining techniques that were used in Madison County affect the way subsidence has happened and how, like you said, the early days maybe 19th-century mining was pretty irregular, so how accurate are the maps that we have from that era? BG: You've asked a couple of good questions there [laughs], if I can get to that. The maps, I’ll take that first, the maps are actually, I think very good. I’ve spent a lot of time studying them. To make a mine map, they have what is called a “room book” and depending on the time period, at least once a year you have surveyors go underground, they would measure all the coal pillars in the room developments, and the entries and they would also survey them in. They would measure elevations and turn angles and write those down and take actual pillar measurements. Certainly pictorially they’re spot on. Now the question is, is, you know, are there errors in the measurements and how big is the error in those measurements? The biggest source of error would be when you turn an angle if you look at a survey equipment they’ll be graduated into little marks kind like that of a compass, for every distance and elevation measurement they would also write those angles down. Well the nearest you’re gonna get in measuring angles with old survey equipment is a half a degree of accuracy. Well if you are surveying over a distance of a mile or two and you make a number of turns that error could compound and, and so you’d be angularly off, okay? But having said that there are number of old mines that operated from 1900 to 1930 that I can verify using subsidence as well as the maps and that’s unbelievably accurate, I would say mines that were operating from, in the 1860 to 1880 time period they’re within 50 feet of being correct. And that's measured against a USGS topographic map which has an accuracy of, that says, everything that’s shown on the map will be within 50 feet, plus or minus, for 92 percent of the recognizable points on the map. So when you make that precision comparison and you think about how they did it and, and to do that underground it's you know it’s pretty remarkable. And for the more modern mines in room-and-pillar mines, your accuracy is going to fall to, to say maybe 6 feet or so from being correct. If it's a long wall mine where it's highly mechanized, they’re within inches, so it depends on type of mining but in Madison County there is no longwall mining it's only early room and pillar mining. (1:00:00) JM: There, there was a debate about potentially longwall mining in Madison County, where there not in the 90s or so I believe? BG: Yeah there was, there was um, I am trying to think of the name of the small community to the East and North of us here, there were looking at bringing some longwall mining there and in many respects it’s a good idea in that you have, you recover a coal resource completely so as to your use your energy source completely so you are not wasting half the coal like you do in room and pillar mining. With longwall mining you have subsidence that’s immediate and you have a coal company that is solvent to take care and address those problems. So in terms of making repair to the surface or preventing damages or, more importantly in my mind, maintaining the agricultural productivity I see that as a win-win situation in, in those kinds of instances. Now are there geologic conditions where that's a very bad idea? Yeah, absolutely, and, and that’s part of the mine planning process that’s in place. You know, the state makes those assessments when they receive the plan. Is this a good idea or not? So, again from my perspective I think the process works here in Illinois well. Now you can hear a lot of people argue just the opposite out there but I think if you peel it away it makes a great deal of sense to me. But you asked the 17  question earlier in terms of what is the mining geometry how does it impact subsidence from the old mines to the new mines? With the old mines you have irregular shaped pillars and spacing throughout the mine. And what we see there, like I said earlier, subsidence events that typically are on the order of 350 feet or thereabouts in diameter and what happens in the older mines is the weak areas will fail but there’s usually a large mass of coal that is left around the perimeter of the main extraction area called barrier pillars, that stops that subsidence event. With the modern mines, well let me back up again, I know this is a little bit into the weeds, but there is something, there is a critical dimension of subsidence that will form on the ground’s surface. When that critical dimension is achieve, that’s when you get the maximum amount subsidence settlement that can take place. If you increase that mined area to a larger plan dimension the amount of subsidence stays constant, so we’re saying if three feet of subsidence is going to take place it will be three feet of subsidence across the affected area forming a relatively flat bottom to an otherwise bowl shaped depression. What’s important, anything located in this flat bottom the surface sinks uniformly downwards and the structures that are in this area of the sag aren’t going to be damaged as much as they will at that critical dimension where you've got tension and compression as well as settlement that takes place. And so that is one key component in the modern mines with the regular coal pillars, your subsidence events now can get extremely large, I've seen cases where they’re fifteen hundred feet in diameter, you know just very, very large subsidence’s. Now on the outer edges with tension is the pulling apart, if you will, that’s where you see the most of the damage is concentrating, the flat bottom that results as a result of that big, large area there’ll be some damages to the houses that will be tend to be lesser than, than what would occur under a critical subsidence event. JM: Interesting. Was there anything unique or different about Madison County versus other parts of the state? BG: Well, yeah it, it again it's another instance of happenstance geologically and geographically.. Geologically, Madison County is located on the outer edge of the bowl shaped Illinois basin, making the coal shallow and provided early, easy access to the coal seam. But also being located to near St. Louis we were supplying the energy needs to St. Louis, um mining in Belleville came in about the same time or perhaps a little later, but they also were a big part of supplying coal to St. Louis. One of the first roads that were built and railroads constructed in Madison County was to bring coal from Madison County to St. Louis. The energy that's given off by coal is roughly two and a half times what you can get from wood which was an important energy source at the time. Forests being depleted for housing as well as energy needs and cooking, so it didn't take much imagination to figure that coal was the way to go. One the other things I find kind of interesting about past mining in Madison County, is that there were ten mines that produced three fourths of the coal produced in Madison County. What makes it interesting to me is that there were over 110 mines that have operated in Madison County but ten, ten individual mines provided that much coal. If you talked about the major companies in Madison County, the Donk Brothers or the Lumaghis would be part of that conversation, another of the big producers was the Madison Coal Company and so was the Mt. Olive and Staunton Coal Mines, um they were the big players. Those four companies provided 81% of the coal in Madison County. JM: Were the other mines then sort of smaller independent operations, you said of those other... BG: Much smaller independent mines, and the extent of mining in terms of area mined and the tonnage of coal was altogether smaller. Some of them were ma and pa mines that mined coal by just drifting into 18  the side of the hill, others were local companies supplying coal for local coal needs. You know Edwardsville needed coal too for home heat and cooking. You look across at my neighbor you can see that they have a coal chute in the house, the house was built in the ‘20s and they used coal to heat their home. The numbers just in case you are interested in them, the longest operating mine was the New Staunton Coal Company and it became later the Livingston and Mt. Olive Mine. It operated for 59 years. The average years of operation for any mine was roughly 16 years in, in Madison County. Oh, I had one more interesting thing that I thought, to me was interesting, um in Edwardsville there’s a nature center and on the north side of that nature center along the railroad track you’ll look and see there’s a brick house, that house was owned by a guy named Henry Ritter. He opened the first mine in Edwardsville, one of the earliest mines in Madison County in 1855. Uh, like I said, it is right along the railroad track and the shaft to the mine started opening and we got a phone call from the railroad company saying we have a big hole by the railroad track and those trains go through that stretch of track at 60 miles an hour. Sure enough we get there to make an inspection and there's a hole forming and some of the ballast for the railroad track is slipping into this hole. We excavated some of the collapsed fill materials from the sides and base of the hole, after having closed the tracks for train use, and what we found was a 12-sided shaft (dodecahedron) that was 25 feet in diameter. The sides of the shafts were made of, tongue and groove wood planks held together by wooden dowels. Now if you think about it this was quite an accomplishment, the shaft was hand dug, it was 25 feet in diameter with coal’s 95 feet below ground surface, the effort that went in to doing that was remarkable and at that time there was uncertainty whether or not they would even hit coal uh they just didn't have a good idea how extensive coal was or at what depths, so part of what went into the early mining to me is fascinating and the ingenuity that went into some of these things. Um, but that was kind of a cool local flavor for me. In Madison County, the last mine in operation was in 1964 and that was the Livingston Mt. Olive Coal I talked about earlier. If you, if you make a scatter plot graph showing the year a mine opened on the X-axis and the duration of mining in years on the Y-axis, here I will show you, you can see it [holding up graph]. And if you look, prior to 1920, now I know this is small, but prior to 1920 there is quite a few mines that operated for a long time, but after 1920 there were fewer mines operating for shorter duration. I think the data plot reflects a number of things. Um you had the Great Depression that brought some of the market down, the steel industry had strikes so coal was not in as much demand, coal is being mined for two things mostly, steel production and for energy needs and that energy need was also tied to the railroad industry, okay? The railroads were wood-burning stove and they went from wood to coal cause the energy efficiency there, but it was still steam-based. Around 1940 the trains started going to diesel and to electric, so uh you lost the need for coal there. And then, like I said, the U.S. steel industry is in decline and if you look at the power plants today, they’re starting to close down, so coal mining isn't going to come back to the way it was, you know, it will always be important for a while but not to the degree that it was and most likely will not stage a come back in Madison County. JM: Yeah I was gonna, I was gonna ask that because there obviously has been a lot of rhetoric ah, over the past year or so especially, tied in with the 2016 presidential election, about a so-called war on coal and I know this a little afield from you expertise but I mean having been part of the, or related to the industry, especially the legacies of the industry, for a long time, uh did you have any thoughts on that or? BG: I can name a couple, some of them I have to steered clear from, but in terms of employment in the coal mines, my intuition is that's not going to come back to the numbers that they had, if you look at the early days of mining in Illinois there are over 3,000 miners, Or I'm sorry, 3 million miners, coal miners 19  and now we're at 9,000 or thereabouts. A lot of that is the direct result of mechanization, going from intensive hand labor extraction of coal to coal removal by machines. We have machines now that can be programmed by one person and it takes out more coal than could ever be produced before. Um so the number of jobs even if we increased coal production significantly you’re not going to get back to those glory days where many people worked in a mine. The way I see it, jobs in coal mining will only become lesser as, as I think, I think the trend will be towards underground longwall mining which is highly mechanized. I think when it comes to mining coal this trend will continue to take place, and like I said that’s a computer job anymore and the amount of coal that can be mined in longwall mines is phenomenal. So I see that as being what may happen, but again you have to create the demand coal and right now we’re in a time period where natural gas is abundant and cheaper and that certainly has some environmental a benefits maybe more so than coal. I mean you can do some of the same things with coal but it is more costly to accomplish, so from an economic point of view I don't, I don't see that changing, I really don't. Uh if we can really concentrate on other non-carbon-based fuels, I'm talking wind, solar, whatever, I think that will become more and more important and as renewable energy becomes more important and the industries become more capable in you know supplying your energy and that will happen, that will put the final nail into the coffin and be the demise of the coal industry I think. JM: Yeah, although in an interesting way your own career is a, I think a reminder that we’ll still live with the legacies of, you know the coal mining era even if it has ended at some point in the future [laughing]. BG: Yeah, uh coal mine subsidence in particular if you look at that, that's gonna be here for a long, long, long, time. I mean we are talking centuries. Uh we have mines that are, like I said, mined in the 1800s that are having subsidence today, uh and I know from drilling operations and from mapping subsidence events, I know a large part of the mine is still up and so it, it will fail the question is, is when. Um and the answer to that question, we’ll never find the answer to it, I think. Um but yeah, subsidence is one problem that’s here to stay. I talked a little bit earlier about some of the gasses that are in the mines, that's another potential problem uh we've had some people drilling holes to install geothermal heat for their homes, they inadvertently drilled into a mine that they didn't know was there and methane gas escaped from the mine through the drill hole only to be trapped near surface by frozen ground. The methane gas flowed into buried utilities and eventually flooded throughout the entire neighborhood and it became an emergency project, we were called at three o’clock in the morning, middle of the winter, but it was certainly an interesting case. We had a shaft in uh Benton, Illinois, and this particular mine was filled with methane gas, at extremely high pressure, it had the energy equivalent of Hiroshima, if it were to be suddenly released due to shaft collapse, there would have been major problems, that's when I got my grey hair and I quit smoking at age 26. [Laughs] Bottom line is there are some real issues that can potentially happen out there that we as a state will have to deal with. JM: Looking back, how well do you think Madison County and southwestern Illinois in general has deal, has dealt with mine subsidence? BG: Early on I would say poorly. It’s getting better, we the Department of Mines and Minerals, in 1986 prepared document that we called “A land use guide to coal mining” to give guidance to communities for land use development over coal mines so that they could design future land use developments differently to either accommodate or avoid the problems associated with mining, and um not many cities took that up from a planning perspective. Maybe it was too cumbersome for them. I, I there is a lot of forces that go 20  in, uh in Illinois in particular there seems to be a mentality that this is my land and I can do what I want to do with it, or develop it however I want to and there's great resistance to any kind of planning that a city would put into place. I went to Springfield, Illinois, to talk to their city engineer and say hey here's some problems that we’re seeing that you need to think about, and they said Bob we tried to have developers plant a tree and they fought us tooth and nail, so there’s a lot of tension out there that, you know, we have to overcome but having just said that it's getting much better what I find happening now is there’s more of an awareness that's taking place about the impacts of mining so we have engineering firms that are calling our agency and asking questions and getting some advice from us and I see that as a good, because the more engineering people put thought into the problem the better, like I alluded to earlier, legislation will get passed eventually that maybe will make things more, more sensible and, more appropriate development of the land. JM: Have any communities in Illinois incorporated these issues into like zoning or you said land use planning? BG: Fairview Heights is starting to look in that direction uh I was called and asked to go to them, and give a presentation to their, to their city council. I explained to them the kinds of problems they were likely to face and what steps could be done to minimize the future impact of mining on their community. I also spoke to a group of realtors there as well. And so from a city planning point of view I think there’s an interest there, they have a lot of malls that are, you know, developed over, over mines and I’m sure they’re very much concerned about what will eventually happen and the economic impact that it will have. JM: I guess related but are there, have there been any changes in say like building codes or construction technology that's responded to this or is that not really an issue? BG: Uh no there hasn't, to answer your question. There hasn’t been any changes in terms of structural design yet. There are things that can be done I think at low cost and that make sense and we put that out there in various publications, that just haven't been widely read or perceived as an important enough problem to spend the money necessary to incorporate in building design in order to minimize problems. I guess in order for it to be common place, something bad has to happen involving loss of life or great expense. But what I do see happening is that many more of the larger companies are being a little bit more proactive in their site developments. For instance, the Sam's Club, which is part of the Walmart chain, that was built in Glen Carbon, Goshen Road and Highway 159, they were proactive and they, they drilled that site and they filled the mine with a cemented backfill material, with the idea that they would prevent or keep subsidence from happening. So I do see that happening more and more and that is something that’s changed during my, my tenure. Early on in the ‘70s I mentioned that a U.S. Bureau of Mines backfilling project in Maryville, they used two types of material that they tried to pneumatically stow, meaning using air pressure to blow in fly ash, the idea is you take a lot of fly ash that has pozzolanic characteristics or in other words, cementitious properties. That if you blow it in mines it will take the moisture up and it will set up, you get rid of the waste and it provides some strength and stability to the mine. Well, they tried that and they basically have a dust cloud in most of the mine with a pile of flyash at the bottom of the injection hole is what they ended up with in, in that particular case. Then they tried pneumatically using air, compressed air to push coarse mine refuse into the mine, so now they've got little cones of debris at the bottom of the bore hole, so that wasn't effective. But what was learned from 21  doing these sorts of projects, and what's happening now is that you can mix sand and coal waste, such as flyash and that kind of stuff, and enough cement that you can pump it underground as a semi- fluid and/or paste and then you, you can do a good job filling up the mine. It will have strengths depending on your engineering design that will prevent subsidence or stop subsidence. That was one thing that we eventually did do, that we, I learned first-hand, when we, if I could jump back to my early days in the Abandoned Mine Lands when we were formulating the Emergency Program and how to respond to problems caused by coal mining, part of the decision was, we decided that we were going to treat the symptom versus trying to prevent subsidence. We've got over a million acres of land mined in Illinois. It costs about a million dollars per acre for backfilling, it was unproven technology at the time when we were starting the Emergency Program, so I decided we were going to provide bracing and direct structural support to severely damaged buildings and help people that way. We did however attempt to stop subsidence by backfilling the mine with cementitious material. We had a bridge in two thousand [pauses] nine, ten between Springfield and Champagne, Interstate 72, that bridge started to subside. We did go into that project with the intent of backfilling and stopping subsidence. However, we didn't know for sure that we could stop it because it wasn't proven yet, that it could be done. Even assuming subsidence can be stopped we didn't know if we could get enough grout in the ground quick enough to prevent collapse of the bridge. But to make a long story short we, were able to do it, we actually stopped the subsidence and we got the data to prove that we stopped it. And so, that was a situation where 800 foot bridge would likely have collapsed had we not been successful in our backfilling efforts. Besides the obvious safety implications, collapse of the bridge would have been economically very serious to the state cause it’s a major thoroughfare. JM: Have individual homeowners or individual people’s responses to subsidence changed over time or is it always sort of a constant, like you outlined before, you know, concern? BG: Yeah, in the early days people were very quiet about it and they wouldn't mention it, only a few spoke out. Now I think with the insurance being available people do speak out more, certain neighborhoods where there has been a number of, you know, subsidences having taken place, I am thinking of in Springfield in particular, they spoke out early but then people would drive by and, and gawk to see the damages and stuff, so people started being quiet just to maintain some peace within the community. But that's, that's the homeowners decision whether to make their subsidence damages public information. For the most part maybe people are becoming a little bit more aware of subsidence because of the people who speak out. As a result, we do get a number of phone calls asking whether their home is located over mine. We'll check into it or we will direct them where to find the coal maps online-, So, one big change is how easy it is today to determine whether your house is undermined as compared to what it was prior to the 2000.. All I can tell you is when I bought my house, you know, back in the old days you couldn't do that, and I didn't bother looking to see if I was over a mine until a little after the fact and, cause the chance of an individual having a problem is small. Look at your insurance premium compared to what you are paying for fire insurance, you’re more likely to have a fire then you are subsidence but if you do have a mine subsidence problem it’s no fun. JM: You'd mentioned the maps and I know that's another thing that you've worked on over the years, could you just share a little bit about that story, how that came about? BG: Yeah, when coal is mined they make maps showing the layout of coal remnants left in place for 22  support. A blueprint copy is made and that gets stored in the state archives or in the county court houses, that law came into being that require mine maps to be made, I want to say around 1910, so some of your earlier mines weren't done. Um, anyhow those maps were subsequently photographed, and stored on microfiche and you would print maps out on demand when people wanted to know if they were undermined or not, and it wasn't very easy and was time consuming. In the ‘70s, when computer technology started picking up, late ‘70s early ‘80s, and the microfiche reading machines were old and starting to breaking down, they were costly to repair, only one person can make the maps, the whole process with making maps using microfiche, it's just time consuming, and expensive to do it. The idea was to take those microfiche scan them in and put them on CDs, now you make them more available, you don't have to touch the blueprint maps which were crumbling and, and you know just through use and age, so you had a permanent archive on that. Well I was using the map collection stored on CD’s locating a subsidence case here in Madison County and I noticed that the map was incomplete, I knew the area was undermined but when I looked at the map you could not tell on the CD collection that it was undermined so that kind of scared me. So I went back to my boss and I had a great boss named Al Clayborne and I said this is what we've gotten for our scanning efforts, we have created another problem here, we need to go back to the original mine maps, scan them in and create the visual equivalent, so now that, that map can be reproduced and printed off on demand and you've protected the host source for a long time, and you make it more readily available by going online for downloading copies. And, and we did that and we had a contract with SIU Edwardsville geography department, Randy, Dr. Randy Pearson was the head person there and we went through and we scanned all the mine maps in our, our state archives. I applied for a grant from MSHA, Mine Safety Health Administration, they gave us $50,000 to go and try to find mine maps elsewhere, so I funneled that money to SIU and had students go to various libraries and, and historic societies and everywhere they possibly could looking for mine maps. Newspaper articles, notifying the public that we want mine maps, and to let borrow the maps they might have so scan them and add to the State’s mine map collection. And I also got lucky, I got access into Peabody Coal Company’s mine map collection. Now they’ve been in Illinois from the get go and they did a great deal mining in our State, and the maps they had are master (original) mines maps of course but they also collected maps from adjacent mines and had their maps on file as well, so that they could plan their developments and avoid hitting those other mines. They granted me access to their files graciously and I scanned all their maps in. We dropped everything to do that and that work was added onto our contract with SIU to do that. But where this went to is now that we have an image, the next step that we took was to geo-rectify it and what that means is, a scanned image of a mine map is nothing more than a series of dots you pick a point, say at the map corners, four corners, the coordinates of where that dot is located at in the real world, is assigned to that dot and it then mathematically assigns coordinate values to all other dots making up the image. So all those points now are measured in relative to each other, so what you have is, you have one layer which is a mine map which you can superimpose with Google maps or city maps or air photography, anything you want to. And so you represent it, how the mine is located relative to the ground surface. I spoke earlier how, you asked me how accurate the maps were, that's how I know they are accurate, because I can physically take a GPS device, go find a bore hole, or shaft, check it against what we did on the mine map. When subsidence takes place I told you before it grew to where there's a large mass of coal, and it would stop. You could find those, where the edge of the subsidence event is relative to the panel and, and by making the mine map see through and superimposing it on the air photography, so you can confirm, that a mine map is accurate. And then when we do our surveying of the event itself we, we have crisscross pattern survey monument points located on the ground that we 23  measure the change in elevation through time, the edges of the subsidence event will match up with the mine maps. So bottom line if the outer edge of the subsidence event matches the mine map that's how I, I know that a given mine map is accurate and that the mine map is being geo- rectified correctly. We've got to that point were the mine maps have been scanned and georectified, so now the next step is we’re going to make that information available online, and so that’s the next part of the contract that's being currently being done. Now I envision in the future that anybody can type in, uh like Google maps, type in an address, they could zoom in to see the actual mining beneath their property, I also envision tutorials on how to interpret mine maps. Having the information and making the correct decisions based on that information are two different things. So I, I think there needs to be a smart system in place that can help people make the right decisions that they are trying to solve at the time. So that's, that's kind of being developed and now that I am with the federal Office of Surface Mining, Mid-continent region, I am part of a team that oversees the mining in Missouri, Iowa, Indiana, Illinois, I will encourage the other States to make mine maps available, they'll be doing something similar probably. So that's one of my goals among others I have in my current position. JM: That's great. I guess the last question, specific question I had for you is just to reflect a little bit on, I mean having worked related to the industry now and dealt with the legacies of coal mining in the area for a long time, many decades, what are some of the legacies of coal mining that you see in southwestern Illinois, specifically in Madison County? BG: Many of the mines that were set up initially, the coal companies were developing lands that were considered you know out there in the boonies, you know, no one is ever going to be developing out there and through time our cities have grown outwards onto the mines and that's why we’re having a lot of the problems we are facing today. And as this continued growth takes place, the risk increases as a result of that proportionally, so the, the take away I see there is that we have a long term problem and I, I think that’s where land use planning can come in to be useful and that’s why I encourage cities to really look at it carefully, for instance I had mentioned subsidence, depending on the age of the mine it may be 350 feet in diameter some maybe as much as 1,000. If you decrease the density of development over mines so that when subsidence does take place you’re only impacting a few structures makes sense. Building important facilities, hospitals, schools, you know, if you have an emergency because of, of earthquake or tornado where do people go? You put them in schools. Now if your schools are over mines and they are subject to subsidence besides losing a lot of money in fixing school damage assuming it can be repaired, you also increase the risk potential of people being injured. So those simple things can be done, keeping buildings under two or three stories make sense to me. When you build a foundation have opposable windows so if you’re talking about a house, have opposable windows that way if you have subsidence you can slide beams, pick the house up and carry it that way and, and just limit the damage to the foundation. So there, you know there is a lot low cost, no cost things that can be implemented as part of a city development plan that I think should and could be done. I think knowing where all the coal mine shafts are at and taking that property totally off the market makes a great deal of sense to me. JM: Are there structures that have been built over shafts other than the shack you had mentioned? BG: Well, just here in Edwardsville, if you go to the Voge softball fields, you know the concession stand, that's built over the air shaft of the Henrietta Mine. The main shaft located on the left field foul line on the men's softball diamond near the outfield fence. If you go there and look carefully, you will see a 24  depression in the ground, that's where the shaft was. That shaft was filled in by the WPA back in the ‘40s. So, yes, to make a long story short [laughing], there is a lot, a lot of things around here, behind Market Basket there's the shaft is there for the Madison County #3 mine. So we’re building over and around and near these things and what we have as land use now won’t be the land use we have in the future. And we don't know what will be developed on them later. Like I said, gas potentially is a problem, collapse is a possibility, so these are things to avoid. JM: Is there a difference or has there been a difference between communities like those here in the Metro East where a) there is no active coal mining anymore and hasn't been for several decades and is now like you said kind of become part of the suburban metropolitan area versus those areas that still have some active coal mining or maybe more recently did and are more rural isolated kind of classic coal company towns? BG: In terms of being aware of mining? JM: In terms of aware of and just sort of attitudes towards some of these issues. BG: It depends on the individual, obviously, if you’re a coal miner particularly from Southern Illinois, you know, there’s a great deal of pride there, and it’s evident in their lifestyle and talking to them, but they tend to be more accepting of mine related problems. A person living in southern Illinois that is not a coal miner or who doesn’t have a family that were coal miners and they have a subsidence problem, their attitude is just like anyone else living in Madison County or in Springfield, Illinois, or anywhere else in the state. You know it’s why unplanned and uncontrolled urban development of mines is being allowed and until you hear loud and clear from many people we will continue to do so. So [laughs] that's what it is., The State will continue to hear people voice complaints saying “well why doesn't someone tell us, we are undermined and that our homes could be damaged”, well that's kind of the idea behind making the mine maps available on the internet and, and the driving force by having it geo- rectified is to tell people about it earlier and so that people can have access to that information and if, if we can do it responsibly, we can help them make good decisions and communities make good decisions. JM: Well that covers all the questions I had for you but is there any topics that you'd want to share that we haven't gotten to? BG: No I think, I have just been talking for so long that I don't know what I said anymore to tell you the truth, but overall, as being part of it going through time, and seeing some of the problems that can take place, as well as what's being done by the government to protect the citizens and environment, I am I guess proud and privileged to have been a part of it and, and more confident in the inherent goodness of, of institutions attempt to be or can be. I know right now we’re in a time period where the perception is that government can absolutely do nothing right, and that big business is going to take care of everything if government gets out of the way. But if you look at the cities and look at the old decayed structures that are still up, old foundries and factories left standing for others to clean-up, that's gonna continue to happen in the future. It wasn’t that long ago that there was little or no environmental regulations controlling the amount of pollution we could put into streams and the air and we had rivers catching on fire, smog so dense city street lights had to turned on during the day and acid raining destroying our lakes and forests. Because of government regulations there has been environmental improvements to the point, 25  that many of these issues are no longer remembered or are of concern. I also think, you know in the case of modern mining laws and the insurance law that was put into place, the abandoned mine lands programs put in place to repair the environmental damages caused by past coal mining activities are examples of government programs, that are being done responsibly, you have people doing their absolute best and trying to solve these complex problems. Whether the government employees end up doing the job as good as could be done, or should been done is open to argument, but I think it's more of, people having to learn on the fly in solving unknown problems while trying to do what's right according to the various laws that are in place, and that gives me, gives me hope and, and confidence, you know, that it's not all bad. Can it be improved? Sure. You know like anything else, the system can be improved. So how's that? My soap box [laughing]. JM: That's great. Did you have anything else you wanted to mention? BG: No I, I think, I think we’ve pretty much covered it I think. JM: Okay, well if there's nothing else, mostly I just wanted to wrap by saying thank you so much this has been fascinating and I really appreciate you sharing your thoughts and experiences with the Madison County, Madison Historical project. BG: I appreciate it and thank you for the opportunity. 26  
MadisonCounty;Beth Warnecke;1966;2018;Beth Warnecke 1966 - 2018    Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Beth Warnecke Oral History Interview Louis Thuet, Interviewer Glen Carbon, Illinois October 7, 2018 Louis Thuet (LT): The following was conducted with Beth Warnecke on behalf of the Madison Country uh Oral History Project as a part of the Madison Historical: Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County Illinois. The interview took place Sunday October, 7th 2018 in her house in Gl... in the city of Glen Carbon. The interview... the interviewer is Louis Thuet a student in the department of Historical Studies at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Uh...so to start where and when were you born? Beth Warnecke (BW): Ok I was born in um Treasure Island, an island off of San Francisco California. My dad was in the Navy and my mom and dad got married and they moved out there. And basically, right after they got married they found she was pregnant with me so I was born in the local naval hospital, out there. LT: Ok so since your dad was in the Navy and... in the Navy yeah? BW: Mm-hmm. LT: So since your dad was in the Navy when did your... was it because of his service that you guys moved here? Into Glen Carbon? BW: No, no. We stayed out there... he was in the Navy for quite a while before he got married, before I was born, and while we were out there... and I honestly don’t know what the catalyst was for this decision. But he came back to Madison County, he came back to Venice Illinois, to set up a law practice with his brother in Granite City. So I was only... I was not quite a year and half old... when we moved back, my brother was a few months old when we moved back. But he got out of the Navy at that point, full time Navy, and went into the Naval Reserves and we came back here, basically he just wanted to bring us back home to Madison County where all our Family was. Then he set up his buis... law practice back here. LT: So the naval reform is that how your dad... am I getting that right Naval Reform? Or what... BW: Reform? Naval... he was a United States Naval Officer. LT: And then you said he... he got out and joined... BW: He went into the Reserves... LT: Naval Reserves. 1  BW: Yeah, which means you’re not... you're not every day active duty Navy but you could train once a month wherever you are. Um my brother continued in his footsteps so Ed is in the Naval Reserves. LT: Ok that is my uh... so that was my mess up. Naval Reserves [Chuckles] BW: Yeah... yeah, no, no, so you can always be called into active duty. You have your monthly duties as assigned. That is what dad did. LT: So after the na... after you moved out here after your dad left the Navy. Uh your dad became a lawyer umm... growing up how much did you understand what your father did? BW: Umm... very much. So not only was he a lawyer he uh, he was, he had a partnership with Uncle Harry, I don’t know if you remember Uncle Harry, he had a partnership with Uncle Harry for a while. And then moved over and um started a new law firm with a man called Lance Callis and that is probably the years that I remember. I don’t remember when he partnered with Uncle Harry at all, ‘cause I was way too young. But while he was lawyer and I was growing up most of our... he worked constantly. He owned a business you understand what that is. He brought briefings home and worked constantly um but a lot of our social life... if we weren’t doing things with family we were doing things with his law partners and they entertained clients. They got real big into the railroad and were prosecutors for the railroad accidents. So he had his connections in Louisville Kentucky and I’m trying to think where the other man lived. Um a lot of our social times as kids going out revolved around his business. Because his, his... we either went out with his partner entertaining their clients or they hosted a lot of dinner, dad was very political too he was very big in the Democratic Party here in Madison County, and we had a lot of dinner parties at our house growing up too. So we were always surrounded by his business, it seemed like, and actually in high school and apart of college I worked for him which was very cool. And all of his... so he and lance were partners and they had several young lawyers in the firm. We would always do stuff with those young lawyers too we would go to their weddings, we got together at Christmas time with them. Fam... summertime barbeque or picnic were always politically centered or with other lawyers that he knew about, so he was very ingrained in his law world and the Democratic Party world and that is just how us kids grew up. If it wasn’t family-oriented, it was having to do with his business. We do all... we still keep in touch of all those people that we know from back then. Pretty cool. LT: Uh. ok that is actually ra... rather interesting, something I didn’t know. BW: Yeah... you’re gonna find out all kinds of stuff, you didn’t know. LT: Uh so what I...I...I...I...I. Aside from working with him in college what other impacts did your dad, in the lawyering field or in the Democratic arena... yeah arena, what what impact did it have on you? BW: Ummm. He was, I’m trying to figure out how to answer this, it’s not necessarily tied to him being a lawyer, it’s not tied to him being part of the Democratic Party. He was very well respected in this Community. I didn’t find out about this till years later, I always knew that he just was known wherever he went, and I’m a young kid naive not knowing why but we always had to stop and talk to people all the time. But he liked to donate quite a bit, and my brothers were in a Boy Scout troop, I don’t know if this troop was connected to our little catholic church at the time, but dad would do a lot of donations to the troop. And that impacted me, um it made me want to be, not necessarily financial donations to things that 2  surround me today, but I learnt how to be very involved in the community, if that makes sense, volunteer my time at the churches, um I guess church I should say church that I belong to. Um even growing up in high school I got into the student council, got into politics back then. I was in student council all four years in high school. I don’t remember ever one-time dad saying “Hey you had to do this.” I just saw him being so active in the community... I don’t know, I didn’t necessarily want to be like him but it made me want to take on that role of responsibility and helping guide our high school community, with student council. I continued it with college, I uh became a RA to help guide the housing association that I was in. So I guess just watching him be so active in the community with donations and people looking up to him for his opinions, um it just rubbed off on me to be more of a leader than a follower, if that makes sense. I, um still do that today in my art world, which we will get to later, but I guess his... I guess he very much did influence me... not with being outspoken but being aware of what was going on and just you know pushing up my sleeves and getting in elbow deep to help out in different venues and avenues that I’ve been in. Whether that be the church, whether it be something in the community, stuff I would do when my kids were in grade school, I was just on every advisory board, leadership board, there was and help run the fund raiser and I think that all trickled down to how dad was in the community when I was growing up. And actually until today I didn’t realize that I... that is probably why... pretty cool. [begins to cry] LT: You Ok? BW: Yeah... yeah I’m good... good memories.... good memories. [laugh] Y...Yeah you didn’t really...I’m always active and I’m always doing volunteering stuff and I’m very much in leadership roles, which we will get to, but it’s pretty cool you just made me realize it was from him. So thanks. [laugh] Ok onward buddy. LT: Uh.... [laughs] ok so um... So moving back a little bit to more of your childhood and uh... what was it like Glen Carbons in the ‘70s? BW: Ok so... LT: Because you were not old enough in the ‘60s to really have huge memories... BW: No LT: ...so the ‘70s and ‘80s. What was it like growing up in Glen Carbon? BW: Ok. Um. It was much quieter than it is now. It was a sleepy little, they call them bedroom communities, we were close enough to larger towns that we could get there. But... but Edwardsville/ Glen Carbon was just this tiny little area, it was perfect growing up, it was smaller than it was now. Not many businesses um... most of your social life revolved getting on your bike and going to hang with friends um... there was one bowling alley, we didn’t go to, there was one roller skating rink that we grew up with. Repeat the question? Where am I supposed be going with this? LT: [Laughs] Um... I just want to know what it was like growing up in Glen Carbon when you were a kid, maybe early teens. 3  BW: Well there wasn’t much to do. It was... it really was I guess like I said. SIU was not a big place to go, as a teenager. My teenagers now go out there now for entertainment. Um you basically went and hung out with your friends at someone's house. We didn’t have all the parks that we have today, there wasn’t a lot. We didn’t have the bike trails we have today, shopping was, back then shopping was not a thing to do as a teenager. Um I don’t know it was very relaxed, very hometown feel. You just you got together with your friends or you had a couple sets of friends, you had friends, I had school friends because I went to a catholic grade school and catholic high school, but you also had your neighborhood buddies that went to different school. Now my brothers might have different perspectives, two of them went to the public school here. Um so their neighborhood friends were the same as their high school friends, mine were not that. I don't know my mom stayed home which is kind of an anomaly now, we can’t, you don’t find that a whole lot. So we would just hang out at home, play with the dog, have friends over, like I said hop on your bike and go play kickball all day. It was just very quiet, sleepy little town. You drive through Glenn Carbon now it’s not, Glen Carbon/ Edwardsville is not the same town, at all I think we had one Kmart, one grocery store, um... one skating rink that we would go to and hang and then we play kick the can all night long because there was truly not a lot to do, and it was the coolest, funnest childhood growing up here. It seemed very country and rural back then because of the developments weren’t around. It took you fifteen minutes to drive into town, so you had to plan your trips. You couldn't just say “Hey mom I need some poster board for a project.” You planned your trips to the store, I don’t know. But growing up it was just very relaxed and very quiet around here. And a lot of it, they...Glen Carbon was very proud of their history back then. I remember my mom taking us to the library, a teeny tiny library full of donated books, but even in that small of setting they had one room set aside in this old building for Glen Carbon history, they were always proud of their history, with the mining, and I was always fascinated with the pictures. Um a lot of the names that I saw as a little girl you still have those names throughout the city today. Um and new people that move into the town probably don’t realize how old these names are, dating way back. I do remember trips like that, going to our little one room library, and, and even though we barely had space for the library they always had space for a history room that we would go in and go read around. Is that what you look for? Or not, is it? Point me on the right direction and I’ll start talking about that. LT: There really is no right directions, all what you remember and what you BW: Ok LT: uh and your perspective on things growing up. BW: Ok LT: Uh so you mentioned just getting on your bikes and hanging with your friends BW: Uh huh LT: and the one bowling alley and one like ice skating rink. Is that where you would normally go with your friends or was there somewhere else? BW: Normally during the day we would get on our bike, or we would walk, and we would go up to one of our friends, we lived in the subdivision and it was not all the way developed. So one day maybe we would go look, the subdivision was developing as we lived there. We would go look around all the new 4  homes being built, play on the big dirt piles. I mean we're talking simple childhood here, it was awesome. We play on the big dirt piles, we get tired of doing that we may go home and get a snack, get lunch, and then we head back out and there was a ton of neighborhood kids and we would play kickball all day. Or we would, I was probably getting too old for pretend games like house, and dressing up and that, but we would just hang. Seriously we would just play kickball for hours in the back of this kid’s house, um the Dewers: Freddy and Faith Dewer. Because there was no development behind their house yet, it was one big field, and their dad would mow down the field for us, we play kickball all day. At night we would all go home for dinner, we all just kinda... I don’t know how we knew what time it was. There was not cell phones back then, we didn’t wear watches, but we all knew to go home for dinner and then after dinner after it started getting dark, our house was always the house to go to play kick the can. And everybody would come down, we play kick the can in our yard all night, it was so simple. There were no... back then there were no VCRs for movies. You have to watch what was on TV, so there was not a lot of TV watching, we didn’t do a lot of that. Cartoons, you know Saturday morning probably, there were no cartoons Monday through Friday because we didn’t have all the cable channels. Back then you truly went outside and were outside all day. From after breakfast we all would gather, go exploring. We had, we lived, we had a creek behind our house. We go exploring in the woods, and the creek, and there was big giant horse pastures where now stands a hotel and a gas station, but there, we would be outside all day long, and in the winter we were outside all day long. It didn’t matter if it was snowing, I’m trying to think what we did on rainy days, probably just did a lot of reading. But um I don’t remember those too much, back then kids were just outside and somehow you just knew what time it was. You knew it was time for lunch, you knew it time for dinner. We had landline phones, of course, and sometimes the moms would be calling the other moms “Hey is...” you know, “...so and so at your house, so and so at my house.” But we were never home but we were always home. If that makes sense, we were always in the neighborhood. It was it was a nice relax, I call it a Mayberry feeling childhood, growing up. I don’t know if you know Mayberry, Andy Griffith Show, [LT shakes his head no] nope, nope. It was just a simple childhood, and then once high school came we would do a lot of spend the nights, being a girl, we would all... girls spend the night a lot more than boys do. But it was just still very simple, there was nothing to do. Even when you started driving, you had a car but what are you gonna do with it. There is nowhere to go, we might go to the mall once in a while, but we didn’t have a whole lot of money to spend at the mall. We just... hanging out with each other... and now you’re making me really think. Like what the heck did we do all those hours passed away. Hung out and talked. Yeah we had campfires and hung out, it was very... we worked once we get into high school you get a job, so... you spend your time working but most of the time you just lived to hang out with each other. That was it. LT: So it was like uh a village to raise a child kinda situation in Glen Carbon. BW: Yeah pretty much, pretty much. We were like, like we were big dust bowl gang of kids going from house to house to house. And like I said it was really cool, we moved to Glen Carbon when I was in 6th grade. It was an awkward stage when you were still a kid doing kid stuff for a couple years and then get into high school, starting to do more high school stuff. But yeah the parents had to rely on each other to know where the kids were, and most likely all of us kids were, there was a group of us all together all the time. So if you weren’t at somebody's house you were at somebody else's house. And if you weren’t at anybody's house we were all out together doing something in innocent it was never, never, uh we were never doing bad stuff it was just all, all innocence back then. Probably we weren’t supposed to be climbing around and snooping around all the homes being built. It probably be a huge infraction of the 5  law or something today, but yeah I remember climbing up on ladders, if it was a second story home, and being kinda scared, there's, it's like no walls up you’re gonna fall. Just silly stuff like that and going out and exploring, looking for old horse bones um... uh yeah it used to be a horse pasture behind our neighborhood. You can see it from the highway it was a big giant hill, it was for the race horses that's where they went, the retired race horses. Somebody owned the land up there and they were allowed to be a horse pasture up there and the horses would die and it was cool exploring looking for old horse bones up there. I think it must, that must have been before we moved ‘cause there wasn’t any live horses up there. And we go catch tadpoles in the pond, you know just simple fun stuff like that. Yeah all the moms they were all stay at home moms and it was a village to raise a child, it was fun. LT: So you talked a bit about it, but where did you go to high school? BW: Ok, so back in the day we went, all my brothers and I went to a catholic grade school, and you had the choice of staying here in Edwardsville and going to the public high school. Which to me seemed huge at the time, Edwardsville High School, and if you wanted to continue on in your Catholic high school we had to be bused either to Alton or to Highland. There was a St. Paul high school, it was a Catholic high school, and you probably had the option to go over to Bellville, there was a Catholic high school there, just one, but most of my friends, well not most of them. So we had maybe eighteen kids in our 8th grade, most of them chose to go to the public high school here in Edwardsville. And there were four of us, I believe, four girls  Jenny, Patty, Amy, Judy, and myself, so five of us, chose to go onto catholic high school. I.. I cannot tell you why I made that choice, probably cause Jenny and Patty were my best friends, and Jenny was the youngest of eight kids and she was going to that catholic high school, she didn’t have a choice her parents said she had to go. So probably that made the decision for me, but Edwardsville back then probably had three to four hundred kids in the freshman class and good ol’ St. Paul’s Catholic high school there was eighty of us, so that was a huge decision of why I chose to go there. So what um...what made my decision to go to that high school? LT: No, I was just curious as to where you went. BW: Yeah yeah, so I was bused into Highland, Illinois to go to the Catholic high school there, St. Pauls, which is no longer there. LT: Ok so as, uh so your, the girls that were you friends, kind of, in your opinion, helped you choose... BW: Mm-hmm LT: ...uh St. Paul. BW: Mm-hmm LT: What were, the best experiences in high school with them? BW: Oh gosh, you want the... the nice good wholesome experience that you’re supposed to choose? Or the stupid choice ones that all high schoolers do. Take your pick. Um my best experiences in high school, like I said, I got very involved in the student council there, which was way cool, and we did all kinds of activities. When you’re at that age, you love to be active, and I was active constantly, so I was doing, I 6  was working on the homecomings, the proms, the um... the play, I got into drama, we put plays on. Our high school was big into basketball, so those were fun. Just getting together with your friends, we went to a lot of basketball games, and hanging out and being stupid. I don’t know just hanging out, we had the best kids in our class. We are still very, very close today and this has been, I’m taking a stab, somewhere between thirty-five and forty years ago, I have to do that math of when I graduated, and I can still say that at least a dozen people from that high school I still keep in daily contact with via social media a lot now or texting or just running into them still, no we don’t see each other a lot. My best high school experiences probably were the social ones, obviously, nobody wants to sit in class. Although we had some decent, we had some awesome teachers, and some of the classes we had and were still friends with two of our high school teachers, we still keep in touch with them. School time was fun, there was always lots of fun activities like there are today, but probably my best memories were the social ones. Hanging out... hanging out with our class, we had such a small class. It wasn’t super clique, so it didn’t matter if you showed up somewhere and your little group of friends weren’t there, there was always someone to hang out with. Um having eighty kids in the class, no, no, no I take that back we had sixty, we graduated in eighty-two we only had sixty-one graduating kids. So you always knew everybody in class, and I was the type that even if I didn’t hang with you, or our personalities didn’t jive or jell, I still got along with you and still hung out with you. Best memories definitely were social but I can still remember classroom memories too, and they are all pleasant. It was just a cool, relaxed feeling back then. LT: So you told some of the, let’s call them, safe or tame experiences BW: Uh huh. LT: That you remember. If you’re comfortable, uh telling this... telling this, what were some of the fun or memorable that you called dumb? BW: Stupid. Yeah, yeah. LT: Yeah. BW: Well back then, probably freshman and sophomore year, everything was safe and tame. And then once you getting into junior year underage drinking was huge back then, and maybe I see it as huge, maybe it’s not, I don’t know. Our social times weren’t just revolving around basketball games or other sporting events, or say prom and homecoming. We would get together on the weekends to hang and then there would be drinking involved, and back then you didn’t stay at someone's house, you did these road parties and it is interesting all of the people I know now as an adult. You either knew about the road parties or you didn’t. You had to come from small towns to know these, but you all get together, everybody would go park out on the road, in the cornfield, and just hang. And it wasn’t crazy drinking, but it is what you did while hanging, had a few road parties get busted and the cops were very tame back then, they just were. Uh I don’t know if that was good or bad, we didn’t really have alcohol accidents either it's a miracle or really it wasn’t that huge of a problem. But it wasn’t as strict as they are today, which is probably not a good thing, I don’t know, umm... dumb things like that. One time we were all together and there was a big group of us, and then, back then station wagons were the thing. You could pile a whole lot of kids into a station wagon, I remember in someone’s stations wagon and driving through these farm... farm fields. Someone was chasing us in a car driving through farm fields. And it 7  was just stupid stuff like that, and now that I look at it was destructive to the farmer obviously ‘cause we didn’t stay on the road the whole time. You know there are little farm roads that go between the fields um that was probably the dumbest thing I remember being in high school. I remember flying over a ditch at one point and just stupid, our guardian angels worked over time that night. Um it wasn’t I guess senior year got to be a little more, it wasn’t, every single weekend, like I said we still had all of our girl sleepovers and we would just hang and sleep over at girls homes. We would go into highland there was one little girl that would live in highland, and we go to the movies there, probably paid all of dollar to get in and I can’t even tell you how much we paid. But we walk back to her house and hang and stay up all night. We still had simple moments like that, hanging, but everything was just social. But the dumb decisions was the drinking, obviously, obviously. I don’t know how rampant that is in today's high school, I’m sure it is and there is much more involved with high schoolers these days. Ours was just simply drinking... beer or sloe gin, cheap stuff. Just hanging out thinking we were cool. LT: So you said someone was chasing you, was it a friend who was chasing you while you guys were in the station wagon? BW: We didn’t know it at the time, but yeah... yeah just a friend, just dumb, dumb, dumb, stuff. I don’t even who it was, it was somebody else from Highland. Because we would mingle with the Highland high school kids too, they would join us in these parties, and I didn’t know ‘em because I’m from Glen Carbon and there from Highland and they go to the public school but the other, the St Paul kids that lived in highland would know these kids, yeah. It turned out just to be another kid they just thought it was hilarious. We, at the time, obviously thought it was cops chasing us, well now that you look at it what police officer would chase you through a farm field? It’s not that important to them, but, yeah. Just stupid stuff, that is probably the stupidest moment. LT: So junior and senior year when you were finally were able to drive or got your license... BW: Mm-hmm LT: I know there is a drive-in around here even to this day. Did you ever go there for entertainment? BW: I... I think I went one time, when you think it would be more memorable. I went one time and I remember, no well no, maybe it wasn’t me. Maybe I’m remember Eugene's memories, he went one time. And you had to pay, back in the day, I don’t think you paid per car you paid per however many people were in your car. I, you know, I take that back I never did go, maybe I went one time. I don’t remember, you would think I’d, I must not have gone. But somehow I remember going, I remember the little talkie boxes to put the sound in your car, which was not all that great. But I remember him saying one time they locked him in the trunk and drove in because he was small enough to get in the trunk and they didn't have to pay for him. I remember that story, I must have gone one time. But it must not have been that great of an experience, I never gone... again. My brother still goes today and Luke still goes with his girlfriend’s family, I’ve never gone. We would go to, yeah, instead of the drive-in we, we would go to Edwardsville Wildly theater, that was big, and I went there a lot and then the Highland had their Lory theater. And both of them are still open, the Wildey now is more, they do more performances there and they do special films there, they revamped and revitalized it. The Lory Theater today still shows current movies, those, those two I went to more. But see this is awful I know I had to go to the drive through one time because I 8  have vague memories sitting there and going “You can’t really see the screen that well and you can’t hear this that well.” So maybe we didn’t even stay for the whole movie. I had to have gone otherwise how would I have known what it looks like. I remember it being dark but it must have not been that great of an experience, I never went back. LT: So moving from high school to college, where did you go to college? BW: I went to Eastern Illinois University, um back then it wasn’t online applications, everything was by paper. Um I remember getting on mom’s typewriter and typing up my essays as to why I wanted to go. The information as to what University to go to was not as prevalent, so I think we had a few things mailed to our home from the guidance office from our testing, so we all took the ACT back then. So you would have some universities mailing their information, their pamphlets, to your home junior year. And um I picked Eastern because they had a good program for what I wanted to do, and they were close, your mom and Mary Ann picked Western, but I think I did a visit there one time and it I just didn’t like the campus, I’m not too sure why I didn’t pick that. I did a site visit to Eastern and I really liked it, the U of I was way too big for me that scared me. Eastern seemed smaller, nice compact campus and that is where I went. LT: Was... ‘cause college for you was the 80s? BW: 80s. LT: 80s BW: Uh huh. LT: [clears throat] so... was Edwardsville, SIUE, ever on your radar for college? BW: No, no it wasn’t um I don’t know why because they had decent programs there, probably they were not, not like today, but they weren’t really, what do you call it, a commuter campus. It was mainly local people, there were people that came from around the country to go but housing was slim to none back then. They had very few residence halls if any, they had a lot of campus apartments. Back then I wanted to go out and be away and experience the true, the whole campus life, I wanted to live on my own um be away from home. So SIU was not an option, it surprises me that I wanted to do that because I was pretty darn shy back in high school. Um but I had friends that went there, that commuted even from Carlyle to go up there. And a lot of Highland kids commuted over there, I was lucky back then money wasn’t an issue. My dad wanted us to go away, he wanted us to experience all that. He never got to, he went to school here locally, which was the thing to do. No... yeah I guess you went away to college back in the 50s and 60s um but he encouraged us to go. Go away to co... school. I don’t know I did campus visits, I really liked it and SIU for some reason was never an option because it was so close. It was still a very respectable school back then, but I couldn’t do the whole stay on campus life. I’m trying to think if they had, they had to have some residence halls back then but not the amount they have now, it was for us locals it was known as a commuter school, you drove, in went to classes, and came home and that is just something that wasn’t on my radar back then. I wanted to go away. That was the more traditional approach to college, there is no traditional approach anymore, but back then it was. LT: So you said Eastern had a good program for what you wanted to do... 9  BW: Mm-hmm LT: ...what did you want to do? BW: Well it took me a while to figure that out, I remember in high school, junior and season year, wrestling back and forth between accounting, I... I loved accounting I don't know why. I love the organizational aspect to it, the numbers are black and white, I love my little brain computing and doing all that and being in an organized setting and keeping everything neat and tidy and straight and narrow, to this day I think I still would love to get into a public accounting and do all of that and crunch numbers but I was also torn with the idea of, completely opposite, of going into special education. I actually remember taking a test trying to determine my weakness, my strengths, and having this test determine my interests. And I was split 50/50 between whether or not special education would be good for me or something in the business realm. I don’t know what prompted me to go to the business world but that is the route I took, for some reason and I mean you can’t find a bad business school around here. Eastern had a good program for what I wanted to do and loved it, that’s what I chose. Had a great college experience. LT: So the organizational aspect is what interested in accounting? BW: Yeah business in general um I took marketing classes, I took the management classes, I would enjoy the management aspect now, but accounting I don’t know I just really enjoyed working with the numbers. Making everything even out, just being very general about it. I loved working with numbers, I loved those classes it was interesting to me. Business law was interesting to me as far as that goes, um finance a little scary. That got a little confusing for me but I loved making one side of your ledger match the other side of your ledger, to put it very general. I enjoyed it. LT: So wh... so... I’m assuming... How am I going to say this? Anyway, when... moving away from schooling a little bit, or maybe not, where did you first meet your husband? BW: Actually in high school, so we both went to St. Paul’s high school. He lived in Highland all his life, his whole family still lives in Highland, I don’t think they ever left Highland. In high school, so freshman year I dated a little boy named Paul Rake Pail, and it was such a small high school class that even when you were done dating you were still buddies, we all hung together and my husband was very quiet and very shy. Never really noticed him all of high school year and someone, we were at some guy’s house, it was the beginning of the year party like to kick off senior year and um I noticed he was cute but never even thought about anything about it. Then one of our friends said, “Hey you should date him this year.” And she probably said something to him, “You should date her this year.” And that is kinda how that happened. So we dated all through senior year, I guess, and then off and on during college. The first two years he went to Eastern too, he set his sights on doing engineering and he wanted his degree from U of I, but Eastern Illinois University had a wonderful pre-engineering program and then transferred to U of I [cough] so we dated off and on through college too. LT: Ok so during the senior, or even the off and on through college, uh what was your best memory of that time with him? Like what was a good... what was the most memorable date you went on or just a good memory [laugh] good memory you had of you two together before you were married? 10  BW: I don’t know, we would sit up and talk a lot. It was convenient when we were at Eastern. Actually I will tell you a funny time that I remember. So freshman year we both stayed at the same housing complex, there were three small dorms, they don’t like being called dorms but were going to for simplicity we’ll call them that, there were three small dorms that shared the same food service. We stayed together in those dorms, he was in a different one than I was, and then I went into the residence assistant program aid to help, it paid for all my housing while I was there, that's kinda my work study program that I put on myself, um also because I love the organizational and leadership activities of it um... so starting sophomore year I was an RA and I moved up to another housing, we will just call it dorm, moved to another dorm and he moved to another dorm, And the funniest thing I remember is him, back then still landlines, but you still had phones in your dorm rooms, I don’t even remember how that would work, extension numbers or something, calling me in the middle of the night just scared witless because, we were still underage until partway through your sophomore year, well the RAs are responsible for busting underage drinking or overage drinking if your too loud. But him and his roommate, and probably a couple of other guys in his dorm, got caught underage drinking. It was hilarious he was scared to death. So he called me up “Our RA just came in and how much trouble are we going to get in?” and I’m laughing at him and going “You’re not gonna get in trouble, they confiscated all your stuff because they're gonna have a party with your stuff probably.” That is the funniest that I remember, dating, back then. LT: Ok so when did you, end up marrying him? BW: Um... we got engaged senior year and then so we all graduated what May of ‘86, he got a job right away with Wisconsin Power and Light, he graduated from U of I by the way, he moved up to Wisconsin and um we got married that October. I remember going up to see him in Wisconsin once took him mom and dad up, like I said his family doesn't leave Highland [laugh] they don’t. I had to drive his mom and dad up to Wisconsin to see him, to see the new town he was living in um I guess I made two trip, took his mom and dad once, and I went up once. So we... we... we dated solidly junior/ senior year of college, and graduated in May of ‘86 and got married in October of ‘86. LT: Ok so you’re married uh and next step is children... BW: Uh huh LT: ...how many kids did you have? [laugh] BW: We have five children. LT: Uh... when were they born? BW: Um.... Aaron’s birthday is June of ‘89, so we were married about three years before our first one. So I worked in the accounting field up there and he, we worked we lived in an apartment for a while, saved up for a house and then started having kids. We had two babies in Fond Du Lac, Wisconsin Aaron and Katie they were born in ‘89 and ‘90. We wanted to get closer to home, ‘cause it was a long drive, once you have kids you want them to be around your family more so we would come home for as much as we could come home for. You know the regular holidays  Thanksgiving, Christmas, Easter. We would always come home once in the summer, you know how we always get together for pool parties. And we started coming home more and more just because we wanted our kids to be around the whole family, 11  because that is how we grew up, that is how I grew up I should say and his family too. So he took a job with a Illinois power company and moved down to Springfield Illinois so we were closer. So we stayed up in Wisconsin for three years. ‘86 no ‘89, ‘90... we moved down to Springfield in ‘91 so we were closer, right, so we're an hour and half away now then we had two more kids in Springfield  Kyle and Ben. Then his dad became ill with cancer and his company was going through a troubling time and they were bought out by another power company and they were sending their field engineers, or their downtown engineers out in the field. And we were probably gonna be sent to this rural area and we decided, and his dad being sick with cancer at the time, so it’s like, if we were gonna be sent out to this little rural area where we don’t know anyone, we loved Springfield, but he couldn’t stay there because of the company buyout. That’s when we moved back here to Glen Carbon in, and what year was that, ‘93 or ‘94... ‘95, I take that back ‘95. Did I answer your question? I am rambling at this point. LT: [laughs] Um... yeah you’ve answered my question. BW: Okay LT: Um... so putting your kids through, if you even remember from your childhood, putting your kids through the ‘90s to today, how has the educational process of putting kids through school changed? Uh... if you at all remember it from your childhood. BW: Well it’s changed now um, you have more choices, and you may have had choices back then but you just did the perfunctionary thing. You know you lived in a town you either went to that public grade school or you chose the Catholic or say Methodist grade school but there many more choices now, there is many more types of schools you can send your kids to, you can do public, you can do private. But in the private sector there are more schools out there. Um... we chose to keep our kids in the catholic grade school because that is how we both grew up, it’s a good education, when we moved, so say when we moved to Springfield and, how old were Aaron and Katie, they were maybe three and four when we moved from Wisconsin to Springfield. When we were choosing the neighborhood to, Springfield is a pretty large town with five or six parishes at the time, we always wanted to do the catholic grade school route because that is what we were comfortable with and it’s a family within a family. Um we chose our home based on what parish it was in, so we lived in an apartment for I’d say, we were in this apartment for eight or nine months we rented a home actually, and we would on a weekly basis go to different churches around Springfield and we picked a parish that we were comfortable in, we looked at the schools and that is how we based to buy our homes in and people still do that today, they still do that over in St Louis. They do that here because we have several private schools here and the same thing when we moved back to Glen Carbon, we had our choice and it was a little bit different from when I was growing up. You either went to St. Boniface in Edwardsville or you went to St. Mary's in Edwardsville, but now this new choice cropped up since I was young and it's a school called St. John Newman, our catholic schools were getting too big but were landlocked, they couldn’t add on necessarily to make the schools bigger, so what they did, they took a parish from Maryville Illinois, Troy Illinois, and Glen Carbon Illinois and did a... a school based on those three parishes, so you had three parishes feeding into one school. And we went and visited that school that had been brand new since I had been growing up and fell in love with it. It was just dynamic and fun and young and that's how we chose where we were going to live here, so we... we moved back to Glen Carbon and our kids at the time, Aaron was in first grade and Katie was going into kindergarten, that’s where they started school there. So it's changed a little bit, it's 12  just that you have more choices, it seems people shop around for their schools now if... if you’re lucky enough to do that. Even if you’re going to a public school you... you buy into the neighborhood of what public school you wanted to go to, back then it just didn’t matter you... you went where you were supposed to go. And now it seems like people are moving based on what school they want their kids to go to, if you’re in that season of your life. If that makes sense. Did that answer your question? How... how it’s changed. LT: Yeah that’s uh...that answers it pretty well. BW: Ok LT: Uh... moving back from family you mentioned in high school you had a job BW: Uh-hu LT: or had to get a job. BW: Several LT: [laugh] Can you tell me about those jobs? BW: [laugh] Well my first one was the good old work at McDonalds job, and and I went there because they hire everyone, it’s super easy. You want a job they're gonna find room for you. It was interesting it was my first introduction, I mean I used to babysit before then and dog walk I would get paid for doing stuff like that. But to get your first like big person job, your first teenager job, where you actually drive to and clock in and clock out it was good old McDonalds for me. Um... I don’t know, I... I didn't, like I said I was pretty shy back then and I didn’t know anybody, none of my friends worked there so that didn’t last too long, I mean I worked at it for a while but I happen to be lucky enough that my cousin was opening up, was he opening up was it, brand new, pizza restaurant here. It was a pizza chain that was becoming popular back in the 80s, so he opened up Pantera’s Pizza here in Edwardsville. And I do remember... I... I... I went through the motions and the steps on how you normally get a job, you have to apply, you have to be interviewed, but I also knew in the back of my head that he is my cousin, he is gonna hire me. [laugh] So I do remember filling out the job application, and my dad was helping me, everything was all paper, you know you drove up there and you got the paper application and you filled it out and you had to take it back. And I was putting down references and one of them could be family, I used one my teachers as a reference, and the other one since we kinda knew the job was in the bag, I was gonna get hired, this was awful but back in, it was right about when , you don’t remember this, Natalie Wood had um drowned she was a big actress back then, and her death was all, it was very mysterious it looked like she was pushed off the boat I don’t know what it was, but my reference she was one of my references. And she was one of my references and they wanted to know how I was related to her and I put swimming buddy and that is horrible, but I still remember to this day. I will always remember it, that was on a job application that’s... you couldn’t do that now a days, absolutely could not do that now a days. So I worked at McDonalds, then Pantera’s for years it was fun I loved it, not necessarily because I saw my cousin but I loved working with, it was all high school and college kids that ran the place, it was just a fun place to work, excellent food by the way, so I probably gained a few pounds working there. And then when I went into college and started getting, well I worked on campus too, but when I started getting 13  more in depth into my accounting degree then I came back in the summers [cough] I co-opted the Madison County Auditor's Office, which was a very cool experience. So I went to the courthouse every day, I saw the inner workings again of government. Seeing how the Auditor, the Clerk, and the Assessor and how everybody worked together but I... it was also a courthouse so I got to see my dad every once and awhile. He would take me to lunch because he, being a lawyer, he would be in the courthouse working, so that was a fun experience. LT: So what did you do at Pantera’s? Like what was your job title? BW: Ok so it was very um, I noticed it even back then, all of the boys got to be in the back making the pizza. And if you were a girl you were on the front, you were the, you took peoples orders, you bust the restaurant, you made sure the salad bar was full, you deliver the pizzas. Very... you know, I forgot one job, actually in high school I also worked with my dad in his law firm, that was a big job too, and I loved that. LT: So moving to more modern times, you work at Busch and the Enterprise center. BW: Uh huh. LT: How did that even come about? BW: [laugh] So after I got married I did accounting work up in Wisconsin. I worked for a small newspaper up there um... doing their billing um and then I did temp work, I couldn’t really find an accounting job with my degree, so they have these, I don't know, temp agencies where depending on your skills, your skill sets, your degree, you go in and do temporary work. I happen to get placed in this cheese factory, of all places, up in Wisconsin full of cows, right. Hello. But we we uh actually farmed our milk in from New York too but I worked in the accounting department there. And then when I had Aaron I worked for about six months still um at the cheese factor in the accounting department and decided I wanted to stay home and be a full time mom. So I was a full time mom for years and years until we got to the point where Aaron was getting close to go to college, back in the day when your mom or dad and myself and Eugene when we went to college we either paid for it, we took out loans, or if you were lucky enough your parents paid for it. Now a days the government tells you how much the student’s gonna pay and how much you’re responsible, as parent, to pay. And we were clueless to that and once Aaron was getting closer to college we realized that we couldn’t just say “Hey you, go take out loans and put yourself through school.” The government was saying “Hey you, as parents, you have to pay so much.” We went “Oh shoot.” So I decided I need to go make some more money just to send these kids to college um... I still wanted to stay home during the day, I still had a three-year-old. I thought well I look for some part time work. I didn’t want to go back to work full time and in the accounting you kinda have to keep updated with schooling, I hadn’t done that in seventeen years or so. So I got on, unbelievably, Craigslist looking for a part time job and I’m reading through it and I know the baseball stadium, right, because my dad had season tickets, I know what sections are what, I was like “I’m not going to do concessions.” Um I needed something that gonna, I don’t, little more glamorous of a job making little bit more money and um something I could do part time so I could be home a lot with the younger kids, I think was, how old was Ben, he was early grade school, well mid-grade school, but Luke was pre-school. I still wanted to be home with him and I saw this job advertised for a section called the uh diamond, the diamond box, and I 14  know where the diamond box is and I’m going “This, this can’t be right, that right behind both uh both dugouts.” It was like “Would that not be fantastic, to be a couple rows from the playing field and...and working just nights at baseball games, and at nights Eugene would be at home with the kids.” So I went and applied for it, and sure enough that what it was and it was fun money, so that started that job so I could save up money here and there and then job lead to working over, it was called Scottrade Center then it just turned Enterprise center this year, but working with the St. Louis Blues. I knew nothing about hockey but several of the people that I work with at the stadium also work part time over there at the hockey rink and I started working there, and just extra money here and there but I could still be home during the day with the kids when they were younger. So it was kind of a win-win, it was extra money coming in but I’m still home during the day. And then it kinda went on from there. So then... you want me to keep going? Or do you have another question leading into that? LT: I mean uh its whatever you want to do, if you want to keep talking about working at both these places, ‘cause I’m curious as to what exactly you do at the diamond section BW: Ok LT: At Busch? BW: Ok so what I did there was um you got little menus in your cup holders, you’re kind of in a somewhat premium section. You didn’t have to get up to get your snacks and concessions to watch the game, they kinda, pampered these guests a little bit. You could sit there in your seats, it's about the first um eight to ten rows around each dugout area. You could sit there, I would come down and you could wave me down and say “I want a nachos, or I want this...” it was a kinda limited menu and some beers or sodas or waters and you could just pay me and I would run up to a special little area and get it. So that’s how that worked, we had the little, we had little hand... we had menus, little handheld machines that we just swipe your credit card or do cash and it was fun and we had to watch for foul balls while you were working, you got to hear the crack of the bat while working, and you’re making extra money and it was good hourly pay but you work for tips, so it's a glorified waitress job is what it was. Uh... we also had a little section where everything was all inclusive with our ticket, there was... there were thirty-two green seats right next to the dugout. So you could... you could look in and there's Tony La Russa and watch him making his play by plays for, for the team, you could see all the players hanging out there um that section was pretty cool because there was no money exchanged they bought a super expensive ticket and same thing, they had the same menu, you just went and got it for them and brought it down, it was all cash tips and that was nice, you gotta work that section once in a while, they rotated us um and then I noticed, that was very nice because the tips were better we didn’t have to charge them for any of their food, then they, this entire section behind home plate, if you look at the game it’s all green padded seats, they call it the green seats, it’s actually called the Cardinal Club, and I just started inquiring about over there and was like “Well what do they do over there.” Because it was my first year at the stadium were talking, this was probably twelve years ago... it was twelve years ago. And then they said, “Oh that's like um the comm... the green seats that I would work down once and awhile.” They go in and you have this, I call this, I call it the prime rib buffet, you go in before the game, we open up two hours before the game, you go in you eat this beautiful buffet of salads and appetizers and chicken and pasta and home-made soup and then you go to the carvery and get your carved prime rib or pork rib or turkey or whatever and that dessert table and the bar so you take care of the guests inside, it’s like a restaurant setting and then 15  when they go out to watch the game then they get, again, a menu full of food and you just keep running ‘em for seven innings, you run em whatever they want and it’s all cash tips, and it’s fun so it’s good money and you get to go to eighty games a year for free and be out in that atmosphere. And I grew up going to baseball games, dad had season tickets to the game with his law firm, and um... I still work there today. Love it, love it, love it. LT: So then in the... in the diamond or even in the Cardinals Club, were you working there the night of Game six in 2011? BW: Oh absolutely, yeah. LT: Can you explain the atmosphere of that night? BW: Uh... scary and sad because that was the do or die game for us and I remember we were down, we were down, so we service until the end of the seventh inning and then we’re done, the guests are done with their food and their drink. We come in, we clean up the area, we clean up whatever were working on and we go home. Were usually walking out of the stadium about bottom of the eighth inning or so trying to beat traffic, top of the ninth if we if uh... it’s taking us a while to get out of there, and I remember coming in we were down, its look like were gonna lose the game and also the Cardinal Club is the premiere club for anything happening and we were told we had to set up a celebration party for the Rangers and they had prime rib, um... the owner of the Rangers ordered prime rib and all the fixings, and they had all this champagne on ice and we had one area of the restaurant where we had to set it up for them and then we were given the option based on seniority. Do you want to stay and work this dinner for the Rangers and all their families, so it’s ownership, it’s the players, it’s all the families of the players, and do you want to stay and work and serve you know like restaurant style setting and take care of them for celebration dinner. And at the time I had, I carpooled with a friend of ours, a friend of mine, we would meet in Collinsville and drive over to the game, and were watching the game and were watching the game, I remember coming in and my manager standing there watching the game and the Rangers are up and she is just crying and was like “Oh god I just hate this, I hate this, why can we not do this.” and I said “Do you want to stay and work this game?” Some of the people were already setting up, the chef, and that were already setting up. And I went “Oh hell no, I’m not staying.” So we leave, cause we had... it was based on seniority, so if you didn’t want to stay you didn’t have to, but there were people then that had to stay and it was like “No, nope... not working it, not doing it, I don’t care to be a part of history, I’m out of here. This is just too depressing.” So my friend and I leave and to get from our department to get, you know out of the stadium and go, were walking the tunnels and you walk past the Cardinals organizational office, you walk past the locker room. That’s really cool ‘cause you run into players all the time coming and going, but all of the Ranger families, they were all lining up and that’s where all the um... what do you call it, the press, we worked right next to the press area too, and all the press was there. They were all excited and giddy like “Yeah we won, were gonna win, we're gonna win the World Series.” And I was just, remember being so ticked off and having to push my away through throngs of people because they were kinda cornered off because they were not allowed into our area yet, but they were lining up to get ready because it was probably the bottom of the eighth inning as we were leaving. And I... I just remember muttering under my breath it’s like oh you know “Get out of my way, I’m going home.” I was just mad at that point. And I remember getting in the car, so I wasn’t there for all the excitement, but I remember getting my car and that is when we tied it up, did we tie up bottom the ninth? I believe. You see 16  the details are fuzzy, I have the memory of... of a goldfish sometimes, I remember driving home tying it up and being ecstatic like “Oh my gosh, do we have a chance?” And then were driving along, I remember the Rangers going ahead and it was like “Oh you're kidding me.” It’s so hard tie up a game then when... when you’re down, top of the inning, and then I remember tying it up again. And we sat in Culvers parking lot in Collinsville and listened to the game and that’s when we tied it up again, we were giggled ecstatic like “Yeah we're gonna do it.” So she gets out of her car and I start driving home and um... I think the Rangers went ahead again. And so When I came in and I kinda, I am very superstitious and was like “Well both times we got in the car, like we got into the car first go home we tied it up and were driving and then we were down and then Bridgette go into her car, when she got into her car we tied it up again.” So I’m super, super, superstitious so I sat out in my driveway to keep listing to the game it’s like “I’m not getting out of this car, as long as I’m in the car, we’re doing something.” So I didn’t actually watch us win, I listened to on KMOX in my driveway because that is how superstitious I was, I just sat out there. And when we finally did the walk off, when Freese did the walk off, it was amazing. So then I quickly ran in, ‘cause I knew they be doing replays. So yeah, I wasn’t at the stadium, and then Game seven was incredibly boring because we were winning the whole time, it was so exciting and ex... and I stayed at the stadium till four o'clock in the morning cause then we serviced La Russa and all the owners of the Cardinals. It was like “Do you want to work that party?” like “Oh yeah I want to work that party.” But our meal, we get an employee meal before each game when we get there, our employee meal on Game seven was all of the prime rib had ordered for themselves on Game six, that was pretty cool. So... LT: So then is the.... What you do at the Enterprise Center for the Blues that uh... BW: Uh huh. LT: ...similar to the... BW: Similar LT: Cardinals? BW: Yeah similar, I service the suits up there, so it’s similar. We don’t get to actually see, were not out in the bowl, the seated game, but were up in the seats. Same things were setting up food for them, delivering their food when they order it, making sure their bars stock. So yeah it’s a glorified service like... we call... uh what are we, server position, it’s not waitress or waiter anymore it’s a server, it’s [cough] Uh huh so same thing. LT: So what... has.... aside from maybe Game six and seven of the World Series in 2011, uh what are some of your best experience downtown St. Louis at Buch and at the Enterprise Center? BW: What do you mean? Working downtown... LT: Because Busch and the Enterprise center is downtown St. Louis, has there ever been some... good experiences or some experiences that stuck out into your memory.... Stuck into your memory that is particularly good? 17  BW: Good, well... it... it’s um... you get to know your way around town a lot, and that's fun. I mean once in a while after a baseball game we’ll go out and I’ve... we’ll have a nice time. It... it’s made me appreciate downtown St. Louis because some people who don’t go downtown are afraid of it but I can walk around downtown now and appreciate all of these little bitty, especially blues bars, we have these little bitty blues bars that play really good music, I appreciate live music a lot because there is a lot of it going on downtown. Um... I have a couple of my favorite places that we go to, the food is amazing, so when people come in town, now, I can recommend places to them, like um... you have people come for, um... the Enterprise Center, it’s not just for hockey but you have people come in for wrestling matches, and basketball from all over, and you can recommend places to go to eat, to try, those are those are fun experiences being downtown and I can definitely get my way, like if I go down to a concert and I want some good parking, I definitely know my way around to where... where to go park and where to sneak in and what time I need to be here and that. So I... I can maneuver myself downtown very easily, where a lot of people are probably are afraid to go down there, I’m not, I don’t know. LT: So then on the flip side of that, has there been any uh... bad experiences working downtown St. Louis? BW: You have to watch yourself, just like um... any big city, you gotta be cognizant to what is going on around you, um... again as you’re parking you have to be smart and safe about it. Um... the biggest thing I remember is when the entire incident in Ferguson went down and all the um... marches were going on, there were some safety issues at that point because you just didn’t know what was going to happen, so um... we had to be very careful going into work, it was during hockey season, we had to be very careful going into work. Our manager did some special parking arrangements for us at one point ‘cause they were concerned for our safety, but most of the time um... there is not a whole lot of bad experiences, it’s just city life and you have to be aware of your surroundings and just make sure that you don’t walk to your car alone at night and if you take the proper steps it’s just... it’s as safe as you make it, if that makes sense. LT: So moving from downtown St. Louis, you have created your own business how did you get interested in doing that? BW: [Laugh] Um... LT: Like where did the idea of creating your own business come from? BW: Well... when I first got married and I was the stay at home mom, not only my focus on raising the kids my focus, my... I always had an interest in design. I remember being little and taking my brother’s Legos and making homes and taking my doll furniture and always designing these rooms and making, I don’t know, it’s a girl thing, not always a girls thing, but for me back then it was just making pretty... I remember rearranging my room a gazillion times in grade school, probably my poor uh... mom and dad had to help me move furniture because I was too little. But in high school I remember constantly rearranging my room and watching my wall, wallpaper, so when I was married and setting up house, I had this desire to make our home beautiful with whatever budget we had. Back in the day it was wallpaper, I learned how to start sewing my own window treatments and when I would get away from the kids my treat to myself would go to the book store and just drink a coffee and read books galore and I always gravitated toward decorating and design and um... back when I told you we needed to make more 18  money for our kids to go to college I realized I did... I wanted to get back into some sort of industry to make money, and I didn’t want to go back to the accounting world cause you’re working from Monday to Friday during the day, I still wanted to be home with my kids, but I always had this interest in making things beautiful and I happen to read an article one time about, a lady who did the same thing. She went from being a stay at home mom, I was reading the Sunday morning paper, and she got herself highlighted in the paper and she took some painting classes and she paints furniture and walls for people. And I went “Oh holy crud you can make a living doing something that I absolutely love, it was like a passion hobby of mine.” And so I took a painting class by someone that was here local. I was fortunate enough to be introduced a painting organization, there is actually a group, so I’m a decorative painter. I don’t do murals, I’m not a fine artist, I don’t have a degree in it um... but I’m also not self-taught, there is actually a world for decorative artists. So all the plaster you see here, the ceiling treatment you see there, my kitchen cabinets, go into the bathroom here. There is an industry for that and there is training for it and we have, what we call, master artists that train you on how to work with plasters and metallic paints and mediums to refinish cabinetry. You’re not just slapping paint on there, there is certain techniques that's uh... it’s a skill set you have to learn and I was slowly introduced to that [dog whine] about twelve years ago. And um... realized there is a whole world out there so I started training, some of my baseball and hockey went for business start-up, I never had to take [dog cry] out a loan, I worked out of my home for many years and my business just kept exploding and getting bigger and bigger so now I rent a studio in Troy and um... I control my own hours because it is my own business. I could work full time if I wanted to or I can [dog cry] I can, I am sitting on the couch here with you today doing this interview, I can do that, I just came back from a week of training in Colorado. Um... it just all kind of happened on top of each other I... I knew I needed to make some more money, I couldn't be stay at home forever, and it’s kinda lonely only being a stay at home person [dog whine] kinda want to get back out in the world and meet people and the only way to do that is volunteer or get a job, right um... and I just realized there a whole other world out there and fell in love with it. So... I am now a full time decorative artist with my own business, has nothing to do with the accounting degree, and I laugh about it all the time. And... and um... it even snowballed from there, so when I was telling you from my dad I’ve kinda got this leadership thing from him it’s natural but it’s something I thrive on and love to do [dog whine] our decorative artisans group, there is a group of us out there, it’s a whole little world all to ourselves um... we've got people, there there’s about eleven hundred of us in this group, we've got people from all over the United States, we've got people in it from Mexico, from Europe, from China, um somehow I’ve gotten on the board that runs this organization, there is nine of us that are in charge of... of this organization and now it’s just become my life and I’m not an accountant anymore, it’s very funny, but I do the accounting work on this board. So I kinda married the two together, I guess. LT: So before we started recording, you told me a... about an inside joke, can you tell me that again? BW: Inside joke about my degree? LT: Yeah your degree and the fact that you’re in this guild. BW: Yeah, yeah so I’m... I’m in charge of all of these artists and I’m self-taught a lot, a lot of the artists that I work with side by side they all have art degrees. You go to college for a fine art degree and I’m very respectful and intimidated for what their background is and [dog whine] we will be doing things and there, we all recognize each other in our skills and our talents and we all um... encourage each other but 19  I’ll take some, this past week in Colorado, I was taking some classes outside my comfort zone. So you have to know a little bit different... about the different things we do but all of the plasterwork you see in here and the paint work, see you put a trowel in my hand and I’m just fine but I was taking some fine art classes, and to me they are very intimidating and people were loving my work and they say “you know, How are you doing that? That’s great. Where did you learn that?” And I said “I don’t know... I’m an accountant, I have no idea no idea why I'm, in the room with all you people.” And it’s just funny, they all look at me and say “You’re an accountant?” I say “Yeah my degree is in accounting, my degree is not in art. You all went to your art schools, I’m an accountant.” And is... it’s just the standing joke. But then another standing joke is that you have two types of artists, so if you think of an artist just off the top of your head do you think kinda flighty and out there and um... probably can’t hold a thought and can’t be organized cause that is what your typical artist is, dreamy and flighty. But then we have what we call our analytical artists and those are the ones that can be organized and you can create art but you can still kinda keep your life in order. Um... the accounting background does help, so I’m known as an analytical artist to all of my colleagues and friends, and that’s who... that’s who we get on the board, we can actually organize these thousand people, these thousand artists, so it does go... it helps. But my degree has nothing to do with what I’m doing now. LT: So just to have a few more questions before we wrap up. Um... how is working at a big industry business like the Busch Stadium or with the Blues, similar to your own business? BW: Um... LT: Or is there is any similarities at all? BW: There are, there are, [thinking noises] I... I guess I have the utmost respect for the management that I work with um... there are rules set in place um... the managers have to be in charge of [water running] all of us that are there say on any given baseball or hockey game um... I understand the hours they put in, I guess, we show up, we do our job, we take care of our people, we do our job, and we go home. The managers are there early doing paperwork and organizing everything for the event, we clock out and go home say like after the hockey game last night, I clocked out at 10:30 and I left. All of my managers and supervisors are still there couple hours after we leave because then there doing all the reporting and um... number crunching and filing all of the reports they have to for each game um... I... I have a respect for that and understand what they're going through, especially they.... They tell us a rule... that makes no sense to anyone else. But when I am done paining for the day, when I own my own business, then I have to come home, and I have to do all the paperwork and the accounting and I have be accountable to myself um... I... I guess that’s how those two would gel, I understand all the after-hours work that goes into something. Like my clients, they see me show up at eight o’clock and they see me leave at three or four o’clock and they think I’m done for the day, I’m not done for the day. Then I have to come home and do all the behind the scenes work of cleaning my tools and then sitting down and doing paperwork and still marketing and and talking to other clients when I’m not there, at their house, so I guess I have... I do have a respect for management because there not only there during the event, there doing all the behind the scenes stuff that... that the rest of our department doesn't know about before the event, after the event, when there is no baseball there still there doing all the paperwork that has... that comes with everything in their job. 20  LT: So then on... again on the other hand... on the other hand how are they different? How is the two business that you’re at different... how’s Busch different from your uh... your own business? BW: Um... I don’t know that there different... I mean obviously, the only thing, different I have to do, it’s a little more stressful, I have to market and go find jobs and find my clients. Um... obviously you got baseball, you got a captive audience, you're always gonna have people there, you’ve got a company that owns our contracting company so you’re gonna get paid regardless, so if I’m not painting I’m not getting paid, right, so I’m always having to look for new clients, new designers, new work, and the all the marketing that goes with that. Um... you’re always guaranteed an overhead company, so the Enterprise Center, when I go there to work hockey I work for a company called Levee Restaurants, there based out of Chicago. Levee Restaurant is always going to get money ‘cause you’re always going to have people there. There is... there are budgeting issues and you gotta... you gotta make sure we don’t go over budget, we have enough orders coming in to... to justify the hourly there paying us, different things like that, so it’s pretty... it’s still a business though and you still have to watch the numbers and work within your budget to make sure there’s a budget. With me it’s just not guaranteed work, I’m not guaranteed a baseball or hockey game where tons of people are gonna come in and buy food, I have to go out and find my work. I guess that be the biggest difference. LT: Well um... I... that... I... that about wraps it up. Thank you for taking time out of your day to allow me to interview yourself. BW: Ok. Did we get all the historical questions you think? Did we touch upon everything? LT: Historical in this case uh... yes and... yes we did cover what I did have historical wise, for the most part the interview was about you and your life and your perspective on Glen Carbon in general. BW: Oh, okay okay. LT: [laugh] BW: Well we didn’t... we didn’t touch upon how Glen Carbon has changed. LT: I th... ok I figured we did touch upon that when... earlier but... BW: Yeah... well there... just... it’s exploded with all the businesses around here um... it’s not the same town that I grew up in. Good and bad. I mean great that um... takes me five minutes and I can go to four different grocery stores, which is crazy because back in the day we had one. Um... we have the theater, that’s... that’s wonderful. There just seems so much more activity here, there's a ton for kids to do um... and it’s also a bad thing, you can’t just get on your bike and go somewhere, because the traffic as increased tenfold. So you can’t just let your kid get on the bike and go anywhere, although, again, to loop around its changed because now the whole area is full of biking trails. We have one of the best biking trail areas here in Madison County, in the whole St. Louis area, it’s wonderful. But the area has grown by leaps and bounds, mainly for the good but it’s a little irritating having to drive down 159 and four o’clock in the afternoon, and we joke, we call it rush hour in the ‘ville, for Edwardsville, but it’s a big thing. We never had that before, ever, so... 21  LT: That.... Ok that is more than I... that is more than what you originally gave me uh... so thank you for that ... uh... thank you for giving me more information on how things have changed around since you grew up. BW: Mm-hmm LT: Um... unless there is anything else you really want to talk about I think that no would be a good time to wrap up since. BW: Ok LT: I did take up at... close to an hour and hour and half? Maybe... of your... BW: Oh LT: Close to two hours. BW: I’m open to talk all the time. LT: [laugh] Well the... the thing this is, is this is only supposed to be an hour to two-hour thing. BW: [laugh] LT: And uh... BW: We’re right in the middle, were an hour and a half. We’re good LT: Yeah, yeah were at hour and half. But I... unless you... I have no other questions present, that you haven't, either already covered or we haven't already talked about so I... BW: Ok LT: For... so again thank you for letting me interview you and taking time out of your day... um... And like I said we will be uh... once this is all transcribed and everything's making sure that I... we typed everything correctly, BW: Ok you will get a copy of this. So uh... than... once again thank you for the interview and thank you for um... the information because I didn’t know a lot about it. BW: [laugh] 22 
MadisonCounty;Mike McNamara;1962;2018;Mike McNamara 1962 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Mike McNamara Oral History Interview Meghan McNamara, Interviewer October 11, 2018 Alton, Illinois Meghan McNamara (MeM): The following interview was conducted with Mike McNamara on behalf of the Madison County Oral History Project that is part of Madison Historical, the online encyclopedia and digital archive of Madison County, Illinois. The interview took place on Thursday, October 11th, at the home of Meghan McNamara in Alton, Illinois. The interviewer is Meghan McNamara from Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Mike, when and where were you born? Mike McNamara (MM): I was born, um, in May of 1962 in Alton, Illinois, Alton Memorial Hospital. MeM: And what were your parents like? MM: Um, well, they were both working, uh, class people. Uh, my dad was, uh, he worked at the, uh, Alton Box Board for the majority of my life. Uh, before that he was a salesman for Black Flag which is a pesticide, uh, company and, uh, they, we had relocated to Quincy, Illinois, for about a year I think, uh, when, uh, my younger sister was born in Quincy. She's two years younger than me, but my mom soon got, uh, homesick and we came back to Alton where we lived for the rest, you know, of our lives. And, uh, my mom was a, a hard worker. She, uh, worked down at the Alton Telegraph for 45 years. And, uh, my dad finished his, uh, career up until the time that he, uh, he, uh, he had a massive heart attack and, uh, had a stroke and was not able to work after that period of time. So, uh, he went on disability, uh, after that massive heart attack, but he worked, uh, numerous years down, uh, as a pipe fitter down at the Alton Box Board. MeM: And he was also in the military, wasn't he? MM: He was. He was, uh, in the Marine Corps for, uh, I believe two years, uh, just right after World War II so he didn't actually have to, um, fight in World War II because the war had ended but he had planned on fighting in that world war. MeM: What was it like growing up in Alton? MM: Alton was a very, um, very nice, clean community. Um, it seemed like, you know, it was, uh, everybody kind of took care of their houses, took pride in their homes. Um, you know, we developed very good childhood friendships, uh, in Alton that I still have, uh, today. We were, uh, outside every day playing. You know, we were, we didn't have computers back in those days so everything we did, we played touch football in the street or, uh, whiffle ball or we'd play baseball down at, behind the East Junior. And, uh, so, and we were, you know, in the winter we went sled riding and we, um, we spent a lot of time in the woods, you know, making clubhouses and, uh, we just used our imaginations and, uh, we 1  didn't spend much time inside unless it was raining and it didn't matter what the weather was like. Whether it was summer or winter, we were always out enjoying, you know, what kids, which I don't see many kids doing anymore but, uh, we didn't have other options. Uh, we didn't have any video games. Uh, we had, you know, television, uh, that we'd watch but it only had five channels. And, uh, we didn't have internet. We had our one telephone in the house and it was a rotary phone. Uh, most young people don't even know how to dial one of those old phones. Uh, we had, there was no cable so we didn't have cable channels. We didn't have 24 hour news, which, you know, is almost bad today I think 'cause you get too much news and we used to get a half hour of news and five minutes of weather and 10 minutes of sports. And, uh, you saw the news at, at five and 10 and that was it. MeM: Did you guys do family dinners? MM: We did. Uh, we were very, um... uh, very family oriented. Uh, we had an evening meal and everybody was expected to be there. Uh, we didn't have a whole lot of activities like, it seems like everybody does now. We, um, my mom worked all day and she'd come home and we never ate out 'cause we didn't have the extra money. My dad didn't like fast food. There, there wasn't any, that many fast food places, uh, at that point in time. Uh, but very seldom did we ever go out unless my dad was working shift work and going out for dinner meant going to Jack in the Box and getting three tacos for a dollar. MeM: [laughs] MM: But, uh, normally every night we'd have dinner at, like, six o'clock. My mom would come home, begin making dinner. Uh, we had a good variety of different dishes my mom would make and occasionally my dad would request breakfast because he never had breakfast. He didn't take time to eat breakfast in the morning so that was one of his favorite meals to eat but I always hated having breakfast for dinner. [laughs] MeM: Did you attend church on Sunday? MM: We did. Uh, um, my mom, uh, my dad was Catholic religion and, uh, when he got divorced, um, he did not really keep up with the, the Catholic Church anymore other than occasional going in for a private prayer. But my mom, uh, we went to, uh, Cherry Street Baptist Church. We didn't really attend church so much as, uh, other than, uh, Easter and Christmas I think but we always went to Sunday School class and, uh, we pretty much attended every, uh, every Sunday morning we'd go to, uh, Sunday School. MeM: And did you attend public or private schools growing up? MM: I attended, uh, public schools. Um, started out, uh, at the old Lincoln school, um, when we lived over on Alby Street. Uh, it was, uh, my first school. Uh, kindergarten, first grade was at Lincoln which is now no longer a school. And then I went to uh, we moved and, uh, we moved up to Donald Avenue, right there at the, uh, corner of Washington and Donald. We lived in a, a very old home. It was really cool. It, uh, had about 16 rooms, uh, very large home. And, uh, so once we moved, I moved up to, uh, the Upper Alton school district. So ... back then, what, you went to Horace Mann, um, so I went, attended Horace Mann in the second grade. In the third grade, they moved, um, we all went to, uh, it was just, just the way it was set up 'cause the school wasn't big enough for the class size that we had, so all of our third grade classes were at a school called Dunbar, which is no longer a school. I'm not sure if Horace Mann is still 2  operating. I think it is. And then we went to, uh, Lowell in the fourth grade, so, and then, uh, in about 1973 they were really big into the desegregation, uh, so they started redrawing school boundaries. So even though I lived in the same house, instead of, of attending, going, I woulda went back to Horace Mann for the fifth and sixth grade. But, um, so in 1973 I lived on the opposite side of the street. The people on the, on the north side of the street continued to go to Horace Mann. I was on the south side of the street so they sent me down to Clara Barton. So all the people that I'd known going to school since the second grade, um, I no longer went to school with so I had to make a whole new, new, uh, set of friends down at Clara Barton where I attended the fifth and sixth grade. And, uh, then attended East Junior. It was called, it's East, East Middle School now but, uh, it might even be an elementary school at this point. I think it is, um, but I attended East Junior for the seventh, eighth and ninth grade and finished out my high school career up at Alton High where I attended 10th, 11th and 12th. Um, I did go to, uh, Monmouth College, uh, the following year. It was a private little school up in Monmouth, Illinois, which is north of Macomb. It was about a four hour drive. And a very small little private school. Uh, but I only went the first year and then my father who I'd mentioned earlier had, uh, this massive heart attack and, uh, stroke and became dis, dis, you know, went on disability, therefore, um, they couldn't afford to send me to this, uh, private little college so I started attending Lewis and Clark College where I obtained a, a business administration degree after completing two years. And, uh ... uh, I ended up, uh, finishing, uh, my four year degree. It was in criminal justice at Sterling College which was an off campus, um, uh, that I attended over in the St. Louis area. MeM: What were some of the jobs that you had before you got your career? MM: Well I was always, uh, I was always interested in making money. Um, I always liked to work and have my own money because my mom and dad didn't have much money. I mean we got a small allowance for cutting our grass and taking out the trash and cleaning up the house for my mom and dad 'cause they both worked full time. Uh, but I always, that was never enough money for me so, uh, I, uh, I chose to go out and I had a paper route for one summer. I didn't really care for the paper route because it was, uh, it was a huge route and it went, uh, it had a lot of hills and I had, I think I had over about 100 papers so, and I didn't make much money doing that so I found that I could make more money on my own by cutting all the neighbors' yards. I think I had about five or six lawns there in my own neighborhood. And then, uh, I'd make money in the fall by raking leaves and then I'd make money in the winter by shoveling snow and whatever I could do. Doing little odd jobs, uh, you know, I helped neighbors out with, uh, putting insulation in their attic and jobs that they didn't want to do and I was certainly willing to do it. And then when I turned 16 I was, uh, I was one of my first friends to get a job. I went down and, uh, I was, my mom worked with a, a girl down at the Telegraph who was, uh, related to one of the bosses down at the Broadway and Main Produce Market. His name was Tom Twitchell and, uh ... my mom, uh, made an arrangement for, uh, me to go down there and do an interview and they were looking for a stock clerk, uh, bag boy or whatever and, uh, I was able to go down there and land that job at Broadway and Main Produce which was a perfect little job because, um, I'd get out of high school at, um, what, three o'clock and then I'd work that little job down there, uh, Monday through Friday and sometimes Saturdays, but from four to eight every evening and then, and we got paid in cash every week. I think I made, uh, started out at $2.35 an hour and I think by the time I quit the, uh, Broadway and Main Produce which we all called the fruit market, it sat at the corner of, uh, Broadway and Main, it, it's no longer there. Uh, it's where the, uh, Casey's gas station is now but, uh, I was just a few blocks away so I either, uh, usually rode my bike to work or walked. And, uh, then I left the, uh, fruit market for about six months and went down 3  to National Food Store, uh, down in east Alton and I was a stock clerk down there. I left because I was, uh, able to make more money but soon after I went and, uh, work for them they closed that National Food Store down. So then I had to go back and beg for my old job back and I guess I was a good enough worker to, uh, for him to hire me again. It was the, the Zaner family that owned the fruit market and I think, uh, they had, like, at least three generations of Zaners that, uh, ran that market throughout the years. And, uh, then, um, I worked at the fruit market until, uh, I was able to get a full time job, uh, as a maintenance man out at Hillcrest Apartments and I, uh, I got that job because, uh, I'd had my first child already and at, like, 21 years old and I had to get full time employment to support, uh, my wife and, uh, my baby. So, uh, my interview, I, I didn't really know much about maintenance work other than I did know the, the manager very well who happened to be my, one of my best friends' mother and, uh, they, I knew that they were looking for a maintenance person and so she had me come out for an interview and I was interviewed by the, uh, the maintenance supervisor at the time, Ron Richards, uh, who was very talented and had a lot of skills. But, uh, during my interview he asked me, he said, "So, do you know anything about electrical work," and I'm like, "No, don't really know much about electric. All I've done is work for the fruit market." Uh, he said, "How about plumbing skills?" I'm like, "No, don't really know any plumbing." He says, "Well what about, uh, carpentry? Do you know, do you have any carpentry skills?" "No." "How about painting? Are you, do you have any painting experience?" And I'm like, "No, not really." [laughs] MeM: [laughs] MM: And, uh, well, I later heard that, uh, Ron went back in to Judy Marquis and said, uh, "Well, he, I would say go ahead and hire him. He doesn't know anything about maintenance but at least he's very honest." [laughs] MeM: [laughs] MM: So I was, I got that job and, um, I was able to hold, I had that job for three years and it, it was a nice, very close to work. Uh, I lived, uh ... within about a mile away from there and I, it was a straight day job with weekends off. Uh, on call occasionally, you know, when my maintenance supervisor wasn't available but, uh, it was, it was a good little job. And, uh, it provided us, uh, with a living, uh, to allow my wife pretty much to stay at home. And, uh, we, we didn't make much money but we were getting by and we were not on any kind of government assistance or, uh, never needed food stamps or anything or, but we, we were considered what I would consider poor. Um, you know, just, but we were able to pay our bills. And, uh, and then, uh, I had a second child, who'd be Meghan who's interviewing me today. And uh, so I thought, "Well, I," and I, I started finding myself falling behind some of the other people that were my age. They were starting to get better jobs at Boeing and, which was it, McDonnell Douglas and Shell Oil and I only had the two year degree which really didn't help me land any kind of a business job at all. You really needed a bachelor's degree. So, um, my mom and dad had mentioned to me that the police department was hiring. So I thought, I didn't really think of myself ever as going into law enforcement. It wasn't a lifelong dream or anything like, a lot of these cops, they, that's all they wanted to do from the time they were kids but that wasn't the case with me. I was a little on the wild side and I didn't really ever see myself going into that profession. But once my mom and dad mentioned it and the, the fact that I was going to be getting about, oh, I think I only made about a thousand dollars a month out, uh, doing the maintenance work. Uh, so I was gonna immediately double my salary by taking this police, police job 4  'cause I think they were making about close to $20,000 at the time when I started. So I started looking at, looking at it and, uh, I started really observing the police officers and, you know, I didn't know much, anything about police work at all but I started mainly just seeing police officers driving around and, and most of them, you know, it was like, well, you know, I don't know what police work's all about. Uh, you know, I know you gotta arrest bad guys and, uh, work traffic crashes but I was like, started really thinking, I was thinking, "This might be the perfect job for me." So I went ahead and applied and, uh, it was a long process, a very long process, and, uh, there were over 300 applicants. So, and I think they were hiring five positions, um, so it was a, it was a very good job at the time, you know, especially if you were, you had to be an Alton city resident, which I was so I didn't have to move. Uh, you couldn't even apply without even being a city resident so, uh, that has since been lifted. And, uh, but any, you know, we, uh, I, I started the hiring process and I was able to, uh, after about, it seems like it was six months before I was able to get hire, uh, hired. I came out number one on the list and my DSN, my number, was, uh, 80, I got hired in December of 1985, so my DSN was 8501 and, uh ... so I started my, uh, life as a police officer in the city. And, uh, I did, I was pretty much, uh, very lucky to, to, to have done just about every job there was to do down there. I started out of course, as everybody does, as a patrol officer, which I did for about four and a half years. And, uh, then I was offered a position in the traffic division, which was clearly, uh, better hours because you normally were working straight days, uh, seven to three and, and weekends off and as opposed to shift work. And our old shift was horrible. It was a seven day rotating shift so you worked seven straight days and you got, like, a day and a half off and then you worked seven straight afternoons and you got a couple of days off and then you work seven midnights and then you'd get, like, you'd get a long weekend, uh, 13 times a year so we got one weekend off a month. So I was happy to go to the traffic division mainly for the schedule. And I spent about six months in traffic before I was offered a, a position in the detective bureau. Uh, and I jumped at that because that's kind of what every cop strives to do, is, is make detective. And there was no, um, everybody thinks that when you make detective you make a whole lot more money. You really don't. Uh, it's, it's, it's a lateral position but it's just a little more prestige. You're wearing a, uh, a suit and tie or a coat and tie everyday instead of a uniform and you're, you're basically following up on all the, uh, felony cases which are the more serious cases. And I spent, uh, oh, roughly I think four to five years as a, no, I'm, I'm sorry. I, I think I spent about three years as a detective and then I took a promotional exam and got promoted to sergeant, which, uh, they only, there is only one detective sergeant and he had seniority so when I made sergeant, that forced me to go back to uniform and back to shift work. But I was at that time a, a street supervisor which is your first line of supervision, um, sergeant is basically in charge of, and there was two sergeants on each shift. When I went out I would have been the, uh, the junior sergeant. And then, then we got one shift commander who was over the two sergeants, so you got a lieutenant, two sergeants and then usually like six or seven patrolmen. So I was responsible for the six or seven patrolman and as a supervisor basically you're, um, you're making decisions out on the street that a lot of, uh, young cops need help with making decisions. Everything isn't black and white, you know. In, in law enforcement there's a lot of, uh, yeah, there's just a lot of decisions that need to be made by experienced people, uh, who've already been there and done that or, uh, or have already experienced it, you know? Uh, so I, I, I was a street supervisor for I don't know how many years. And then I was, uh, I was lucky enough to be offered the, uh, the detective supervisor's job. So I was still a sergeant and I was able to move back to detective's so at that time I was a, a detective supervisor. Uh, and they, you know, I also worked some cases. Uh, my caseload wasn't near like a regular detective because I was in charge of approving all of the detectives' paperwork and, and supervising, uh, felony cases and murders and armed robberies, all the serious things that were happening in Alton. Um, 5  and I had, I was under a, a lieutenant initially and then, uh, and then it became, a captain ended up being, uh, in charge of detectives. So, um, I did that job up until the time I, uh, was promoted again, uh, to the rank of lieutenant. And at that point I became a, a shift manager which is in charge of a, an entire shift, a couple, two guys. And, uh ... that was a good job. Um, you still were working shift work but you did have seniority and had your choice of vacations and, uh, first choice of vacation. Pretty much could have a comp day any time you wanted because you had the two supervisors there under you. And, uh, so I did that job until, uh, Chief Sullivan came in. And he, he made me an administrative lieutenant, uh, which basically was, uh, they called it support services. So I was over the records division, I was over the traffic division, I was over the jailers. Uh, and that came later in life, uh, the jailers. We didn't used to have jailers until we, uh, were able to get the new station. Uh, we, we, uh, always were in the basement over there at, uh, on Third Street below City Hall for the longest time and I never thought we'd see a new police station, but, uh, that was, uh, very nice, uh, to be able to have that new station, the Donald, uh, Sandidge Law Enforcement Center, and they were able to put the court, the Third Judicial, uh, Court, there in the same builder and we shared space. But, so when we, uh, we were actually had a lot of input with the architect on what we, how we wanted to design this, uh, new station because the way the old station was designed, it, I don't think it was ever designed to be a police station. When we'd bring people in, if somebody's been drinking you either had to take him through the basement and come up about 35 or 40 steps or you had to get him out on Third Street hill and it was never good. Um, especially in the winter, snow and ice made it very difficult to park on the side of the hill. Uh, so yeah, it was, uh, it was very needed. Uh, we, we finally had the space that we needed, uh, 'cause we were out growing, uh, they were putting, making offices out of broom closets down at the old station. We were just, uh, and I think we only had about, we might have had a dozen cells and then it only had one female cell. And at times we'd, we'd way overload the females back there. There was only two beds and I, and I know we had more than, more than that in there. And, uh, all the females had to share one toilet, uh, if you were thrown in that slammer. Um ... I don't believe we ever double bunked anybody, uh, at the old station. We'd, uh, if we, if we ran out of room, uh, we could take our prisoners down to east Alton and they would assist us in housing somebody until they could be seen by a judge. Um, we, uh, like I said, we, we sat down, uh, and helped design the new police department so it was convenient for the investigation, the detectives, to be able to have access to the jail, so the detectives' offices were right across the hall from the jail. So, and then in the new jail we, uh, there was, lot, you had lots of new cells and then we had a, a, we finally had a, well we always had a separate division for the females but they had their own little wing and, uh, and then they had the, the males' wing. So, and they were never, not in, they were never intertwined but it was just a much better, more secure jail. And, uh ... we, uh ... what else? Um, well, we were able to, uh, help design the command center, um, and then where the supervisors would sit as, and where the dispatcher would do all the radio traffic. And then they had the, the, we had a very nice, uh, area for the traffic division and the records girls had, there were, there were like four cubicles at the old station and we were able to give them more room, much needed space for all the records that were being stored. And, uh, so it was, it was really, uh, I know that there was a big price tag on it and, uh, you know, a lot of people thought that it was way over the top but when you're really there and doing the job and, and seeing that there really wasn't any wasted space, I think it was, it was really, uh, needed and like I said, it was, I never thought I'd see that in my day but it was, uh, it was one of my special things about, you know, of my career is getting to go to that new station now. I was actually the last one, as we were closing the, uh, old station down, uh, I hung around the old station because it was a point in time, time where we were actually leaving the old station and transitioning into the new station but, so, uh, I was actually the last, 6  last shift commander, um, at the old station and, you know, after everything got moved, uh, I packed up and I was the first, uh, shift commander at the new station. It all happened in the same day, so that was kind of cool. MeM: That is very cool. What were some of the other roles that you had at the Alton Police Department? I know that you, uh, partook in a Special Olympics? Am I right about that? MM: Yes, that was, uh, kind of when I was, uh, in support services role. Uh, the chief was very community oriented. Um, and that's one of the things, you know, when I first hired on we didn't really, we didn't do much with the community at all. We just did police work. We'd go on our calls, we'd do self initiated police activity, and then we found, you know, that, um, public relations, uh, there was a mistrust. Uh, it was, you know, people didn't always trust the police even though, you know, we were just doing our jobs. Uh, so we started reaching out with community, uh, outreach stuff. Uh, and Special Olympics was one way in which the community got to see us in a different light. Uh, we raised money, uh, for Special Olympics and, uh, that's, that's kind of like the police, uh, uh, charity. And, uh, and I was big into that. Um, so once they put me in charge of that I, I just, I started trying to figure out different ways to make money for Special Olympics and you were rewarded, uh, every year. Special Olympics did a, a law enforcement torch run t-shirt and when there was, and, uh, police officers would all run in the, in the torch run. Uh, you know, it was like a five mile run and then several cops that would want to do it would run every year but the whole thing for the torch run was to raise money for Special Olympics. So, I, uh, we did a couple things where the, the cops would go in and, uh, do celebrity waiter things and, and work for tips basically. We weren't trying to take tips away from the staff, this was just like if you wanted to make a donation, we would help them, you know, fill the sodas and, and, uh, you know, take people napkins or silverware and just ask for a small donation. Of course we didn't put pressure on them. We just left an envelope on the table and if they chose to do it, they did. We did that at Applebee's and Red Lobster and, uh, but we didn't make that much money. And then, uh, I, I noticed that on the, the back of the shirt, uh, there was awarded the top, um, police departments, so you got your name, uh, on the back of the t-shirt and it was, uh, by rank and, uh, you had to raise more than $15,000. But once you got to the $15,000 mark, uh, you could get on the back of the, you could get your, uh, police department's name on the back of the shirt and I was like, "That would be really cool to have our name on the shirt." So that was my goal, is to raise $15,000 and it wasn't gonna, it was gonna have to be more than these two celebrity waiter things. So I, I started finding, uh, I, I decided to, to put together a golf tournament. And, uh, I did that golf tournament, first year I, I made over $10,000, um, or right at close to 10,000. And with the other, uh, functions we had done, it, it put us on the t-shirt for the first time. And, so I continued to do the golf tournament, uh, until the time that I left that position and, uh, I was able to get on the shirt, uh, I think at least three or four consecutive years before I, um, was, uh ... before that, uh, they, before we stopped doing the fundraising so much. So, um, I did the tally and, uh, in the eight years of doing that I was able to raise over $100,000 for Special Olympics. And, uh, like I said, we also did a lot of other, we started getting more involved with the community, with, uh, National Nights Out. Uh, and that's the night that everybody, they have a big block party and, uh, well you know, so we're mingling with all the, uh, citizens in, in the community. And, uh, we also did, uh, we started a basketball, uh, league. Not a league but, uh, where we, uh, we'd play, uh, the kids. You know, a bunch of the officers on their off duty time would go out and play these kids in basketball and we just tried to really, uh, tried to present ourselves as just humans. We're, we're not robots. Uh, we do have a human side and I think it was really important for people to see that, uh, 'cause most of the time, you know, when you're dealing with somebody, uh, unless 7  it's just a, a, a fender bender, it, it's a negative light for, uh, the person you're dealing with along with the family and or the kids that are seeing what's happening and especially if there was any resisting of arrest or anything, uh, and what could happen, you know, and, and the traumatic experiences some of these kids had witnessed when their parents might have been arrested for whatever they had done, you know. Um, I was also, uh, getting on to some of my other, uh, my other- MeM: Can I ask a question? MM: Sure. MeM: Um, wasn't there something around Christmas time where you could, like, shop with a cop for Christmas or something? MM: Oh yeah. You're right, I kind of forgot about that. Um, yeah, through our, um, Police Benevolent and Protective Association, unit 14, which I was also, uh, very heavily involved with. Uh, I was a executive board member, uh, for that organization but yeah, I worked, uh, I was, uh, treasurer for four years and I was vice president for four years. But we started the Shop with a Cop program as also part of our community outreach where we'd, uh, well, it started out we only, uh, we were taking 10 kids and spending $100 apiece on them. And basically, we got, uh, we asked for, um, churches and organizations, for the people that were needy and, and maybe the parents couldn't provide Christmas for the, for the, for them. So we'd take these underprivileged kids and take them to Target and basically let them shop. You know, they could shop for themselves or they could, they could buy gifts for their parents. Uh, you know, occasionally you'd have a kid, you know, buy some, buy himself something but, or her, herself something, we took boys and girls, uh, but the majority of these kids really just wanted to, uh, buy all their brothers and sisters and, uh, their parents. So, that was, uh, they've, uh, since expanded that program. Uh, now they, they take, I think they take, I don't know, about 30 kids out at Christmas time. We also started doing food baskets, uh, around Thanksgiving. We, we would put together about a, 100 food baskets and the policemen, um, and, well, uh, in the olden days we used to, to hand deliver them ourselves to people and then I think they got such a big thing to do that we started giving them to, giving them directly to the organizations that, uh, that help people out. So we'd, instead of doing 50 different deliveries, we'd, we'd take them down and just dump 50, uh, at the food bank. So... MeM: Wasn't there a major, uh, murder case squad that you also a part of? MM: Yes. Uh, I was, uh, in detectives, after you had two years, uh, two years experience as a detective, uh, you could become a member of the major case squad and you had to go through training. But it's the Major Case Squad of Greater Saint Louis and that was, uh, kind of a highlight of my career. Um, I was only able to work a couple cases because of my time in detectives and getting switched in and out of patrol because, um, you were only allowed to, to be in the major case squad if you were in an investigation bureau. So, uh, I, I was able to work a couple of high profile murder cases. I mean you don't get called out but the, the major case squad didn't get called out unless it's a, a murder with very little to go on, very little leads. Uh, so I, I remember, uh, I worked on a murder case over in Belleville and they, and they, and they still, uh, even though we're all training together from Missouri and Illinois, they always kept the agencies, uh, you know, if, uh, if it happened in Illinois we used all Illinois major case squad members. If it, if the case happened over in Missouri, they'd use all Missouri, uh, detectives. Uh, you, you 8  had a, a separate badge for your major case squad and, uh, and, you know, it was a very good experience and you met some of the top notch, uh, you know, top notch detectives in the area, you know. And you, you know, you could always learn from whatever. Even though we were all pretty, all the Alton guys were pretty good. We never called in the major case squad, uh, like they do now. We always, uh, we were proud to, to work our own murder cases and very successful. We had, uh, Alton has a higher, well, before I retired Alton had a higher percentage clearance rate than the major case squad. And we were very successful, uh, at solving murders. Um, there were a couple, uh, during my career that, you know, kind of still haunt me. Uh, there's, um, one of the first ones that really, uh, was shocking was somebody around my age. Uh, she was murdered up on Bell Street. I believe it was Bell. I was a brand new rookie cop at the time and it was the Julianne Gottlob case and to my knowledge, I've been, you know, out of town for the last couple of years, for the most part I, I try to stay up on Alton news, uh, that case is still unsolved. Uh, and then one case that I was, uh, actually worked as a detective, I was actually, uh, one of the crime scene guys, it was Felicia Rexford who was stabbed on a November day in, um, out in front of Target. And, uh, she had, uh, can't really recall. I think she had one or two stab wounds and she didn't, uh, survive and there was just, that was one that kind of really still shakes me because, uh, we weren't able to, we weren't able to solve that case. And then, and to my knowledge I think it's still unsolved today. Um, one of the other cases that, it was very haunting to me is, um, when the two firefighters were killed. Uh, I was in detectives, a fairly new detective. Uh, firefighter Tim Lewis and Captain Gary Porter ... I knew Gary. I didn't knew Tim, he was a young, a young man but, uh, I knew Gary pretty well 'cause his wife was our police dispatcher. And, uh, they had died fighting a house fire up on Highland Avenue and when they initially called me, uh, they said, "We had two firefighters killed last night." Uh, it was early in the morning when I got called out. I, uh, I immediately asked who it was because I, I had two real good friends on the fire department. I, I was hoping it wasn't, well you never, you hope it doesn't happen to anybody but I immediately asked who it was and it wasn't two of my high school friends that had, uh, I was very close with. But I did know Gary Porter real well. And, uh, it was a two story structure fire and, uh, one of the walls, uh, had fallen on these two firemen and they weren't able to get them out of there, uh, with, without them perishing in the fire. We, uh, that was another big case that, uh, we had, uh, ATF come in, Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. Uh, we work closely with, uh, one of their agents on a lot of the, a lot of the drug cases and a trigger lock is where you have drugs and a weapon but, uh, we were able to utilize some of their equipment 'cause they had better, better, uh, recording equipment. And we finally developed a good witness, not, not only a witness but the guy who had actually set the fire, uh, confessed to doing it. And, uh, what we really wanted was the landlord that, uh, that set him up to it because, uh, it was a vacant structure and he tried to burn it down once unsuccessfully. This time it was successful and it cost firemen, uh, two firemen their lives. But, uh, we sent the, the guy who set the fire was doing it for a landlord and the landlord, I guess, was upside down and wanted this thing just to burn. And so we were able to send him over there with a wire on and get, uh, get the guy. His name was, uh, I think it was Greg Franklin, and, uh, we were able to get him to confess and we were successful in his prosecution. And, uh, I think he was sentenced to 25 years in prison for setting that, uh, setting that whole thing up. So that was one of the cases I was proud to be a part of. MeM: Are there any other memorable cases in your career? MM: Well, yeah. There was a murder case that we'd worked, uh, up in Belle Manor. I believe, uh, there was a, the victim's name, I believe if, um, if I can recollect, it was Troy Slack. And he was, he was shot by unknown persons down in Belle Manor and, but we knew he had been shot with a sawed off shotgun. 9  And we absolutely had no leads and, and which was very unusual in Alton, at least back in my day. Uh, we don't get a whole lot of cooperation usually from the community 'cause people are afraid to talk, but usually in Alton somebody would always call in even if it was anonymously and tell us who did the murder. This wasn't the case in this. Uh, it, it had been going, it was getting kind of stale. We'd interviewed everybody we could and, and had no leads at all to follow up and it was, it was, the case was starting to get old which is never good because usually you need to solve your murder within about the first 48 hours or else, you, your, things aren't going well. 'Cause if, if the murder's solvable, usually within the first 24 to 48 hours you'll pretty much be knowing which direction to go and we had nothing on this case. And so I get a call one day. I'm, I'm in an investigation and I get a call from a cop over in Ferguson. And he happened to, he was interviewing some witness in, uh, on another incident unrelated to anything and he said, "Did you guys," he said, "I got a witness, said something about an armed robbery using a sawed off shotgun." And I said, "Well, no, we didn't have, we didn't kind of have any, any armed robbery," I said, "but we did have a murder here just recently with, where a sawed off shotgun was used," 'cause we knew by the wound, um, that it was a, that, from the spray it was a sawed off shotgun. So I was like bingo, light went off. I'm like, "We need to go over there and talk to this witness. She knows something and we might be on to our guys." And, uh, sure enough, we went over there and interviewed her. It was, uh, three guys from Missouri who had no ties to Alton. It was just a senseless murder. This guy, uh, I don't know if, uh, if they were trying to, if they were, just did it for meanness. I don't know if we ever found out the real reason but, uh, or if it was, you know, a drug deal that went bad. But anyway, we were able to, uh, get these three guys to, uh, in and talk to them and interview and they all three confessed and we were successful in the prosecution of that case. And, uh, that was one of the bigger cases just because we were clueless and I didn't think we were gonna be able to solve that case. And, and any time we had a murder, um, in town, I don't know what they're doing now because they call out the major case squad so they don't, Alton really doesn't work their own murders anymore, at least recently they haven't under this current administration, but we always did. Because if you turn them over to the major case squad, you lose, you lose command, uh, of that case and we always took pride in keeping the case under the Alton, Alton guys. And what we do is everybody just stopped what you were doing. If you were working on somebody's burglary case, you no long, you had to put that aside for a while until we, and then all, all the entire investigation bureau would work a murder case and we'd all go out and start calling leads. And, uh, there are just numerous people usually to interview and it requires tons of man hours. And we'd all work, you know, probably close to 16 to 20 hours a day, go home and sleep for four hours and then get back up and, and do another 16 to 20 hour day until we solved our cases and that's why I think we were so successful. Plus we, we knew everybody in town. Uh, you know, most of the guys I worked with, uh, were very well known in the community whether it be the black or white community. Mainly, usually the black community were probably more known. Um, and we got along with, you know, for the better part with most people and a lot of times if you had some good relationships out there, you would get information. Uh, and I think that's another reason we were so successful, 'cause when you're bringing a major case squad in, you're sending a detective that nobody has ever seen before out to try to, you know, get, get clues and, uh, get information. Well, there's no trust there because they didn't know the guy, so, um, and as long as you treated people, uh, with respect even though, even though you had to arrest them if they had committed a crime, as long as you treated them with respect, uh, they'd cooperate with you on situations. Uh, so, uh, I think it was, that was another reason we were always so good at solving our own murder cases. Uh... 10  MeM: Did you have a lot of... what would you say is the majority of your crime in Alton? And, and the way that crime kind of evolved? MM: Drugs. It's always been drugs. Drugs, drugs fuel everything really. They fuel the, uh, the burglaries 'cause people are trying to burglarize stuff whether it be a vehicle burglary or a residential burglary. They're going in to steal things to fence to the pawn shops or to other people in order to get money, and what is it normally for? Drugs. You know, uh, we saw the crack cocaine epidemic come in, um, you know, late 80s I think is when the first time we saw it and it just, it exploded in Alton. Um, we'd never seen crack cocaine and, and that's when the city, the city used to close down about one o'clock in the morning and it was pretty quiet for the most part. You might have an occasional, uh, domestic disturbance or something like that but then they started opening the bars til three in the, three in the morning, and then once crack cocaine hit, we were busy running calls all night, you know. And, uh, now, you know, I guess the drug of choice, uh, are all these opioids and heroin which, you know, people weren't dying on crack cocaine but they, it would ruin their lives. Uh, they'd basically, uh, lose everything that they have if they did have anything. A lot of times it was just, uh, people with not much education and, and, and no money to begin with but it, you know, it, uh, it definitely took its toll. And I, uh, nothing like today with these people dying, um, of, uh, opioid abuse, you know. Uh, these big pharmaceutical companies got everybody hooked on, uh, Vicodin and Oxycodone and then when they can't get that anymore they turn to heroin and, uh, the fact that they're putting Fentanyl in heroin now is, is what's causing these people to die left and right. And, uh, so I'd say, you know, drugs is a big problem, uh, in the community, you know, and not just our community, it's across the United States. Um, you know, but, uh, it, it creates, uh, homeless people and, uh, you know, and you see a lot of homelessness now. Not so much, uh, even in, well, just anywhere I go just about you can always see that there's a big problem with homeless. Uh, yeah, there was another part of my career. Uh, when we did start having such a drug problem, um, we had never really, other than, you know, we never did any proactive stuff towards drugs and drug dealers and then we formed a, a drug unit at, uh, as part of our investigation unit. And, uh, there- MeM: Was that the Weed and Seed? MM: No, this was different. I can go into that though too, uh, because this whole drug problem, prostitution problem is what, uh, prompted us to, but I'll address that here, uh, uh, but we started, uh, once we started the narcotics unit which we, we, we all learned it's like, you know, if we can control our drug problem maybe we can, it'll help control the crime problem. So once we formed this unit, uh, we'd begin, you know, other than, you know, just a, a police officer on the street making an arrest for drugs is about the only time we did anything about drugs. If you'd catch somebody with some marijuana or some cocaine, uh, of course they'd go to jail, uh, but we'd never done anything proactive. Once we formed this drug unit, uh, they were very successful in developing con, confidential informants, usually somebody that had a small amount of something on them. Uh, you'd want to know where they were getting it from and most of the time they were more than willing to tell you if you'd, you know, uh, speak to the state's attorney's office and, and tell them that he's a cooperative confidential informant, he's promising to take down three, three mid level drug dealers. So, um, we ended up, uh, once we started, uh, doing this, uh, once you'd made a couple of undercover buys out of somebody's house, that gave you probable cause to go to, uh, the state's attorney's office and, uh, get a search warrant drafted and then we could take it before a judge and then it, basically he'd sign it, you know, if there's probable cause signed off on by the state's attorney's office, um, they would issue a search warrant. So then we'd go, uh, you know, do the search 11  warrants. Well, we didn't really, we didn't, we were using sledgehammers back in the early days to break people's doors down and, uh, so we finally formed a, a SWAT team for Alton. Basically, they call it the Tactical Response Team. I was one of the, uh, mem, first members of that because, let's face it, a sledgehammer just didn't work very well, you know, when you swung it at the door and it sticks in the wood door and, so we got, and we were never dressed in uniform. We, we were always, you know, uh, might have had a black jacket on that said police on it but that was about it. So we, uh, once we formed this Tactical Response Team, we were definitely more professional. We got a shield, we got a battering ram and we were all dressed as police officers. You knew, because we'd had, once search warrant we did back early on while I was still in patrol, I wasn't a part of this search warrant but it was a MEGSI, uh, which is the Metropolitan Enforcement Group of Southern Illinois. They were like the first county drug unit. Um, we were assisting them on a search warrant and one of the occupants inside the house started firing rounds from his bedroom out the front door as we were breaching the door. Luckily, uh, no one was, no one was shot. I think one of the guys had a bullet go through his jacket but, uh, I, I had happened to be in uniform on the backside of the house so I didn't know what was going on, I was told to stay put over on my side in case they tried to come out the rear door or rear window, but I could hear it sounded like a war zone with all these gunshots going off and I, I, I didn't know if all my buddies were, were dead on the other side of the house or, or what. Um, luckily, uh, everybody was okay including the bad guy, uh, but that, that taught us a lot, uh, 'cause he tried to say he thought that we were other drug dealers coming in to rob him, which, you know, I don't think he really thought that but it was a good defense so we had to start, that's why you see these guys, they look like they're, they're, you know, ready for, uh, war or whatever. There's a reason for that, you know. It's a, it's, well they wear Kevlar helmets in case there's rounds fired and, um, you know, they do almost, they're, it, it's a little intimidating for some people but there's a reason that these guys, you know, they all want to go home at the end of the day. And, uh, you know, we're not there to, to shoot these people but we're certainly not there to take a bullet either. MeM: Did you ever have to shoot anyone in your career? MM: I never did. Um ... you know, I never, we were always, uh, told, uh, and taught you, you don't draw that weapon unless you really plan on using it. So there wasn't too many cases. I mean, there were several cases where we had to pull a gun. Luckily, I was lucky enough to work 27 years and never have to fire my weapon. Uh, one of the closest times I ever came to firing my weapon was, uh, was in my last month of my career. Uh, a guy was, um, well, I don't know if, I guess he was suicidal. He was, uh, really hopped up on drugs and we get over there and he's in the back of his, his wife had called us. I guess he was threatening her and the family and his daughter's inside the house, I think she was like 10. And he had a, a pistol in one hand and a big knife in the other and by the time I got there he was up in the back of his, standing in the back of his pickup truck and my officer was already out. When I pulled up behind him, he was out of the car and had him at gunpoint and we had about a 40 minute standoff with that guy, uh, before we were able to get a detective up there that he knew who he trusted and talked him, uh, throwing the, throwing the weapons down. Luckily, you know, I, he kept pointing the gun at us and, uh, we could have easily shot him and been justified but neither one of us pulled the trigger and, uh, I'm glad we didn't because it ended up being just a starter pistol. And, uh, you know, but we could have easily shot him because he kept pointing the gun at us and we kept telling him, "Don't point that gun at us." We both were in a position to cover, uh, but really my officer didn't have much cover other than the car door. But, um, so that was probably one of my closest, and then, uh, that's when I, I figured, you know, I've been lucky 27 years, uh, I think I'm gonna take my retirement [laughs], uh, when I turn 50 years old. It's, it's 12  definitely a young man's job. And, uh, I just thought, well, you know, I think it might be time for me to, to, uh, let one of these younger guys have my lieutenant's bars and they always love it when a lieutenant leaves because the sergeant makes lieutenant and the guy on the sergeant's, top guy on the sergeant's list gets to make sergeant, which is a, you know, a pay grade kind of, um, pay grade higher. So, yeah, anyway, I retired, uh, six years ago in, uh, May at the age of 50. And, uh, I was very, uh, very happy and proud of my career. Uh, it provided, you know, a very, very good, uh, living for my family. I was able to raise four children. Um, I lived in Alton almost my whole life. I did move out to Godfrey when they lifted the residency requirements, uh, but mainly Alton. And then, uh, you know, I was very still tied to Alton. I, I, I had a lot of, uh, uh, investment properties that, uh, during my course in my career I, I started thinking about investing in rental properties so I was, I was, I bought, oh, I was up to 75 doors at one time and, uh, but I've since sold most of my rental properties off and I am, uh, retired and I've only got, I've still got, uh, three homes and a duplex here in Alton that I'll probably hold on to for a while but, uh ... But, uh, two years ago I sold, um, two years ago I sold my house and, uh, decided to move to, uh, we were wintering down in Vero Beach, Florida. [inaudible], you know, that was our, always my wife and I's goal is to be in Florida for the winter but then we found it was getting a little expensive to keep two places so we decided just to move down there full time and, uh, we love, we love it in Vero Beach. It's very small and, uh, we're like 10 miles from the ocean and it's beautiful and the winters are fantastic but, uh, I was getting a little homesick and, uh, decided to convert one of these, uh, the downstairs unit of my duplex. Um, it's a one bedroom. I decided I wanted a place back here for coming home to see my kids and my mom and, uh, holidays and stuff and it felt like the last few times I'd been home it was, you know, Meghan always lets me sleep on her couch or my mom will let me sleep on her couch but everybody, I just thought it'd be nice to have our own space again, so that's why I'm home now, right now, uh, putting this little apartment together and getting it ready for Christmas. MeM: So having been an Alton resident for about 55 years, how have you kind of seen Alton evolve over the years? MM: Uh ... well, I'll tell you, you know, Alton used to be a big blue collar town. Um, back when I was a kid, my aunt and uncle, I remember them graduating high school and they were a blue, immediately leave high school, go down and get a job at the glassworks which was, uh, uh, Illinois glass or, I can't even remember the name of the plant, it's been closed so long now. Owens-Illinois, Owens-Illinois was the name of the plant, but they were, they were able to get a good enough job to move out of their parents' home at 18 years old. And we, you know, we had the, Alton Box Board was a big paper company and they employed thousands of people. And Laclede Steel, even though they're open again under, uh, Alton Steel, Laclede had, I don't know, maybe four or 5,000 employees. And between, between the steel mill, the paper company, the Alton Box Board, and Owens-Illinois, you probably had 10 or 12,000, uh, 10 or 12,000 jobs down there. And those, most of them are all, I mean the Box Board's gone, uh, the glass company went under. That was when we used to have returnable milk bottles and returnable soda bottles. Well, those days, um, are gone and, and we've lost a lot of jobs. And, uh, they had a mold plant out in Godfrey which is in Madison County, uh, that's no longer open. And then, uh, well, Olin, Olin Brass was a huge employer of this area and, and they're at a fraction of what they used to be, so I think ... Alton, mean population, I was looking at a chart, uh, they gained population until 1970. And at, and at that time it, it was really close to, I think, 40,000 people. And, uh, since that time, we've done nothing, uh, Alton has declined in population and I, I attribute a lot of it to, um, the closing of all those good blue collar jobs that are just not there anymore and, uh, I think a lot of people that were, uh, you know, they were living, 13  uh, modest lives in, you know, in, uh, small little homes that are, and that's why Alton's become such a big rental town because I think a lot of these people, uh, weren't able to get a job here so they had to leave to go other, other places. But, uh, I think what I saw was Alton as a population now, we're, it's around 26, 27,000, and that's the same population it was like in 1925. So we've lost, um, we've lost a lot of residents, um, since 1970. And they even, the figure I saw is that, they don't really have any actual figures but they're thinking that, uh, we've lost another, at least another thousand people since, um, the census of 2010. Uh, so you, I don't know. I, I do see some, uh, positive things happening. You know, there's some, some new businesses popping up and this, uh, uh, this business revolution, um, has, has been inspiring, you know, helping some small businesses to keep their doors open or, or, uh, you know, offering them advice on, uh, how to make their businesses better. So I, you know, I, I do see, uh, some progress here. I think it's got a long way to go to get back to where it was when I was a, a kid and I don't know if it ever will. Uh, because this is a thriving little community with all those factories and, uh, like I said, my dad was [laughs], was employed and, uh, while we weren't rich, uh, we got by. We always had food on the table. We took one vacation every year, we went down to Lake of the Ozarks, the same place every year. Uh, but my mom and dad didn't, you know, spend a lot of money. We, we, they were very, uh ... they were savers, you know. That's what people did back then 'cause there really wasn't credit cards. You didn't have, if you didn't have the money, you didn't buy it, uh, and that was the old school thing that my mom and dad, that's how they were raised and, uh, but it, yeah. I think, uh, I don't know. I still like Alton. I like it a lot. Um, and like I said, I, I'm coming back here just to have a place to stay for what, however many weeks and, uh, I'm hoping to have a grandbaby some day and that'll get me back here a little more often. MeM: Would you say that there are more rental homes than there are owned homes now? Like... MM: I think, I think the estimates are, like, 60% rentals. MeM: Wow. MM: Yeah. I think that's what, uh, the current administration has figured, you know, and I think that's why there's cracking down. While I don't think every landlord needs to be cracked down 'cause a lot of people do have nice homes and, and are responsible landlords and take care of their property but there are some slumlords, or not near as many as there used to be but there are still some slumlords in town, uh, that don't do things like they should, don't take very good care of their places. Uh ... but, um, definitely more rentals, I think, than, than home, uh, ownership. MeM: Any good rental stories? MM: Oh, I could prob- MeM: I'm sure you probably have some. [laughs] MM: ... I could probably write a book on rental stories but, uh ... well, uh, yeah, I can tell you. Um, I've had, I've had my fair share of, uh, well I've inherited a, a couple of my problems. Um, I had this, I'm not gonna mention any names but, uh, she, I think she was a, a paranoid schizophrenic. And, uh, I bought the, I bought a place and, uh, she happened to be in one of my units and, uh, she would actually said she'd, you know, see, see ghosts and, uh, she believed it. And, uh ... she called her ghost, uh, Double O Seven. 14  And, uh ... finally I, you know, she was threatening me a lot. She'd call up and threaten to kill me and I finally just had enough of it. I, I wasn't really threatened by her but I, I was also a little, didn't know what she might be capable of so I, I told her I really wanted her to find a new place to live. And, uh, finally I was able to get rid of her. [laughs] She said, "I'm ready to move," and I was like [inaudible]. She goes, "I don't have any way to move," and I said, "I'll, I'll be over there with a few trucks and we'll help you get out of that apartment." So, uh, yeah, uh ... she was a, she was a real hoot. MeM: [laughs] MM: [laughs] And then I had another guy that, another one where I inherited, I'd bought a place down in Christian Hill and, uh, the guy was obviously a, a paranoid schizophrenic that wasn't taking his medication. So he called me up one day and told me how he was graffiti-ing up my walls and, and breaking the glass and, uh, so he was a [laughs], he was another one I had to get rid of. Um, you know, and I sure enough went over there and he'd busted every plane, pane of glass out in the apartment and, uh, threw his phone through my oven door, it had a little glass door. And, uh, [inaudible] first, uh, window he knocked out, I, I just boarded up and said, "No more glass," you know, "for you." [laughs] And, uh, he was scaring the neighbor kids and stuff, telling them that the bricks were red because they were made of blood and, uh, yeah, he, he had to go, you know. It was a nice area and, uh, I've got people calling me up saying, "Your renters are scaring my kids," and, uh, so ... he had to go. MeM: [laughs] MM: [laughs] MeM: All right. Well it looks like we are running out of time. Um, is there anything else that you'd like to mention? MM: Um, well I, I never did touch on that Weed and Seed. Um- MeM: Yeah. MM: ... you know, with all the crime problems we were having, um, mainly in the middle part of town there was a lot of drug dealing going on, a lot of open prostitution. So somehow, um, I don't know how we were ever able to pull it off, we were able to become part of the Weed and Seed revitalization. Basically that was weeding out the bad and trying to seed it with good, you know. So we started trying to address these problems, uh, as a community and, uh, it was, it was funded a lot by, uh, with government money and, uh, we were able to do, uh, hot spot patrols that were paid for. You know, that was with two officers dealing in these high crime areas where some of this, the real problems in Alton were going on. And, and, you know, it helped us really, uh ... uh, form a community target team against, uh, issues instead of just being a police problem. You know, and we actually invited the residents in and heard from them what, what they're dealing with, you know. It's like, "Yeah, you know, um, I've got a prostitute walking by my house, you know, all the time. You guys, how come nobody's doing anything about it?" So, uh, I was a big part of the Weed and Seed, uh, and out of that we formed the Nuisance Abatement Task Force and, uh, that's where we all start really, uh, we'd always target, like, our top 10 problem properties. Um, you know, suspected drug dealing, um, whatever it may be, normally that's what it was but, uh, you know, and then a lot of times they were rental houses and some landlord maybe wasn't what, 15  doing everything he could to keep bad people out and good, you know, trying to find good people and, uh, but no, uh, they're still doing the Nuisance Abatement Task Force today and really they've even kicked it up another notch with this new, uh, code enforcement. So they're really targeting landlords I think more than homeowners, uh, with this new, uh, new little team that they've formed. So... MeM: Anything else? MM: I can't think of anything else to add. I've pretty much given you- MeM: [laughs] MM: ...my entire life story. MeM: All right, well thank you for talking with me today. MM: All right, you're welcome. 16 
MadisonCounty;Joyce Taff;1942;2018;Joyce Taff  1942 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Joyce Taff Oral History Interview Charles Delano, Interviewer Granite City, Illinois October 4, 2018 Charles Delano (CD): Hello my name is Charles Delano and I am interviewing Joyce Taff for the Madison County Oral History Project. Today is October 4, 2018 and we are in Joyce’s home in Granite City, Illinois. Joyce could we start the interview by you just telling me a little bit about your family and where you were from? Joyce Taff (JT): Okay, I was born in St. Elizabeth's hospital in Granite City, Illinois. I've lived here most of my life except for six years when my dad was transferred down to Fort Worth Texas. I lived there from second grade to the middle of the seventh grade when we moved back up there, or here, Granite City. And I've lived here ever since. CD: Ok. So then, uh. How many siblings did you have? JT: Uh ok. I have one brother who is alive and one brother who died when he was nine hours old. He uh received, he uh. We didn't have incubators back then and he didn't, remember the Kennedy baby passed away. CD: Yes JT: He died from that same lung disease. And uh he's now buried up, well he's buried at Calvary. And um. I had the pleasure of Fr. Jeff, last year, moved him from the baby section over to the family plot. So now all the family will be together. And Fr. Jeff came up and said a Mass in the chapel. And uh. At the grave site, he blessed the grave site. And that was very important to me. Cause it was my older brother who has three children. He has two girls and a boy. I can remember standing out in my grandparents’ yard by a big tree they had and praying to God that please let my baby brother live. I don't know why that sticks with me but it has for all these years. Um. One other thing [indistinguishable] I'll tell you when we were in Texas. That a before I go back on my family or I don't know how you want to do this Charlie. But, ah. We lived, lived in like a farm in Texas. Mom would come and my brother would come to pick me up from school. When we got home, the gas hot water heater had exploded and our house was on fire. And that was very traumatic for me, because I could hear my dog inside barking and the firemen said we can't get her, can't get the dog out. My mom said it said it [indistinguishable] in later years. She said if I knew then what I knew now, she said I think you had a nervous breakdown. Because I do have bad nerves. So that was kind of a big thing in my life, and it still affects me to this day with my nerves. And Um. But, for me alive. I had a typical, I was very blessed. I was loved unconditionally by both parents. My brother and I are very close and are still very close. Also with his wife, and my nieces and nephews and great nieces and nephews. Uh. Every six years apart. I um. I went to school in Granite City High School. Graduated from there and then I took typing but I really didn't have a major skill. So I moved in 1  with my grandmother who lived here in Granite City. My parents moved over to Missouri. And uh, she sent me into keypunch school way back when. And uh I was able to go to school. I got a job at an insurance company over in Clayton. And that’s how kind of I stared my career in keypunch and when we talk more about the Depot later, I'll explain how that worked in. Cause that’s how I got hired at the Depot. CD: Okay. And what was it like growing up in Granite City? JT: It was neat, it was uh, course different time. You could walk the streets, not be afraid. Uh. I worked at the Washington theatre. Uh. From 16 to probably my senior year, or 18. Over a year had passed. Learned a lot of responsibility, had to learn my arithmetic. Because every night, I worked in the concession stand part. So every night we had to count candy. So multiplication tables came in really handy. And we had to count how many, so every night we had to count candy. So multiplication tables came in really handy. And we had to count how many hot dogs you had left and all that. Never the buns but the hot dogs, you see. Strange. Oh uh. My uh. My boss, Chis Patshaw was very nice, understanding man. Very free. When we weren't, when I wasn't working we'd go to events at the high school like the football games and basketball, you know whatever sport happened to be going on at that time. Uh. Had. I met my best friend, we lived like a block apart, didn't realize that. Then, one day we were both walking to school at Sacred Heart and we realized we lived that close. So when we became good friends, walked to school every day, walked to the high school. Which is was much further then you know now but um. Had, had a. We had a certain circle. We weren't, I wasn't, not in the in group. But um. There was probably about ten of us who ran about together. We’d take little trips during the summer. Um, it was each other’s parents or whatever. And I, I guess we, some of the girls got married after school, um. I did not. Mary Ann and I started traveling together and. CD: Who is Mary Ann? JT: Mary Ann is my very best friend, my BFF. And um. She has had to put with me for over 62 years. And she's a, very calming influence in my life. When I get upset, she can calm me down. My mom and dad as I said before both loved me unconditionally. As a child, I only received one spanking and that was from my Dad. That was shortly after he retired. I didn't see my dad till I was 3 years old, because he was over in Germany in the War. I was born in ‘42, he didn't get home until ‘45. So, I was three when I saw my daddy for the first time. Mom said every soldier that I saw I used to call daddy. And um. I had run out the street in front of the car. Well he was very upset. Of course I got a spanking. Mother told him he could never spank me again. Which you know I understand because he was upset. If my brother, I remember one time, my brother and I were fighting, and uh. And I don't know why, we were just kinda punching on each other. And my mother came in the room and said okay you two want fight, fight it out. You know, just hit each other, do whatever you want, and we both started crying because we didn't want to really hurt each other. It was just a thing to do and [indistinguishable] from, I mean my brother and I are as close as two siblings can be, maybe even closer. All I know is that I can pick up that phone anytime and he'd be here in a minute. And that's, really feels good inside to know that um, same thing with my nieces/nephews/sister-in-law, that they would be here. But it’s um, good having a littler brother ‘cause you can. I used to, you know play like you know he killed me or something and he believed me. [laughing]. I don't know how he figured I was talking to him if I was dead but you know. So that's some of the goofy things but growing up here in Granite was nice. It was uh a quiet little town. You knew your neighbors, um. I can remember going down to the local little grocery store was like a mom and pop thing. 2  And uh. You would just go in and put something on the, a tab you had, ya know. You paid it off at the end of the month I guess, I don't know what they [indistinguishable]. Which uh. That was kind of neat, it was a small-town type thing. And we had a really good, two really good places, well three, to eat in Granite City. There was Snack Shack which had really good chicken, which is over by our Hospital now. Uh, Barney's Root Beer, which all the kids hung out at but that’s closed now. It’s now the Schnucks parking lot and um. What was the other one? Snack Shack, Barney's, oh. Ah, Park and Eat. That's where the BP station is in Granite now. They had the best pizza burgers in the world, and everybody has tried to, in this area, tried to duplicate them, no one has. Now, I just found out last night, in a meeting, that they said there’s this new restaurant in Granite that’s open called the Diner. And they have the closest to that Pizza Burger, and this is from people my generation that belong there. CD: Well you mentioned that it was much safer earlier. So, how has that changed as far as being able to walk around Granite? JT: Well I think it. [Sigh]. A friend said they think things as far as kids walking and drugs got out of control. Now I don't know this, when air conditioning became invented. Because people used to sit on their porches, then they started going into their houses. And uh, It made it different, but to me, Mary Ann and I would take the bus home after work at night, didn't feel any threats. Uh. You could walk home from the football games or you know there wasn't a threat there. But now you don't even know. I guess it's basically like when during that time, you weren't afraid to pick up a hitch hiker or you know offer somebody a ride. And they weren't afraid of you either. But now that's all changed, you never know now unfortunately. You know if they've got a gun or if they're on drugs or if they're trying to hurt you or whatever so. Safe in that way I guess. CD: Well then, did the military base and the Depot, did that play any role in your life growing up? JT: I think it did, yes it did. I don't think it did, I know it did, um. I. It made me more aware, I think. I've always liked history but when I went to work for the Depot, because it was an active military base. I worked there from 1965 to 1970, when they closed the army Depot down. Now it stayed open as a warehouse place and then a made other things of it since. So it’s still open but it’s not called the Granite City Army Depot any more, um. It was always neat to go in, in the morning, with the flag going up. You had to get out of your car morning or night whenever you were close to that flag coming down or up going up. Stand there. You just felt like you were a family because of the military presence there. Everybody kind of worked together, whatever group you were in, whatever office. And for me, it was the flag, just getting out of the car, and just standing there, and knowing that you know these guys are fighting for me to be, ‘cause this was during the Vietnam era, war. So, it a made a very big impact on me, ‘cause I always tell people that I really miss that flag. Even though I went to work for another military installation, it was in a big building downtown St. Louis. We didn't have that. And I think, when the Depot closed, for Granite City that really hurt. Because at lunch time, all of us would go downtown Granite City. They had a Woolworths, you had a place, different places we went to eat, different businesses. They had a show down there. You know. And all of that ended up, probably within two years after the Depot closing, all closed. So that was a big impact on Granite City, losing a lot of income for downtown. CD: And how did you first get a job with the Depot? 3  JT: Ok. I was working for this insurance company, as I said earlier. The treasurer absconded with the funds, so then I was out of a job. So ah, somebody said well why don't you take the civil service test and see if you can get on with the government. Well I did. I got called. Uh, went on an interview, and I got hired. So that’s how I got on with them. I started on the nightshift, called the third shift at the time, as the keypunch operator. I kind of progressed up like another grade and uh. I was one of the persons, because it was during the Vietnam War, I was one of only two people could operate a transmitter, is what they were called. It was a keypunch machine but you put the punch cards in there and that transmitted all the information to the different arsenals, Depots, of all the equipment that was moving and moving out so. That was kind of neat to do. It uh made me feel like I was part of the real action but I mean real action [laugh], I was doing something for my country, um, In, probably within a year, year and a half of doing that, I got moved to the day shift. They were looking for a keypunch supervisor and I got it, to be a key punch s supervisor. I got that position interview, got that position. Um, little hard supervising people that you'd been on the same level with before. Some took it well [laugh], some didn't take it well. Um, and I enjoyed that, I enjoyed the camaraderie of the people I worked with. As I said, very close-knit family there, um. And at the end of my career, not working at the Depot, but when I retired 31 years later, I um, was still at a computer, I was working for a computer agency. But I was an administrative assistant. You know I took care of all the training needs and uh um, the charts for briefings for my bosses and stuff like that. So, you know it advanced for me. It got me hired after my grades. CD: What were some of your other duties as a supervisor? That were different... JT: I had to write the appraisals for people, for my peers I guess you would call them. Um, I had to make sure, I had to do all the scheduling. I had top prioritize the work load as it came in. I had the authority to approve or disapprove leave like vacations, sick days wasn't usually to bad cause if you're sick or you're sick. But if someone, you got, say you had six two people and two of them were on vacation at the same time then you kinda had to make a decision there on what you were gonna do. CD: So, do you work a, what kind of people did you work with that in this environment then? JT: um. Mostly the women were the keypunch operators. The machine operators who operated those big old IBM machines. I don't know if you've ever seen them, they're giants. That was mostly the men did that work because there was like uh wired boards that you had to wire. You know to take in and out. But what I, when. My boss, my big boss was very nice. Uh, not that my other bosses weren't nice too. But he was kind of a mentor for me, um. Like I said, working for the military is just to me, is just incredible. CD: So, do you work with civilians then mainly, or did you work with enlisted? JT: Both, both. We had um, officers. We had enlisted men and we had civilians, all within our same department. Uh. I worked in what they called warehouse 37. So, it was kind of a big building, like a big warehouse. So, you had different offices also in there. Like you might have a procurement office in there with the uh data processing center. Which that would have been in. You might have maintenance down the way, so you had a lot of people and a lot of buildings. CD: Did you supervise uh military personnel at all? Or was yours just the civilian division? JT: Mine was just the civilian part. Now uh, when they, the military used to come in from Wisconsin 4  during the summer for training and uh sometimes I would have to just do them for the summer, military guys if they would come in. But not often, usually they would put them up there on the big machines or something like that. CD: And you mentioned a lot how you felt connected, like you were doing something during the Vietnam War. JT: Mm-hmm CD: Did, was there a sense of community there between the civilians and the army personnel? JT: Very much so. CD: And what would you guys do during off hours? JT: Uh. We would go sometimes, we would go, even at lunchtime, we would go to the NCO Club, Non- Commissioned Officers club and have lunch together. Or sometimes we would go there for uh evening, for dinner. Or we would meet off base, I had some military guys, over here, not here where I live now, but our house or our apartment. So, you know just to make them feel at home and welcome and of course if they had families then they were also invited but. Anything to make them feel, you know, welcome. CD: Mm-hmm. And you started working for the base five years before the Depot closed. JT: Yes CD: Did you know, when did you first find out that they were probably going to close the Depo? JT: On my way to work, sitting in my car, waiting for a train, they announced on the radio that the Granite City Army Depot would be closing. That’s how we all found out. CD: And how... JT: On the radio. [laughing] CD: How long was this before they actually closed it? JT: Uh. I'm gonna say maybe 8 months, it might be a little longer. CD: How did that uh, people react when they first found out, especially since it was on the radio? JT: That's what upset ‘em the most. It’s the fact, that they, that’s how they had to hear about it. It didn't come down from the commander or the head of personnel and stuff like that. And uh, they worked well to get us all a job somewhere else, um. Or people retired. You had some choice in what you wanted to do, retire. Some people moved out to Utah to another base. Some moved to um, trying to think of some other places, up to Rock Island, Illinois. You could go over to St. Louis, cause at the time there was several 5  places over there you could go and that’s what I chose to do. CD: And then so, why did you choose to go to St. Louis and where were you at over there? JT: I started out at in a building that’s no longer there, the Cotton Belt building. And I chose to go over there because it was closer than going, moving out of Granite City. I would have had to go to like Utah, Rock Island, Illinois, Alabama, so St. Louis was my logical choice, um. Retiring from my career, most of my career, after we moved a couple times, was in the, they used to call it the Mark Building, but when I retried it was called the Robert E. Young Building. It was across the street on Clark, Market and Clark. And it was across from the police station. So that’s where I retired really from. And at the time, when I started out it was called SEMA, when I retired it was ALSA, which is the acronym for Automated Logistic Systems Agency. CD: Did many people transfer to St. Louis or did a lot of people leave Granite City completely? JT: Most of the people that I knew of transferred to uh St. Louis area. Now, I know at least maybe six to eight people who went on to Tubing, Utah, they were out there. CD: And then did the closing have a big effect on the Granite City population, things being offered as far as services, restraints, things like that? JT: Yes, ‘cause some restaurants had to close, um. I remember downtown, Woolworths especially. We used to go there sometimes at lunch and they had [indistinguishable] a lunch counter. And when we went down there for lunch, that... Woolworths stayed open, [hiccup] excuse me, but the lunch counter had to close. You know they just didn't have enough business. Uh there was a couple stores downtown, um. Clothing stores that had to close. And I know that put people out of buss...I mean unemployed. And there was a show downtown, that closed. The Washington Theater where I worked, it stayed open, but now the uh bus depot is there. CD: So downtown, was downtown the hardest impacted area? JT: Yes, yes. CD: How are the other um parts of town affected, if at all? JT: I'm not real, I think downtown was hardest hit. Some of the areas like Belmore Village, that was hit a little bit because there was businesses out there but not as bad as downtown. Downtown I don't think has ever come back from all that because it used to be a bustling metropolis. Now it’s just died down. It’s coming back a little bit but now like it was when I was there. I mean I still go there. CD: Ok. So, the Depot is just closed, you've moved over, or you're working in St. Louis I should say. What did you start doing for your new job? JT: Um, I went into the keypunch section as a keypunch supervisor. I was hired over there for that, um. I went over there in June of ‘70. Uh, I stayed with that agency until I retired 1995. Uh, going through different name changes of course. Uh, got out of the key...I went from keypunch, I was still keypunch 6  supervisor. The hardest thing I had to do as a keypunch supervisor was I had to fire [indistinguishable] yeah I did have to fire, she had been given three warnings, because she was not performing her job well and she was deaf. That was my hardest thing I've ever had to do as a supervisor. Uh, very nice lady but she liked to, as I told you earlier about [indistinguishable] working priority order. She only took out what she wanted to do and the other employees would complain she's not taking any of the hard work so you know she was talked to by me and then my supervisor also had to talk to her. Well when she'd been given her third warning, supervisor, my supervisor said you're the supervisor you let her go. So that was kind of a hard thing to do. And uh but after there, I went to the computer room. Which I learned a little bit more skills on the computer and things like that. And then I got a chance to go down, get out of the complete computer field of the keypunches, the computers and all that. And uh, go into like an administrative job. And uh I, I did take that interview, took that job and then I, with that kind of progressed through there and that was working with uh. On how, they were called system change requests. And it was how to change things in the system through, I think there was four different commands that we worked with and um. So I processed all of those and then we from that I got a job on a special group, there was just myself and another lady, where we taught everyone the new procedures as things changed over and I was the uh main person to do that and I was lucky enough during probably like the last 8 years of my life [meant careers], I got a lot of awards. Got some bonuses. um. When they decided that they were gonna move part of our agency in a re-org, I was lucky enough to get a job with another gentleman who I really enjoyed doing stuff with and that’s where I got to go into doing training for the employees, um. And doing his briefing charts, to take up Washington DC and stuff like that so. I really enjoyed that part, last part of my government career doing that. CD: And that was your last few years, you were working for this gentleman? JT: Yes. CD: And then you mentioned some awards. What awards did you receive? JT: Ok. You can. I got some awards for, outstanding awards for performances on my job, um. Sometimes those awards involved bonuses, which was you know over your salary, which I received the bonus, um. Got awards for training others, so you know, just kind of. CD: All job and performance related then. JT: Yes. Yes. I got an award for being so. It’s hard to talk about yourself, without sounding like you're tooting your own horn, um. I, I was told that I was the very best person I had for a trainer. Now don't ask Mary Ann that because I don't care about teaching her [laughing], I don't have the patience. CD: [laughing] JT: Uh, but. It was something that um, I guess, not that I don't enjoy training Mary Ann but. I really enjoy that and they recognized that at the agency's level, so I got things from that. We got um, this is kind of something off site, I don't know when they blew up, the uh building in Oklahoma City, a group of us got together and made ribbons for sale so we could send money down there for the Oklahoma City Bombing, um. Just a lot of other little things I became involved with at work, and that. So, you know. I would get, I wouldn't say an award, but a good job you know, and that was the whole group not just me 7  and things like that. I enjoyed all that. CD: And you worked in the computer room for a while. JT: Yes I did. CD: What was it like working in the computer room, back when you had all those old machines? JT: Noisy. I, it was okay and I thought that would be what I really wanted to do the rest of my life because it was just really fascinating, but the more I was in there. And as a, I'm sure every agency or place, lot of pettiness going on, and I just didn't like the way some people were talking about others, and that’s why I decided to make a move out. CD: What were your duties while working in the computer room then? Joyce: Um. Kind of the same as, you know when I a keypunch supervisor, cause I'm still supervising on one side. But on the other side [sigh], how do you explain this? The computers took tapes. So I worked in the tape library it was called, which is these big reels and you know, you'd have to categorize those, so if a programmer would go in or a computer operator would go in, they know, which one to pull or where it is, they're on the computer so. I mean it doesn't sound like a whole lot but uh. And then um, I got to run some of the machines, uh uh. They were called peripheral equipment, it wasn't the computer. Big guys for peripheral equipment. So, it a, you know like the sorter, if you had to sort the cords. Another one where you'd have to put in the boards and um get out certain reports from those boards, how they were programed for. Different stuff like that. CD: What were the computers doing and what was the goal of your office? JT: Computer office? CD: Mm-hmm JT: We were a support system for the whole agency. Uh. When the programmers came in who were writing the programs on other floors, ‘cause we were on a floor all of our own and we were behind closed doors. Because most things that we did were uh secret or higher confidential. So, what was the question? I forgot [laughing]. CD: Just what is your office do I mean...? JT: It, it was really supporting the programmers cause. Whatever the keypunch people did, we typed up, we typed up...We typed up everything the programmers had programmed out of how they wanted this program to run on the computers. So, they did that, then we took that information, course give it to them on their little punching cards, and uh. They would make additions, corrections, and then the computer operators, the big... you know, the big guys that ran the big machines. They would input all of that. Then it would come into a tape. CD: And you mentioned it was a confidential/secret. So did you have security clearance? 8  JT: I did. I had top secret. But you can go higher, much higher in all those secret levels, top secret levels. CD: And was there the same sense of camaraderie that you had at the Depot, when you were working over in St. Louis? JT: I can't say, no there wasn't, not the closeness or the camaraderie, um. It was more of a, I wanna get a promotion and get here and here and here, there. Where at the Depot, it was everybody would work together. Now at my last five years, it was more of a camaraderie. That, the office that I worked in there, now I can't speak of the other offices but our office worked together, that was good. And we all did things outside together. In fact, I even uh, Mary Ann and I even went on a vacation with like four groups of people. You know, so you know. It, there was camaraderie there, we'd go to each other’s houses and stuff like that. Uh, for the whole office, not just you know me. CD: And then what types of uh people were you working with, especially in the computer room, when you uh first worked there? JT: Uh, systems analysts, programmers, um...computer technicians. Because that’s what I became was a computer technician, when I was in the computer room. CD: Was it mainly men or were there a lot of women working there as well? JT: It was a mixture. CD: Did you have that kind of segregation of jobs like you did back in Granite City where the men would be the big workers, and the uh... JT: No. No... CD: ...and women would be the keypunchers? JT: No. No. CD: No. JT: No. You know I can't really speak too much about the computer room after I left it. I, I think it was on an equal basis. But you know they had three shifts so I only knew but see the day shift, I don't know that much about the other two shifts. But uh, as far as programmers and systems analysts, they were probably, maybe a little bit more men. Because some of the ladies were married, had families. The guys had gone to college, gone to school for this. So, but everybody seemed to get along ok. I mean, I'm still friends with a lot them and go out you know to lunch or go out to dinner and stuff with ‘em. So. CD: And then your last five years you were working as an administrative assistant. JT: Right. CD: What were you doing, um in there? What kind of people were you working with? 9  JT: Uh. They were programmers, systems analysts, who, they were the ones who were uh. I had been having their work keypunched for years. I was working with the actual people now. Uh, procurement analysts, budget analysts, um. So it was a different kind of a, out of the computer field, but into the. How do I wanna say this? The more professional I guess uh. And I don't mean that nastily, you know. They were doing budget and uh procurement stuff with, the computer room you’re working with, people who know technology, computer technology. So these people had to know more and uh we had every year uh, twice a year, we had a, different commands come in and I'm talking about Alabama, Rock Island, New Jersey, uh DC and then us. They would come in. I had to uh make up the packets that they looked at. And uh. So, there was a lot of decision making in those groups where there wasn't as much up in the computer field. CD: What are you deciding? What are, what's this this group doing? JT: Okay. Each one of those commands that I just named. CD: Mm-hmm JT: They would submit what I told you before were SCRs, systems change requests. They would write them up at their commands too. CD: Mm-hmm JT: They would have to go through DC, it’s the government don't forget [laughing]. And if they wanted something changed, they would protect their prioritizing things. How, which, whose command's things is the most important at this time. What is this you know? Does this make more sense than this one you know? Decide which ones they might get rid of or keep or whatever? CD: And so they all met in Granite to meet for a conference on this? JT: No no no, this was in St. Louis. CD: Oh I'm sorry, this, this is, um, you're right, you're in St. Louis and they had a conference in St. Louis. JT: Yes, every two, twice a year. CD: Okay. Is there anything else you would like to talk about with your career? JT: Can't think of anything... I felt very blessed when I retired, that so many people came to my retirement party. In fact, I even, fact it was was, everyone from the agency was invited. We had it in the auditorium. I got to get up and speak and thank everybody. And then I had a luncheon a week later and that was quite well-attended, it was at the Embassy Suites down on the landing. And I felt very honored that so many people thought that much of me. You know from the lowest grade people to the highest grade people. They attended, so that was very, special for me. CD: We talked a lot about your career but what's going on in your personal life. As we follow this thirty years, I know we’re switching gears a little here... 10  [Laughing from both Joyce and Charles] JT: Uh, okay. Well let’s see, I'll start since we're talking about work things. Why, um. I went to work for Holy Family [Joyce's home parish] in 2003. Our business, when Father, when we got a new pastor, I won't name names [laughing]. Uh. He wanted to know where all the computers were, well they didn't have any over there. So, you need someone with confidentiality because you don't want everybody to know how much is in your checkbooks, how much everybody makes. So, he approached Mary Ann and I, because the uh business manager at the time said I think we can trust these two people really well. I know them well, you know, know ‘em from Church, all the, Joyce and Mary Ann do a lot of things around here, um. So, he, we went in and he talked to us, and he asked us if we'd be interested, and we said yes but were gonna have to break it into two parts because one of us can't do payroll and the other one write bills. You can't have one person doing that. Of course, we do now but [laughing] it’s um. So I took the payroll part thinking that would be the easiest part [laughing], Mary Ann took doing the bills. So, I did that from 2003 uh, that pastor left and we got our current pastor and um. I did that ‘til 2016 I believe. And uh retired from that. CD: Mm-hmm JT: Uh, and that was just basically, I was basically the human resource person because I had to report, give reports to the diocese all the time. I had to make sure the health insurance was uh reflected the diocese, who gets what you know. If there was a letter, someone who wanted to know, like a bank if they wanted to get a loan. You know give them that, those figures to do with payroll, or what they make, their income, um, got like I said into the insurance towards the end, which is diocese mandated and all that. Because our business manager was just trying to oversee most of the other things that were going on, um so that’s what I did in my working stuff till 2016. I still volunteer um. I told our current pastor that I would keep the safe environment, which is Protecting God's Children and background checks. That I would keep that up as a volunteer in my retirement, and I have been doing that, um. Sometimes it’s a little hard to get people to realize, even though you have Protecting God's Children, which you only need once, once you're had it. Or your background check, if you have to more have done every five years. Well they don't understand why they have to have background checks every five years. Well you know, fact I'm working on some people from school now, that the uh secretary sent me who want to be uh chaperones to go on uh field trip for relatives. Most of them already have all of theirs but they uh. I'm okay, I'm down to the seven people I have to get a background check from. But there’s a lot, there’s not a whole lot of work if you keep it up with it. But it’s still sending it out, and if they don't mail it back, giving’ em a call, stuff like that. So that, that’s what I'm doing work wise. After retirement, Mary Ann and I both decided we wanted to do work for our Church. Now we were doing, working carry out fish fries, we were working. And we were doing things at Church, you know we were Eucharistic Ministers and um. Then when Mary Ann retired, we started getting into catering, not getting paid, we did this out of the goodness of our hearts, and we still do it out of the goodness of our hearts [laughing]. Not as much as we used to because uh, we used to do the uh Boy Scouts, the graduation, um the anointing Mass, the Confirmation, you know, just so many different dinners, the pastors wanted. Uh our big thing that we do know, or I still do is the anointing Mass and uh birthday party for baby Jesus. We used to do the senior luncheons for the little seniors, but due to age and knees, and we just can't stand that long or do that much. Doing a lot, we're very blessed that we have a lot of workers who do the leg work and we can Mary Ann who has the brains can just sit there and tell ‘em what to do. And I just sit there and cut up 11  things [laughing]. So, you know we're still active in our Church, we try to uh, go to everything special there is uh. Our pastor is very good with having religious things, cere- I shouldn't say ceremonies- uh Masses that you know we never had before. And we always try to make those. So, it’s uh [indistinguishable] the St. Ann's Sodality, have been for years, I was present for 22 years of the [laughing] St. Ann's Sodality. Uh. CD: What is the St. Ann's Sodality? JT: It's like a lady’s club or altar society type thing. Uh, it used to be called the Holy Family's Lady's Club. Our current pastor [laughing], does not like it to just be called Lady's Club. He says it should be St. Ann, so we changed our name like three years ago to St. Ann and so. Uh which only makes sense, instead of altar society. Anything that uh he needs like uh, we're doing the altar wine for him now, you know buying that. Uh, we have um, taking care of the homeless, were doing some things on that. We just try to you know do different charitable things I guess is a good word for it, I don't know. So, we're quite involved in all of that. Uh we did the food pantry for several years now, and we handed that off couple years ago. Uh it its’ just, the pro-life movement we're very involved in that, uh. We did the, everything for that for years, then three years ago we gave that up, [indistinguishable] so where a lot of the younger, the youth group has taken that over. And uh now we just attend, we can attend and listen to the talks and uh, we don't march down, we just stay in Church for you know, say the rosaries, and stuff like that so. Let’s see. I mean, seems like we're at Church a lot, but I can't remember what else we did. [laughing]. CD: Ok well... JT: Oh, we have Totus Tuus. CD: You do [laughing]. So, I'm gonna jump back a little bit to uh, when the military base actually closed and when they... JT: Are we doing, am I doing okay? CD: You're doing great Joyce [laughing]. JT: Okay [laughing]. CD: You're doing great Joyce [laughing]. No wrong answers here [laughing]. JT: Okay CD: But I know like the uh military base really slowed down and shut down between 1995 and 19... JT: 1970 it officially closed. Its 65 goofus not... CD: Well I mean the ent-, not just the Depot, but the entire installation... JT: Yes CD: ...in the 90s. So how did that affect the community in your opinion? Was there, did most things 12  close because of the Depot or were there more effects after the entire base closed? JT: I think there was probably more effects because like the military didn't come in anymore, so they didn't bring any revenue to Granite City. Uh you know, this was when they would go out I guess the National Guards or whatever they were for the summer. That made the officers club, the NCO Club close. The living facilities for the military got turned into apartments. Uh, couple good things: they built a YMCA down there, um, the commissary closed that was there. There’s something else they built recently down, I can't think what it is now. CD: So there hasn't been a lot of negative effects actually since the base closed as far as you can tell. JT: Not that I know of, there could be I don't know. CD: Mm-hmm JT: ‘Cause I know they've rented it out to several people, they do have warehouses down there. Some of the buildings have been torn down but I don't really, you know we don't have a good Granite City paper, so I don't know everything. Other than by word of mouth or Facebook [laughing]. CD: Ok, so. As we're starting to wrap up I mean, is there anything that you would like to tell us about your life, knowing that you're going to an archive, people in ten thousand years will look back at Joyce Taff [laughing]. JT: [laughing]...and say what an idiot. [Both laughing] JT: I really enjoy. Well look, I'm gonna step back a bit to my childhood. One memory, I mean. I didn't know my dad's parents very well. We were in Texas when they passed away. I was eight and my brother was two. So, didn't know them real well and they lived in Alton. They moved to Alton in forty something, two I think. Um. So, I wanna uh ok. But my grandparents, my mom's parents, the Kramers. I can remember sitting out as a kid on the back porch with my grandfather, and he taught me about the constellations, the stars. Uh. How to take care of the birds, feeding them, we'd go around with a little hot water kettle in the winter time and put it, you know he had little saucers out. So, you know those were good childhood memories for me because he took that time, uh I. And he had rheumatoid arthritis so badly, I can remember in later years he would just sit on his bed and rub his hands and rub his hands. Um. My grandmother was a very big influence on my life as far as religion. Uh, very important to her...um. Mom and Dad were not as religious [laughing] as they were but I mean. Mom went to church, my dad was Methodist. But they did get married in the Church, so you know in later years. Uh, what was the original question [laughing]? CD: Just, what would, is there anything you'd like to tell us? JT: Okay. um. My mom, well I wanted to become one of the Daughters of theAmerican Revolution. CD: Mm-hmm JT: And I knew there was a lot of research to that. My mother had been researching the family tree for 13  two or three years. And you know, at the time I wasn't, I wasn't at the age I was really excited about that or wanted to know much. But I, all of a sudden I got interested in it, and I don't know what sparked, oh I know what sparked it there was a, no that’s now what sparked it, anyway. I started going over the library in the evening, the St. Louis Library, ‘cause we were right across, well not across but right down there by it. And Mary Ann and I would go there with couple friends, who were also researching and uh. Started finding out things, and I thought now how am I gonna find out about the Taff family. I went to uh one of these books about the history of different counties in Missoura and I knew that they came from Maurice County, which is down by Rolla. And so I picked it up, I looked at the chapter, and it said the history of the Copeland Taff family [laughing]. Now it, that was a God movement for me [laughing]. So, I read a little bit about that. I uh, found out more stuff, I was able to get into the Daughters of the American Revolution, which I'm very honored to get into. I went to Valley Forge and also got the records from the Virginia State Library. My fourth great-grandfather, Peter Taff, wintered with George Washington at Valley Forge. I have the documents and the papers that verify that. Thats a very neat thing to know. Um, I also through that joined the Daughters of 1812 through another uh grandfathers, a Copeland grandfather. I've been able to get into the Daughters of the American Revolution and I really, I think because history does play an important part of my life, I feel very honored to be in those organizations. I have done several Ancestry, I got on Ancestry. My mother if she was alive now would just be in heaven. I know, well she's probably there anyway [laughing] but she would have loved Ancestry. Because she did everything by hand, she had so much documentation on her family that I thought where in the world did she get this. But it's right because I've gone to these places and she was right. So, I have, every place that all of my relatives have lived throughout all their lives, I have made up books and taken to the libraries or the historical societies in those counties and presented those to them. So, their history will carry on through those books and hopefully it will help someone else. I've got books in Indiana and Kentucky and Illinois and Missoura and in a Pennsylvania. So, the only place I haven't really been is Virginia and that’s where everything really started. And uh I've got a, at the Madison Country Historical Society now. And I'm getting ready to do some for the Hayner Library in Alton. But it it does help, when you are doing research if someone has something. I know when I went to the Jersey County Library uh in Jerseyville and asked for something. She said well this is all we have on that day. Well it wasn't very much but it was more than I had so um, by what she gave me I started doing some researching because my dad's mother's mother was a Greeely. That's who I was looking for and I've been able to, I took some books up to her, she was so excited, this little lady is in her 80s, so she was really excited, so it makes me happy that I can contribute to that. And I'm not trying to do this this to, you know, say oh wasn't she a great person. I just want people to know these were real people, if you need help, it’s here for you. You know, I'm glad I could do that for them, if they so choose to use it I you know. And its uh, same thing with belonging to those organizations. Uh, I'm proud that I belong to them. I feel honored that I could qualify and belong. I don't do that to be snobbish. I just think they're, I mean these are people who if they didn't fight for our country, we wouldn't be where we are. I pardon me, I shouldn't say it that way [laughing] we wouldn't have a country. So, you know, you know, I love my genealogy work. I [sigh] it gets frustrating at times but I, I love doing that now. And I love to read, I love to read. You know, I try to read at least x amount of books, I say twelve a year, once a month. You know, I try do one and I have been keeping that up. Sometimes it’s just little books, like right now I'm reading Abolitionists of Alton IL. CD: Mm-hmm JT: A lot of that I know, I don't. And uh, oh, I did, which you may not want to put in your interview 14  [laughing] but uh. My grandparents when they moved to Alton, they moved into the Enos apartments. I don't know if you've heard of them. It used to be way back when the Enos Sanatarium. Now before that it was someone’s mansion, Nathan somebody's mansion, or Nathaniel's. It is haunted and they have underground tunnels from it being an Underground Railroad site. I did not know any of that until I went on a uh underground railroad tour with the Alton visitor's bureau and to think that my grandparents Taff lived in that building. I guess that I didn't know them that well. I mean that really is interesting to me. So. I think that’s it, Charlie. CD: Well thank you very much for the interview, Joyce. JT: You're welcome, Charlie. You probably have a lot of useless nonsense there but. 15 
MadisonCounty;Mike Picchioldi;1962;2017;Mike Picchioldi 1962 - 2017   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Mike Picchioldi Oral History Interview Ally Morgan, Interviewer Maryville Heritage Museum July 10, 2017 Ally Morgan (AM): My name is Ally Morgan I am a student at SIUE, and I'm working on an oral history project and I am sitting in the Maryville Heritage Museum with Mike Picchioldi, who is going to be answering some questions for me. So Mike, where did you grow up? Mike Picchioldi (MP): I actually grew up in Maryville here, um, my grandparents owned a confectionery store and I hung out at their store a lot so I get to meet a lot of people and know a lot of people growing up when my grandparents retired, my parents took it over for a short period of time, and so I worked at the store, and you know grew up here and played here. AM: Okay. So you've lived in Maryville a long time, have you ever lived anywhere other than Maryville? MP: I did. I was, um, on the fire department here in Maryville, and until 1991, I got hired by the fire department in Edwardsville and I had to move there in 1993, so since 1993 I lived in Edwardsville. But Marysville's always been my hometown, so, I came back and I joined the committee for the Heritage Museum, and it got to the point where the committee if they had questions they would ask me because I had the answers, so eventually they elected me chairman of the committee. AM: Okay, so I'm guessing you went to Maryville grade school? MP: I did, I went to Maryville grade school that was on Donk Street originally and then they built the other Maryville school and they decided to change the names to Maryville East and Maryville West. So I went to Maryville East until 4th grade and then Maryville West until 6th grade, and then I went into the Collinsville High School System. AM: Okay. You mentioned Donk Street. Tell me a little bit about it got its name. MP: Okay Donk Street runs the length of the entire old part of Maryville, and it's named after the Donk brothers who owned the mine that was in Maryville in the early part of Maryville's creation the mine was the big employer and there wasn't very many streets and one of the streets that ran from North to South was named after the Donk brothers because they had Donk Brother's Mine Number 2 which was in Maryville. AM: Now is the rumor true that they thought about the naming the town Donkville? MP: Ah, we've heard some some different rumors that they had talked about um, you know different names and such, but ah, the town is actually named after Mary Crone who was the wife of ah the developer of the town basically, and ah, he named it after his wife, Mary. 1  AM: Okay. Different story than I have heard. So what made you decide to be on the Board of Trustees for the museum? MP: Well, Maryville had their centennial in 2002, and um, my parents at that time were on the committee ah, that helped with the Maryville Centennial, after the centennial the museum was open for a short period of time and then it kinda declined off and a lot of the committee members quit or they had a couple pass away, so they decided for some reason it just didn't' seem like this was a priority anymore, um, I get to talking to some people that were part of the committee and I decided you know I had some stuff to donate to it, and I came up and donated and talked to ‘em, and they said "Well you know show up for a meeting." So I started coming to meetings, and then like I said after about ah, two or three meetings they said: "Why don't you join the committee?" and I said "well, I you know I'd like to but I don't live in Maryville anymore, I live in Edwardsville." and they said "Oh that's not a problem, so I joined the committee and then after about 3 or 4 months like I said they'd have questions about stuff and I would have the answers for ‘em, and they said: "We need to make you chairmen of the committee." So, since then I've been the chairman. AM: Okay. So as a child growing up in Maryville, what are some of your favorite stories maybe from your grandparent's store, your parent's store just hanging out with your friends? MP: Well, it was a totally different um, life. Ah, in fact I had just posted some stuff I have a Facebook page that I created called "Memories from Maryville" and I posted a lot of old pictures and facts and data and stuff about Maryville. My grandfather was an avid - amateur photographer and he took slides so he has a huge slide collection he passed away in 1980, and last year I decided that I was going to start digitizing it. So, I started digitizing these slides, there's over 50,000 individual slides and about two-thirds of the way through, and, posting these pictures it just reminded me of what a simpler life and what a fun time we had growing up in Maryville. The kids always came together as I said I posted a story about the Maryville Homecoming. The Maryville Homecoming has been going since 1938. As a kid, I remember we would come up and we would help the firefighters wash and wax the fire trucks and get em ready for the parade for the Homecoming, and you know our lives revolved around the parade. You talked to people, and you know, Maryville Homecoming came you had to have a new outfit to wear to wear to the Homecoming. AM: [chuckles] MP: You know it was a big deal and businesses would close, and everything to allow the fire department to get as much money as they can because they knew that was for the betterment of the fire department which meant it was a betterment for the village. So the businesses even the the bars and taverns closed until later on in the night after everybody spent their money at the park then they would open up and let people come in for the evening, so, you know that was a fond memory I have of growing up is that everybody pulled together and when the Maryville Homecoming rolled around, everybody you know, participated my grandfather ran a cake stand for god I don't know how many years, probably 30 years, and every year, you donated cakes, one for each night, and they would have hundreds and hundreds of cakes because the people in town would spend the 40 cents 50 cents for a box of cake mix and make a cake and then bring it to the park for the firemen to make money off of and it was that was all pure profit for the fire department. So, there was a lot more pulling together um, as a kid personally, we played 2  baseball, during the summer we played baseball every day, there was a baseball field on the school ground up here on Donk Street we played at our or behind the Mother of Perpetual Health Catholic Church there was a softball diamond back there and we would play on there but it seemed like from sun up to sundown, we were either playing baseball or if we didn't have enough people we'd play Indian Ball or we'd play Pickle Wars or something. Um, they also had a ah, black top area at the Maryville school, and as kids we would play street hockey on there and all the kids would come together and we'd run around and we'd play street hockey and we made our own goals, so we were either doing some kind of sport, or riding our bikes, um, we had a bike tag that we'd play and all the kids would play it in the boundary was the east side of town, from 3rd Street to up Donk, all the way to Division Street, and you'd just play bike chase, one person would take off and hide, and everybody else tried to look for em, was kinda like a hide and seek game and ah, we would play that for hours and hours and hours and hours and then the streetlights would come on and everybody'd go home. So, that's kinda the simpler times we had growing up. AM: Right. Okay. What was your favorite subject in school when you were in Maryville? MP: Ahm, I was not a big fan I didn't like math, I didn't like reading, ah, science kinda interested me but I just felt like the way the teachers were trying to present it was too dry, when I got into junior high, they we had a science teacher who was more hands on experiential, and he would show us things and that peaked my interested more and I really enjoyed the science aspect of school, but, everything just kinda seemed too boring to me. AM: [laughs] So what was your favorite part of school? Lunch, recess? [laughs] MP: Recess was always fun because you got to meet and play and talk with your friends that were in different classrooms you ah, you'd go to school you'd see em on the bus, but then you'd be in different classrooms and you'd never seen each other until the end of the day again, when you had recess then you were able to at least mingle and interact with your friends. AM: Okay, um, so, what did your - par- grandparents sell in their store? MP: Um, they actually had a confectionery plus a um, gas station. And my great grandfather actually started the store, and it was originally on Donk Street where the Maryville American Legion building is now which used to be the Maryville Post Office, just a little south of Donk and Main Street. And they had their original building there, and they he had a blacksmith shop and a confectionery but they sold everything they sold miners clothing, they sold ah, the hard hats, the miner's hat's with the carbine lamps ah, the lunch pails everything that the miners would have used they sold in the store plus everything else, dry goods, and canned goods, and ice cream that they hand dipped and all that stuff. AM: Okay, so, you talked about a little bit about the museum how long has it been around? [voices in the background / echoes] MP: Ah I know they started this around 2002, and they were doing the - yeah we can pause a minute. [to other person] She's doing an interview for school so [voices] AM: We had a brief interruption once somebody came into the museum so Mr. Picchioldi is going to go 3  on and tell me how long the museum has been around. MP: Ah the village started a committee in preparation for the 2002 centennial for the village, so the museum pretty much has been around since 2002, the only occupants of the museum prior to the ah, to the start of the museum was the fire department was still here, in 1994 they moved into their new building so this building pretty much sat abandoned, ah, as storage for stuff until they decided to convert it to the museum around 2002. AM: Okay. How many exhibits do you have? Or how many items do you have in the museum? MP: Well, the museum is kinda in a fluster right now, we had some mechanical issues and then we had a water leak this past year, the floor was very bad, two years ago, so they decided to, um, completely resurface the floor so all the displays and exhibits had to be removed from the rooms so they could redo the floor so when they did that, that they took all the artifacts and such that we have out of the cases and moved em to another part of the building upstairs, well then they got the floor done, and decided that the air conditioning wasn't working so there was no air conditioning in this, so it's we'd come in here to work and it would just be sweltering and we'd open the doors to the old firehouse to try get some airflow, but am, so then we decided we would set up a temporary display for last year's Homecoming, and then ah, this year we were going to start developing you know how we wanted to set the displays up because we wanted to set up for different aspects of the village life, ah farming the community, the churches, the businesses, and then we had a big water leak in here and it flooded a portion of the building, so once again we had to move display cases and such out of the way, try to take care of that and got that fixed up we're trying for a community development grant. So, if we get that grant which they're anticipating that they are, [voices] oh. - So if participating in this community development grant which is going to be a big ah disruption to the museum also, so, we didn't want to spend a lot of time fully stocking all the displays until we find out exactly what's going on with that, and cause we didn't want to carry everything down from upstairs, put em the cases, and then having to move everything again, so, we decided we would just stay in a state of flux until we decide you know, what's going to happen with us. Um, we're in the portion of the museum right now that up until this past winter was the police department. This was the old police department building. They moved out prior to 94' also, but, this building had been used for storage for the public works department so this section of the building was an absolute mess, over the last two months they cleaned this place up, and decided that we would use this for a temporary display area until the main portion of the museum could get ah you know back to normal. So, we have some displays in here which is just a kinda sampling of what the museum has, we have a some items from past Maryville Homecomings, we have some of the mining and train items because the train used to go right through the area the village by the mine, and they played a very important part to this you know the village becoming what it is, there's ah baseball which was a big item for Maryville. Maryville had a big baseball community, up to 16 professional baseball players came from Maryville, ah, we have some items we round the fire department because once again the fire department and the Homecoming played a very important role in the village, ah, and then we have some items from of the local businesses, some farming items, ah, apple button, and bullion kettle, a thrashing machine, so just some of the items of life growing up in ah the village of Maryville is on display here, ah we just decided we just wanted to do a little sampling so that people could see what kinda items we have and what we're looking for. AM: What is your favorite item in the museum? 4  MP: Um, up until recently, ah, I either had seen or had experienced some items of the museum in particular um, one of the items which is my favorite is that we have a 1958 sea grey fire engine that's in the museum that was the Maryville Fire Department's engine it was purchased entirely from proceeds raised from the Maryville Homecoming over the years so leoneit was there - the first motorized apparatus was from 1939, so from 1939-1958 they had one piece of motorized apparatus in 1958 they got a top of the line Seagrave Fire Engine that was like the best at the time, it was like considered the "Cadillac" of the fireman apparatus, so that's piece was originally a backup backup on the fire department when I was in on the fire department in the 1980s, and we decided well, let's fix it up and make it more of a showpiece so the fire department worked all together we stripped it down we ah, polished or not polished but sanded and got it ready for preparation for painting one of the members of the fire department, Kirk Mueller owned Muller Auto Body and he painted it entirely for free so we had this 1958 Seagrave upgraded in the 80s ah we took it to the Saint Louis Fire Show that they had in September they had a parade and a fire apparatus show and it won first place in its division back in the 80s and ah when the fire department moved, they decided to let it be on loan to the museum, and it still runs it leads the parade every year, and that's pretty much a really nice showpiece of the museum is this fire truck. AM: What made you decide to be a fireman? MP: Ah, growing up, in Maryville, I had two grandfathers that were both volunteer fireman in Maryville, um when I was about 10 year old, I started running on fire calls with my grandfather, and if we were at home they lived right next door and if - back in those days in the 70s, they had a fire siren that alerted the volunteers that there was a fire so any time day or night if there was a fire the well lemme get back to how that goes, there was a button here at the firehouse that rang the siren, every night at 9 o'clock, somebody would come up here one of the firefighters was assigned for certain amount of time and they'd come up and they'd ring the siren at 9 o'clock and that notified everybody that it was 9pm. So did they did that every night well eventually they got a timer that they put on and that would go off at 9pm but during the course of a fire, the fire department in Maryville had a fire phone assistant so a couple of the taverns in town had fire phones, a couple of the business in town, my grandfather and grandmother's confectionery store, ah Leoni's in Maryville they had fire phone because Mr. Skip Leoni's was on the fire department my grandfather was on the fire department so they had these fire phone there wasn't a full time police department, as far as having an actual police station, ah, at the time, so if the fire phone rang, one of the firefighters or somebody there at the taverns would answer the fire phone and get the information where it was somebody would bring the information and come up to the firehouse and they'd blow the siren, and then they'd wait for somebody to show up and they'd tell them where the fire was and such. So, when I was about 10 years old, whenever the siren would go off, I'd run over to be with my grandfather and whether he'd be responding from the store or whether he'd be responding from home, I'd jump in the car with him and I was in charge or turning his blue light on which all the firefighters had these blue lights to notify you know the traffic that they were a firefighter and I'd ride to the fire with him in his car, so, from about 10 years old up until I was 18, I did that with my grandfather until he retired. Well then, ah, when he ah, retired, it was just a kinda come up here and hang around and see what was going on when you heard the siren, well when I was 18 years old then I joined the fire department and became a member of the fire department in November of 1980. Ah, and I was really ah, pretty much into it, I took as many classes as I could and ah, took trainings and such and in 1984 I was actually promoted to fire chief so I was 24 year old and I was Fire Chief for the fire department in Maryville. And uh, I had never had aspirations of being a career firefighter I went to school to be an architectural designer, I got a degree in 5  architectural design went to work for a business that ah did ah large doors for aircraft hangars and banks and cold storage and I hated it. I hated sitting with a tie on behind a desk doing drawings. So, I applied for some fire departments in 1991, and I was hired by Edwardsville and became a career firefighter, paramedic, and worked there 21 years, and put 16 1/2 years years on in Maryville and so, my grandfather's ah both grandfathers who were firefighters were pretty much the inspiration of what got me interested in the fire department. AM: So what would you say was your most memorable fire call? MP: Ahm, I'd have to say that it was Alfonzo's Pizza. Alfonzo's used to be located just north of the downtown area and ah, it was called Schiber ah, not Schiber Court. It was ah little plaza just to the north of Bobby's and the Red Apple and that's where Mike Palucchi started his Alfonzo's Pizza. But we had a big fire in there one night, ahm, and Alfonzo's was pretty much destroyed so they vowed to rebuild so over the course of several months they started to rebuild and they were almost finishing the process and a plumber's pipe caught the building on fire again, and it burned down for the second time from its present location was. AM: Wow. MP: So we had two fires at Alfonzo's Pizza over the course of a couple years and completely destroyed the building just because of the way the building was made it was hard to enter to fight the fire, and by the time we could get somebody into the building, because of you had one door in and out, by the time that we could get somebody into help with interior firefighting now that it was already into the roof and such and it was we were able to save the buildings and the businesses on either side, but Alfonzo's was pretty much destroyed. So, that was that's one of my most memorable fires that we've had. AM: Okay. Alright. Um, do you have children? MP: I do. I have 2 stepchildren and 1 daughter who's a sophomore in high school, I have a son and his wife and 2 daughters that live in Columbia, Illinois he's a CPA for the farm burea of that area of Illinois, I have a daughter and her husband and her husband and son that live in Edwardsville and she's a CPA and works for Skefoll and Nicholas over in Saint Louis, and like I said my daughter who is 15, she's gonna be a sophomore at Edwardsville High School, and three grandchildren AM: Okay so, oh wow, Congratulations. So, what does your wife do for a living? MP: My wife is the trial court administrator for the third judicial circuit of which includes Madison County and she works in the chief judge’s office in the Madison County Courthouse. AM: And how did she feel about you being a fireman? MP: Well, she pretty much just had to suck it up because when I met her, I was already a firefighter in Maryville and ah and already in Edwardsville I started in 91, and got married in 99 so so I was already a firefighter when we met so she knew how it was and you know, there was times where we'd go to do something and I had to leave because I was going to a fire or something else. 6  AM: So what's the difference in being a volunteer fireman and a paid fireman? What - like how did that differ for you? Other than the pay, obviously. MP: Welp, yeah, you know fire doesn't differentiate between whether you're a volunteer or for a firefighter, fire burns the same way regardless, it's all about the amount of time you spend training and preparing yourself ah there's some volunteer fire departments Maryville one in particular they're very good department as far their training goes, getting their people ready and prepared to fight fires they allowed them to go outside of the department to do trainings they had some guys go up to Champagne Urbana this past June to take some training classes up there which are always beneficial, um, so they they have a very good training program. The only real difference is you're getting paid to do a job, and you're volunteering to do a job, but in regards to do you fight fire differently? No. Do you die the same way, yes. It's just's that you've got some people that do it for love of the community love of being a firefighter and then you've got some that do it because it's their job, but you've got some people that are paid to do that don't love it as much doing the job as volunteer firefighters. You've got some volunteers that don't love it as much as career guys, so I mean it's it's not a whole lot different than some other jobs it's just that when you have a small community you can't afford to pay for 15, 20 career firefighters to be there all the time. So, there's a little bit of difference in regards to ah, you know one gets paid and one doesn't but as far as the fires go, it's just pretty much the same, and you've got guys that are professional fire fighters that are volunteering and you've got professional fire fighters that are paid. AM: So what's the difference between a small community and a big community as far as like the feel of the fire department? MP: Um, growing up in Maryville the fire department was always a centerpiece of things that went on, um, Santa Claus would come to visit the village ya know on Christmas Eve, well, Santa Claus would always arrive on a firetruck, so the fire truck would come up and Santa Claus would get off the fire truck, and he'd meet with the village kids and hand out a little treat bag and such. Ah, if there was anything going on, as far as, ah, community service that needed to be done, a lot of times the fire department would have their people come up and help and assist with that. In a larger town, of course you got much more things going on, and the fire department is usually busy fighting fires and running emergency medical calls and that and they don't have as much time to participate community wise ah, I know in Edwardsville we try to as much as we could if there was like a subdivision ah picnic or party we try to have a fire truck stop by so that the kids could see it and interact with the community and such. But it wasn't as much as a centerpiece as it was in a small town usually in a small town either you had a family member or you knew somebody who was a volunteer firefighter a lot of the business owners because they were in town all the time, they were part of the fire department because they were here and they could leave their job and come and assist in a fire or something, so the fire department in a small town always seemed to be more of a centerpiece of the village or the town and they participated in the betterment of the town just all all over. AM: Does the village or the fire department in the village still anything to do with Santa Claus coming? MP: They do. They have a Santa Fest every year, the museum is going to try to get involved with that this year, um, growing up in Maryville at the intersection of Main and Donk Street they always put a Christmas tree up every year in the middle of the intersection and it would be lit up well after about 3 or 4 7  years of someone running into it [laughs] after leaving the taverns they decided that that wasn't safe anymore so they put a fire or a Christmas tree lit up in front of the fire house which is the building that we're in. So we're hoping that this year to be able to erect a Christmas tree and have it lit out in front the museum like they used to do back in the 60s and 70s. We've talked to the fire department about their Santa Fest that they have, and we're talking to them about having Santa Claus on his way to the firehouse stop at the museum and have a chair set up by the tree to meet kids like they used to do back in the 60s and 70s and then he'll spend a little time here and then he'll move onto the Santa Fe St that they have at the fire station. AM: Okay. So you're retired now? MP: I am. I retired in 2012, um, not by choice I was injured during a training incident, and I had to have some severe major back surgery, so I had 21 years in on the career side, and almost 31 and a half total in firefighting and ah, pretty much the doctor said there was going to be limitations to what I could do, what I couldn't do, and so it was time to move on. AM: You keep mentioning training and that you've had a lot of training where all did you go for your training? Other than the actual local fire department? MP: Well besides my ah I have an associate’s degree in architectural design, I went back to school and I have an associate’s degree in fire science um, I've obtained pretty much every certification through the Illinois State Fire Marshall's office I could and I had took trainings at various departments or through SWIC when it used to be Belleville Area College um, I went to Champagne Urbana to the Illinois Fire Service Institute and took trainings, we had trainings that come into the department in Edwardsville that I'd get certified doing things, ah so yeah I held about 18, 19 different certifications through the state fire marshal's office and such and, so any time I had an opportunity to get something right to be certified I took the chance and went and did it. AM: Which certification is the one you are most proud of? MP: Ah, fire officer #3, they ranked they ranked it fire officer #1, 2, and 3, and that was the hardest course was to take there was ah several courses in tactics and strategy and management, and such as that and ah, that took me the longest to get it to that point. That's one that I'm quite proud of. AM: Okay. Was there one that you maybe needed more than others that you used more the stuff that you learned? MP: Ah. The fire office with the management and how to deal with ah employees and people and such and some of the tactics and strategies side of it um, that was usually the one that was most beneficial in regards to to ah, being an officer on the fire department. Also, we had one for um, fire instructor, which I have my fire instructor 2, which is like one of the highest ranks which you can get to fire officer trainer 1 and 2 so that allows you teach and sign off on other ones ah, prolly the one that I worked the hardest at that I was most proud of on out of any of my certifications was with my paramedic certification. Um, we helped initiate myself and several others when ah the department in Maryville here in the around 1982, we started an ambulance service when we were notified by the funeral home that was providing [sic] service to us from Troy, that they no longer wanted to cover Maryville, so we were forced into starting an 8  ambulance service [name in audible] bought a used ambulance, we all worked together to get it ready, and once again Kurt's auto body in Maryville painted it for us and got in ship shape and we began ambulance service around summer of 1982, um, back around 84 then, we approached the village to go into at the time the state of Illinois had what they called emergency medical technical intermediate which allowed us to do some different things that basic ambulance services couldn't do we could defibrillate somebody that was in cardiac arrest or start IV's or advanced airway techniques and the village agreed that they would you know let us take on that responsibility so we sent guys through training through Anderson Hospital and they got certified at the intermediate level, I was one of the first ones, so we were able to provide a better service to the community, with an ambulance service that helped to save more lives, and then, after several more years, they the department convinced the village to go the paramedic level this was in the 90s and then they agreed so now they got two ALS "Advanced Life Support" Paramedic ambulances that the fire department provides. AM: Very nice. So, are - are the paramedics in Maryville also firemen or... okay? MP: Yes. Yeah, they're ah, the paramedics ah that they have on duty are usually firefighters for the village ah there's some that they use that are part time paramedics and aren't firefighters but there are some that are both and ah if there's a fire the guys that are there on duty will you know respond with fire truck too. AM: Okay. So did you prefer being a paramedic or a firefighter? MP: Always preferred better being a firefighter. Little more action AM: Why is that? A little more action? [laughs] okay. AM: There was something else I was going to ask.... so, do you any of your friends still live in Maryville from when you were a kid? MP: Oh yeah. Yeah I've got several friends that are still here um, I've got friends that I met when we were in grade school ah back in you know 70, 71, that I'm still friends with today. Which, you don't have that a lot with growing up in larger towns people you know move on, and parents move on, but I've got it a handful of friends that I've been friends with since you know, 1970, 71. AM: What are some of the craziest things you guys did as kids? MP: Um... AM: That you're willing to share? MP: Um, the this bike chase thing that we used to do the ah one of the rules of this was that you had to stop physically stop the person on their bike, um, so that was pretty much the only rule how you stopped em was up to you - I mean there was times when we you know strung a rope across the road, or we waited for them to come riding down one of the alleys and we threw our bikes out in front of them to stop em, and yeah there was a lot of scrapes and cuts and such so that was that was pretty crazy ahm, you know we'd ah, chase the fire trucks on our bikes sometimes, you know when it was somewhere close to town 9  and you know we'd help them drag hose and stuff like that so, we didn't never do anything crazy illegal or anything you know, that was just never a thought of ours ya know, our stuff motto [sic] was how could we do something and be adventurous and not get hurt. [chuckles] AM: So did you guys ever play on the railroad tracks? MP: Yeah, we played on the railroad tracks we had some friends um, but ah, that lived close to the railroad tracks and they would always jump the rail cars, and ah the one friend of ours, he ah his specialty is he would jump in the scrap cars and he'd start looking for bicycle parts and he would just start throwing them off the train, and after about a mile, he'd jump back off, and he'd go back and he'd start collecting all these parts well then he'd would make bicycles from these parts that he had got off the train, and ah,this was back in the 70s and at one point he had a 15 speed Schwinn bicycle that nobody had ever heard of before and they'd never made a 15 speed - the 10 speed was the you know, the big thing at the time, and he had a 15 speed bicycle that he'd made from scrap parts that he'd get off the train. AM: Okay. How fast did the train go through town that you could jump on and off of it? MP: Um, luckily, there was kind of a as the train would come into Maryville, there was a slight incline, so it would slow down a little bit, and it was it was slow to the point where if you were running next to the train car, it you were going at about the same speed so it was easy to grab hold of the rail and run alongside of it and jump on, I was never that adventurous, I never, never wanted to jump on the train car, so... AM: Okay. I always thought it would be fun [laughs] MP: It always looked like fun but when you're standing right next to it, and the train's going past you, the fun kinda leaves. [laughs] AM: Right. Okay. AM: Um, I have all these questions, and you start talking, and I forget MP: I know it was through the 70s that the train was still running through here, ahm, but I think it was during the 80s that they they the train stopped running the tracks were abandoned for a long time, and then um, back in the 90s the Madison County Transit District purchased um, the railways and then they ripped em out and put bike trails and such in....running businesses continued village of Maryville, Jim Morgan's barber shop, he's got the ah, continuously running business right now. In regards to that. Um, the village of Maryville would not be around today if it wasn't for the two grocery stores that were in town, Leoni [?] and Sons and Picchhioldi and Sons [?] um, back in the mine was before it was getting ready to close, the mining industry was really starting to slack off and the mines to the advantage of the lack of productions and because the mine was getting mined out basically to lower salaries because if you didn't want to take a lower salary, well then they could just fire you because you know they didn't want to pay a higher salary so a lot of the miners took a lesser salary well the two stores in Maryville, Leoni's and Picchioldi's not only sold confectionery items but then I guess that they had dry goods and they had canned goods, and something that is unheard of today is they offered credit. So the people that brought money because they didn't make as much money in the mines and didn't have enough food to feed their 10  families could come in and get items and put it on credit and then at the end of the month or the beginning of the month they could come in, and make a payment to on their credit. Ahm, I know my grandparents both died and Skip Leonie and his wife both died with people still owing them money because they ran credit for so many years and they died off before these people could pay them off. But if it wasn't for these two businesses offering credit, the village would have disappeared because people would have moved out looking for other employment somewhere else. So, because these two businesses allowed people to buy on credit, not only food items but a lot of kerosene, coal oil, ah tub warm and light their homes and it was offered on credit and that kept the village going. AM: So your last name is Italian? MP: Yes AM: Is that correct? Okay, when did your family come here - to the United States? MP: My great grandparents came here I believe it was 1900 or 1901, my great grandfather came over several times, ah, by himself and then he and his wife come over and they settled in Spring Valley, Illinois up North for a small amount of time, um, they moved down here around 1910, my grandfather was born in 1908, and they had the blacksmith shop and such ah, that he was running with the confectionary it was called Anton Picchioldi's at the time and then ah my grandfather took it over in 1920 and changed the name to Picchioldi and Sons and so they've been around here since the very beginning of the village of Maryville. AM: Was Maryville settled by a lot of Italians like Collinsville? Or was it? MP: Yeah I think that there was a lot of Italians that come into the village there was ah there's still you know there was Picchioldi's and Leoni and Mazzano and Valino, and Velzanno and you know those are all Italian names that lived in Maryville. Um, 2014 I ah took a family trip with my wife and daughter and we went to Italy and one of the places we visited was Locana, Italy which is in the northern Piedmont region of Italy and that's where my great grandfather Anton Picchioldi was born, so we took a walk through the cemetery and the headstones in the cemetery in Locana you have Volinos and Belzanos and Picchioldi's and you know all the names that I recognized from Maryville were also in Locana. AM: So they all found themselves here together? That's kinda cool. MP: Yeah yeah. AM: Okay, so what other industry was there other than the coal mining era and then the two groceries was there anything or? MP: Well, coal mining was the big industry that was the draw, um, obviously things that came into Maryville to they wanted to basically start businesses that would get into some of that money there was at a time there was 14 taverns in Maryville there was boarding houses, there was prostitutes, um, so, you know where you had these single miners that would come and they would ah work in the mine six days a week and then on Sundays they would visit these prostitutes and go to a taverns and um, yeah, there used to be a movie theater, there was a cannery, there were several bakeries and they were all located within 11  the small area which they called "old Maryville" which is the region that we're in and they were all you know packed together within that small you know 3-4 block area in each direction. Um, an interesting fact about Maryville is that as you go down Main Street and you cross over the bike trail which used to be the railroad tracks and the part you drive that goes off to the left and that used to be called "Chinatown Road." AM: I was just getting ready to ask you about that. MP: So, if you look on some older maps, that area of Maryville is actually labeled Chinatown. And, my grandmother on my mother's side, she grew up in that area of Chinatown and always referred to it as Chinatown. Well, Chinatown got its name cause on, as I was saying, the mines were in 6 days a week, they were closed on Sundays because everybody went to church, and, that was their only day off from the mine, so they would all do their laundry on the same day, well nobody had driers, nobody had washing machines, they would hand wash everything, so after they'd wash it they'd string a clothesline and they'd hang their clothes up to dry. So, in this area of Maryville around the mine there, they had it was almost like a company town, they had these small little houses that were built by the mine that were to house employees. Well, every one of them would have lines out with clothes on it. Well the train started was coming through one day and it was either the president or the vice president of the train line was on the train and they're slowing down because of a slight incline, and they're going through that region, and he said "Oh my gosh, look at all the clothes hanging out on the lines, and it was you know, house to house to house, and clothesline to clothesline and all these clothes hanging out he says: "Man, that looks like a Chinese laundry, there must be a Chinatown there..." and that name stuck for some reason and it's always been called Chinatown and there has been often times where you have somebody's stopped by of Asian descent and wanted to know where the Chinatown region was because they'd seen it on a map, and so, where the museum is currently trying to work with the village to get a sign that's on Parkview Drive that says "Historic Chinatown Road" but we needed to try to come up with some way to differentiate it so that 911 was concerned that it would be a problem, so we've brought back choose a different areas that have had historic signs and such so we finally decided that normally you've got an oblong kind of street sign that we would put more of like a square sign on there that's said "Historic Chinatown Road" or something like that. So we're trying to work with the village to do that. AM: Okay, so, they all went to church on Sundays. Were there a lot of churches in town? MP: There was several churches and the churches were always a big part of Maryville because that's usually where everybody got their entertainment with they'd go to the church service on Sunday morning and then usually in the evening there'd be some kind of a program whether it be some kind of Sunday school kid's program or they'd have some kind of a dance, or they'd have a speaker of they'd you know they'd always do something and a lot of times the fire department would be involved with that also just because that was like the community thing to do. AM: How about when you were a kid did your parents make you go to church? MP: They did we used to go to Saint John's Lutheran Church which was in what they called the Pleasant Ridge area of Maryville, which was one of the very first areas of Maryville was ah Pleasant Ridge where St. John's Lutheran Church is which is ah down West Main Street ah, you take it to Pleasant Ridge Road, 12  so that's where we went to church that's where my grandfather and grandmother on my mother's side went. My dad's side of the family um, were more atheist, my grandmother was raised Catholic but she never was a devout Catholic and she'd only attend every once and awhile, um, so they never really went to church on their side, because grandparents ran the store, and again, they worked 6 days a week well on Sundays was their day to rest, and they did because they were up 5 or 6 in the morning until 10 , 11 o'clock at night running the store and the garage and such. AM: So what did you do when you worked in the store? MP: Um, usually stocked shelves or back then, you had soda machines with soda bottles and people would come in and they could buy one bottle at a time or a six pack, well, and they would bring those bottles back and they would get three cents or a nickel or whatever it was at the time in return of the bottles. So, people would come back and they would have you know, Coke and Pepsi and the 7-UP and the RC Cola all this and that in the 6 pack well those bottles all had to be sorted and put in different cases so that when the soda company came back to retrieve their bottles, that they were picking up the Coke bottles or Pepsi bottles, or whatever so they weren't picking up somebody else's body so you had to sort individually sort all those different bottles and put them into the different cases so that was one of my duties that I hated [laughs] AM: So you hated that, what was your favorite thing to do? MP: Um, my favorite thing to do was just kinda hang around the store and talk to people and ah you know hear all the stories and you know listen to talk and the grocery store at the time that was kinda the ah, um, clothesline of the day, where people would come in and say "Hey did you hear about this..." that was the social media at the time you know, it was face to face social media so they'd come in and they'd say "Hey did you hear you know so and so's you know uncle passed away or.... " so you'd hear all these rumors and facts and such of what was going on, I vividly remember that. Um, I did like stocking the shelves some of the times you know, it all depended and I was small so I had you know, I did everything up to about 3 or 4 feet and then my parents had to come back and do everything else above it. AM: So how old were you when your parents closed the store? MP: Ah that was in 1976 so, I was 14. AM: Okay - alright. So is there anything else you would like to tell me? MP: Um, this flier here is the it's titled "The Self-Guided Tour To Historic Points of Interest In Maryville." And this might help you with it - it talks about some of these aspects of the village itself there's a map that shows this is the old part of Maryville here, here's Third so Jim's would be right there, and ah, AM: So this would be Chinatown here? MP: Yep. And right about the P's at is where Jim and Janice live, um, so this was considered like the old part of Maryville, um the Lutheran Church. 13  AM: So where was your grandparent's store? MP: My grandparent's store was right here at the corner of Main and Center Street. AM: Okay. I will include this map in my project MP: So this is 159 right here, and originally that was just a one way road and it had a um, what do you call it... streetcar that would run from East Saint Louis to Edwardsville. AM: Oh cool MP: Along this road. And where the streetcar would stop would be up here where Buffalo Park was which is now the "Lake House on the Lake" um, that one used to be called Buffalo Park so, these little numbers here they correspond with different aspects of the village and they tell you you know this was the ah, Interper Railway and such, so this has a little flier has some good historic facts. AM: Actually it has Chinatown labeled on there I'm on the wrong side of the road. MP: And this, this was the first post office AM: The picture on the front? MP: Yeah AM: Okay. All right thank you so much for taking your time to MP: Oh no problem AM: To share some of this history with me I really appreciate it thank you very much. MP: You're welcome! 14 
MadisonCounty;Danny Gray;1958;2016;Danny Gray 1958   2016  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Danny Gray Oral History Interview Josh Koehne, Interviewer Edwardsville, Illinois October 19, 2016 Josh Koehne (JK): This is an oral history interview with uh... Dan Gray. Danny Gray? Danny Gray (DG): Dan Gray. Danny, Danny D. JK: For the Macoupin [Madison] County Oral History Project. I am Josh Koehne. We are at his house here in Edwardsville, Illinois, uh, on October... 19th? 19th. 2016. First question. What is your name? DG: Dan Gray. Danny D. Gray actually. JK: Danny D. Gray? DG: Uh-hum. JK: Uh... When were you born? DG: Uhhhh... 8. Sorry about that, 8-19-58. JK: So... August... DG: August 19, 1958. JK: 19th, 1958 DG: 1958... yeah. JK: Umm... So you grew up in Granite? DG: No, I was born, actually, I was born in... Granite but uh... actually, Granite or St. Louis I can't remember which one it was, but I didn't live in Granite until later on. JK: Okay... DG: I lived mostly in St. Louis, it just depends, we bounce all over. My dad was in the Air Force so we bounced all over the United States. So... We didn’t get to Granite itself until... probably it was like 8th grade something like that. JK: Okay... 1  JK: Um... What were some of the places that you lived? What’s your earliest memory? DG: Oh... My earliest memory is... St. Louis... We lived in Missouri. Hold on a sec... [Recording Pauses and Restarts] JK: You were saying your earliest... DG: Uh, my dad was in the Air Force, every time he went overseas, we ended up moving either to St. Louis or wherever. So mostly my... early early early years was St. Louis or Glen Carbon area. JK: Okay... DG: So, Glen Carbon, Illinois so... JK: What was that like moving around? DG: You know what? I thought it was normal. I thought it was a normal thing. I just thought that’s what all kids did and... uh... I liked it because it made me make friends quickly, you know I could talk to strangers. Matter of fact, when Lisa and started dating, she looked at one time and we were in line at a movie I was talking to a guy behind me and she said: “Well, you can just talk to anybody, can’t you?” I go "Yeap," I said "when you grow up like I did when you move every year. Sometimes, twice a year." I said "You gotta learn to make friends really quick. See you can't be afraid and shy not to talk to your next-door neighbor or when y' know you move into somewhere you gotta make friends really quick." So that's basically why I kind liked it. It's a lot easier when you're younger because when you're younger kids it's not bad. Now when you get older, it probably be a little tougher. So... But I did not mind it as a kid, I just kinda thought that was normal. JK: Uh... What's your... favorite memory of bouncing around like that... er... do you have a... particularly powerful memory of something th... DG: You know what... we lived so many places but probably my favorite was in Florida. We live Crestview, Florida, which is just outside of Destin, Florida. Of course, that was my favorite place down there  I loved that. And one of the biggest memories I have of that is when my dad went down ahead of time  we lived in base housing for about a week or two before we found a house to live in. So it was actually on Eglin AFB. My mom drove us down there, me and Charlie an... my brother Charlie, Debbie my sister, and me and then Pat... uh Pat, my sister Pat which is, of course, your mom. JK: yeah DG: And... eh... We drove down got in late one night and uh they put right into that base housing where my dad was staying. We get up the next morning, we're literally feet from the lagoon. The lagoon that goes out to the ocean so me and my brother Charlie went exploring and we walked down the beach and we come across... these guys doing uh... they were actually astronauts practicing in and out of the capsule we got to sit and watch them, you know at the time I didn't realize how big a deal that was but it was the actual astronauts and they were doing simulations of like after the capsule land getting them out of the capsule and putting them back in so that that was really neat there. and that was like the first day we're in 2  Florida it's just one of our memories you know. and so that part was really cool. So of course probably living in Crestview, Florida was probably my best memory, you know as far, as you know of all the places that I lived, I mean you're so many so many different ones. But that was probably my favorite. JK: You mentioned uncle Charlie and, uh, and, uh, my mom, Pat. DG: Pat, right JK: Do you have any other siblings? DG: Yes I do, I have two other siblings which came later on which they actually came after we moved to Granite. Actually, Joe, Joey come along, he lived with us in St. Louis at one time and my sister Cassie, soon after that’s when we moved to Granite City, I was probably about 8th grade then, she was probably a year and a half old then, maybe two years, that’s when we moved to Granite City Illinois. JK: And that’s where that, that sort of family joke that Aunt Cassy was really Aunt Debbie's kid DG: Yeah that was kind of a funny joke because my sister Debby, her and Charlie when we lived in one part of St. Louis my brother Charlie went to live with my grandmother in Glen Carbon and Debbie quit school for a year because the school they were going to was uh 98% black and it was a rough school. The school I went to was almost 98% black, middle school, so Debbie actually quit for a year to help my Mom with the baby which would be Cassie or Cassandra and ah she was with the baby so much everyone thought it was her baby. I’d actually forgotten until you said that. Yeah, they actually thought that Cassie was Debbie’s baby. Of course, it wasn’t, it was my sister. But, eh... that’s where that came from. JK: And eh, let’s see, so you grew up in St. Louis and Glen Carbon and bouncing around all over. DG: That's right. JK: Um, do you have a specific memory, hold on, let me see how I want to say this, all right, so after you grew up, graduating college, what was your first job out of college, I mean high school? DG: My first job out of high school, actually I worked over in St. Louis with a friend of mine at a place called Wisco, Wisco, and they put sunroofs in Dodge cars, Dodge Diplomat and LeBaron those were cars from back in the early 80s, 70s I mean. And I worked there for about a year, it was assembly line work and eh, worked there for about a year and I think the company was about to close down and that’s when basically I got hired on at Granite City Steel back in ‘78, year '78, April 4th of ‘78 no wait, April 9th of '78. I started working at Granite City Steel. JK: So you were 19 in '78? DG: Yeah, 1978 that's when I started in Granite City. I graduated in '77 so I worked at the other company not quite a year before I started working at Granite City Steel. JK: What was your first job at Granite City Steel? DG: Granite City Steel, I worked at the, let me see where I worked? I want to say I worked at the North 3  plant which we no longer have the North Plant, but the North Plant is where they have the galvanized steel sheetings and they corrugated it which means they ran it through the corrugator to make ripples in it to make it stronger. I worked over there for probably 3 or 4 weeks and from there I went to the BOF is where they actually melt the steel. JK: Can you describe your first or earliest memory of walking into the steel plant and what it was like? DG: Yeah, that was like, walking into the steel plant, that was like, I don't know how I remember that but I started on a Sunday, either Sunday afternoon or Sunday morning, on a Sunday and walking in and not knowing what to expect, you know, not knowing if I was going to get a hassle by the older guys or whatever, which I didn't, it was real nice. I remember my first or second day there I ended up cutting my arm which I still have the scar from, cut it on a piece of banding. I thought oh my God, two days on the job and I've already cut myself, they're going to fire me I know, which of course they didn't. I remember going to the dispensary and they bandaged it up so much I could hardly move my arm. It was just a small cut but I still have the scar from it. But uh, it was just kind of scary going in the first day cause you don't know what to expect. And then, as it went on you learn more about the job and the plant so it wasn't quite as bad, you know, till I left that department to go to another department. It’s like going into a different school or moving somewhere different cause you don't know what that department’s going to be like and what to expect. JK: So eh, after your first job at the north plant you went to the BOF? DG: Yeah, BOF, Basic Oxygen Furnace is what it stands for and that's where they actually melt the scrap steel and we actually make the steel there. And it’s made by scrap steel and then they bring, they call it the raw iron or pig iron, it was from the blast furnace side, they bring that over and melt it down. That’s actually melted down from coke, you take coke and super heat it and then you squeeze it and it gets all the impurities out of it and turns it into coal, which makes it into coke and once it’s made into coke they reheat it again and melt that down and that’s basically your raw iron, raw steel and that’s melted down into liquid form and they send that to the BOF where it’s poured into a giant ladle on top of all the scrap metal and they had a big oxygen hose that would come down and blow air into it and stir it all up is what that does and then when it stirs it all up that's when you get rid of the all the impurities. Where actually you could actually say we were recycling before recycling was cool cause basically that's all you do, recycle steel constantly, cars, whatever, metal then they put the pig iron on top of it, the raw iron, then heat it all up and backthenitwas pouredintoingots,biggiantingotstheylooklikepopsicle,andthentheyaresentoverto another department where when the ingots cool off they would heat them up again then they would have to roll them out manually back and forth on this big conveyor. They roll them out and into a long slab and the slab is sent to the hot strip and the hot strip heats them up again and rolls them into coils, they melt them into coils is what they do. And, they roll and smash them down, even more, to probably from 12 inches to probably a quarter of an inch, that's how the process goes, pretty interesting process. But nowadays we got rid of all the ingots, that part and now we melt the steel and send it right to the caster which pours it right into a slab automatically so it cuts out a lot of that rolling it into ingots and all that so now it pours it right into a slab which goes right to the hot strip. So it's a very interesting process. JK: Yes, it is. So you've worked there almost 35 years? 4  DG: I've been there 38 years, it will be 39 years in April. JK: Ok, so have... have things changed, you've mentioned how things have changed partly but can you elaborate on that? DG: Oh yeah, I seen things change so much just from my short time being there because like I said it was basically, you pour the steel into ingots and have to go through all this process of reheating them, rolling them out into slabs and now the big change out there now is like I said, with what they call a continuous caster, now when you pour it, it already rolls it into a slab which saves us days of work and man hours and you know, everything with that and so that's one of the biggest things I've seen so you know, just that and all the automation and then we come along now, we used to have what they call the 7A galvanizing line cause some of our steel is hot rolled and some of it after it goes to the hot strip they send it to the cold strip which they run it through an acid bath and run it through the cold mill which brings it down even more till it’s about a 1/4 inch, then by the time they get done with it, it might be down to an 1/8 of an inch or a 1/6th of an inch and that's where you start getting your galvanized steel, where after they get it down to about a 16th of an inch they send it down to the 7A line which they run it through liquid galvanize, they were they galvanize the outside of the coil. Now, we no longer have the 7A line we have what they call the triple G or the galvalume line. Now when they run it through now basically the same thing but it’s run through galvanize and aluminum together, they call it galvalume so that was a big deal there, that was huge deal. Yeah with automation, like with the caster and all that, that cut out a log of jobs like we used to run everything by railroad, the slabs used to be put on railroad cars from the caster to the hot strip, well now they are picked up by what they call crest haulers, great big giant machines you might have seen when you went by there but they tires on these machines are probably 18, 20 foot tall, just the back tires on this machine. And they can pick up probably 5 or 6 slabs and the slabs are probably 150 or 200,000 pounds apiece. So it's just huge automation where we used to have to take time to put them on the train cars, we have to put each one on the train cars, now they just up, the slab haulers pick them up, they take them outside, they'll stack them outside and when they need them, just pick up a whole slab and run them to the hot strip where it used to be, they'd have to mag them up, put them on the train car, run them over there, mag them all off again while now it's just done by slab haulers picking them up, running them over them and setting them down. So that was two big like I said the caster was a big deal and then the 7A was a big deal. That's what did away with our North plant over there. The North plant used to be our big galvanizing line too to make corrugated steel. We don't do that anymore, it just kind of went by the wayside for us it was anyway. And actually if I'm not mistaken I think Granite City Steel had the pattern on corrugated steel at one time, they were the first ones to make it. If I'm not mistaken, they called it Strong Barn so that was a big deal too, we ended up selling our, when it closed down they ended up selling it to another company of some kind. So that was some big changes since I've been there you know, cause they did it the same way for years then I just came in at a time that automation was just kind of coming in and taking over and you know they were changing out the continuous casters, that was huge, I think it, I would say the continuous caster was a lifesaver for us because when other steel mills were closing down or being bought out or whatever, that kept us alive I think, we had so much automation in the caster area. so I think that was one of the things that kept Granite City Steel going for so many years. So, as far as changes that was probably the biggest changes. JK: You mentioned earlier about how they sold the pattern. National had bought Granite City Steel in the early 70s 5  DG: That was, let me see how it went, it always been National Steel since I've been there then US Steel bought it, Granite City Works, I don't remember. JK: I think it was 2003 if I recall DG: Yes, it might have been about 2003, that's what I'm thinking. Around 2003 and as far as changes, you know, they haven't made any major changes yet but a few here and there. JK: I think, I believe there was supposed to be a new coke plant that was supposed to be opened up, or break ground in 2008. DG: Yeah, they built a coke plant, we call it the coke plant. It was built right across the street from our blast furnace. That, we do not own that, it is not US Steel owned. That was owned by Sun. We buy coke from them and eh, they do the same thing over there. Somehow they superheat it, and they squeeze and get the byproducts out then we buy that from them so I think that was another life saver for us at one time. They were building that while we had the plant closed, on idle and we were all worried whether they were going to open up again but at the same time they were putting Sun Coke in across the street which would have been dumb for them to do that and then not open us back up again, which they did but I still think that was a big deal. One thing US Steel did, now that you mention US Steel when US Steel bought us, they bought Granite City Works, Great Lakes, and Midwest, that was all owned by National Steel. They sent the big boss down to Granite City Works to close us down. That was actually, I just remembered that just now, they sent him down to close us down because we were the oldest plant. Well, the longer the boss was there, the more money we were making and he was calling up saying “Hey, I don't know what’s going on but these guys are making money down here.” They were like, just keep an eye on it. Well, another couple of months went on and he was calling up saying, “Hey, these guys are still making money hand over fist, what's going on?” Well come to find out when National Steel sold us, the story I heard was they kind of switched the books around to make it look like the other two plants were doing good and we were doing bad and that's the story I got from it. Well, come to find out, they not only did not close us down but they started putting money into us, so they built another continuous caster so we have two now that's one improvement they did do. I think that was after US Steel came in so now we have two continuous casters and they've continued to put money into us, we just put a new bag house in and that was like 50 million dollars and they put a new, after number two caster, they actually took that out and bought a new caster and put that in which is supposed to be one of the few that can run a lot of steel that nobody else can run which was great for us too and I think that’s some of the things that's keeping us going still yet. But like I say, they were there to shut us down, they were going to shut the plant down and sell it then when they realized how much money we were making, you know, they decided to keep us and start putting money into us which was great, you know, a life safer, and right after US Steel took us, I think about year after they took us, eh, a report came out that we were, we were number 1 for US Steel as far as profit, and number 1 in the nation for profit also, your know for a short time anyway. So that was a good deal, a huge deal so like I said US Steel keeps putting money into us, we're an older plant but we still turn out a lot of good steel so that was the main thing with US Steel. JK: Are you still at the BOF? 6  DG: No, I’ve bounced around at a few different jobs. I went to the cold strip after that and then yard maintenance and now I’m in the, eh, store room. The store room is all the supplies come into the store room, that a steel mill can have which is a ridiculous amount of stuff, and our storeroom, we hold parts. Every part they need they put an order in for it and we deliver it out to them. I mean it could be anything from toilet paper to nuts and bolts to a drive shaft as big as your house, you know so that’s where I work now. We call it the store room or we call it stores and so like I said when anyone needs anything they put a ticket in and it comes to the store room, we go pick it and we take it them, almost like Amazon does down there, take it off the shelf and that's what we do. JK: Could you describe a typical day? DG: A typical day for me? I deliver, we’re all called storeroom attendants and due to seniority you can pick your job but it has to stay that for 6 months or a year. Well, I'm one of the delivery drivers which that's what I do best. My typical day would be coming in, getting my truck, inspecting my truck. We have to inspect our trucks now, eh, I do mostly small packages, smaller stuff and eh... sometimes I work on a 2-man truck, well that's usually what me and my buddy do now, we work a 2-man truck and then sometimes we'll get on a small truck by ourselves. But we'll take the small stuff that can be done by hand, can be taken off the truck by hand and delivered to the departments. So my job would be get up in the morning, go in there, I'd get a pallet, figure out which pallet I'm gonna take first, take it and put it on my truck, sort it on my truck however I want to and then I'd go through the plant, as I go along, just like a mailman, I know exactly where my delivery areas are, what needs to go to that delivery area, it’s marked 12A, 12B, 131, we’ve got over 300 delivery areas at one time and you got to just memorize them all and I would do, we have east, west and blast. I would always do the west side, someone else would do the east side and we had blast furnace which is completely on the other side where they make the coke at, it’s called the stinky part over there. And my day would be hitting all these places, getting rid of as much stuff as I can, come back and get another load. I did that about 3 or 4 times a day. And, eh I'd do downtown which is all the offices and stuff like that so I'd go out deliver it, come back, deliver another pallet, and so that's basically what I'd do all day long. It's almost like a UPS, it's basically like a UPS is what it's like but like I said it could be full of papers, computers, you know whatever department you're going to and whatever they ordered delivered so that's basically my day. JK: So, before that, you were working in the yard? DG: Yeah, I went to yard maintenance just before that and, eh, my department in the cold stripping closed down, I went to the cold strip for a little while, probably about 4, 5, 6, 8 years, I really liked that job and that department was closing down and they were moving it to a different section of the thing so I left there and went to yard maintenance which yard maintenance does kind of what you would think, they do all the outside work, you know, they need to dig up a line of some kind, a gas line or whatever, that's what yard maintenance does, you know, keeping the place clean, cutting the grass, they, eh all kinds of jobs you do outside the plant, whenever they need something done, so I went there and drove a truck there for a while and had a CDL, Class A license which is semi-tractor trailer, I can drive a tractor trailer so I drove trucks there, the big giant ukes, the big giant dump trucks, I've drove those before, that was an interesting job. And I drove the big load-luggers, like if someone needs a big box outside your house to put a bunch of scraps in, I drove that truck for years and years. Then I left there and went to, that's when I went to the storeroom. I've been in the storeroom for quite a few years now. 7  JK: And the cold line, cold strip? DG: I was in the cold strip when I left the BOF, actually it was the north plant, BOF, hot strip, from the hot strip I went to the cold roll finishing, from cold roll finishing I went to yard maintenance then I went to the storeroom where I've stayed. Cold strip, cold roll finishing was probably one of my best jobs, I really liked it and met a lot of nice people there. I worked there, actually I was telling you how they run the coils from the cold mill, they would bring them over to the cold strip and we'd basically ship them from the cold strip is what we would do and I was in the shipping department, cold roll shipping. So I would load the train cars and semi-trucks. I would be in the train cars when they set the coils down or in the trucks. Actually, my job was truck loader, car loading is what it was. So that was my job there. I liked it, it was a neat job, I had to work with the crane man. We had a great crane man and you had to watch your back, you had to watch it all the time because any job in the steel mill was going to be a dangerous job anyway so you gotta watch your Ps and Qs. But, I was there for quite a few years then when that department closed down I didn't care for it and that's when I moved to north plant and then I went to the store room or I mean yard maintenance. JK: And before that, you were in the hot strip? DG: The hot strip, that was short lived, I was there probably a year or something like that. That's where they actually bring the slabs in and they heat them and they roll them into coils. I worked there for probably about a year, year and a half. And then like I said after that I went to the cold roll finishing, yard maintenance and then the store room. I've been in the store room probably for 15 years or something like that. JK: So you mentioned that the, so if you could describe your favorite job that you've had, it would be the... DG: It was the cold strip, I liked it when I was working in cold roll finishing, I liked the guys I was working with, it was hard work, you know hot and sweaty work, probably now would be the job I have now, delivering because I can go throughout the whole plant, I drive throughout the whole plant, I go downtown where our office buildings are, I deliver down there and I'd have to say that's my favorite job. My wife calls me the social director cause I know so many people because I get around to meeting everybody cause I'm through the whole plant now, I'm not just stuck in one little department so I'd have to say the job I'm on now which is store room delivery guy. That's me, the job I like. JK: What’s your favorite part of working at the steel mill, plant? DG: You know what? That basically is it, I get to meet a lot of people, there's, you know, over 1400 people working out there and I know a lot of them. I've been there for so many years now, you know, I know a lot of them and they know me, you know. A lot of them I don't know by their first name but I know them by their nicknames or just by sight and a lot of times you’ll see guys, cause we wear hard hats and glasses all day long, I'll see these guys outside the plant and I'll look at them and go, “well hell, I didn't know that guy was bald,” because you never see him with his hard hat off, you know. And that is probably my favorite part, I get to meet a lot of people, I know a lot of people, people I've seen throughout the years and didn't know their name now some of them I even know their name cause I deliver to them 8  now. And it's kind of interesting now because when we started out, back in the day, you couldn't even drive a truck unless you had 30 years seniority, well now guys are driving a truck with 6 years seniority, you know things have changed that way where you know a lot of jobs are combined, they're doing a lot of job combining and stuff like that but I'd have to say just being out and driving through the mill and delivering my stuff, it's hard work too, there's a lot of heavy packages and stuff I got to unload but just getting out and meeting people that's my favorite part there. JK: How does the job combining make you feel? DG: You know what, I know they have to do it, it’s hard cause you get settled in on one job you like to do and then now they start combining jobs but with automation, you almost have to do that and I understand that. I understand you have a company and a union, I'm a union man of course and I understand the company has to do that to survive, you know they have to get automation, like I said when they put the casters in that probably knocked out, oh God, probably 100 jobs or more you know with everything, maybe more a couple hundred jobs you know, start knocking jobs down cause automation is taking over now. Now they don't have to pour the ingots then take them over to the strip yard and take it out of there then reheat it, then roll it into slabs, then take it off of there and put it in the train car again, blah blah, you know that was a lot of steps so now they’ve moved that so I understand you know with automation, you know combining jobs but they didn't lose any jobs they just made the guys, combined jobs, moved the guys around here and here and there but I understand, nobody likes changes, especially me, that's, well I hate change more than anybody but it's got to happen, you've got to flow with the time, you know. Other than that, it's not bad, so just learn to take it. JK: And you mentioned that you're a union man, eh, how has been, I assume you joined the union, when did you join the union? DG: I joined the union the day you start the mill if you're going to be hourly, we call them hourly and salary. Union people are hourly and your bosses and management are all salary. So, yeah, if you're hourly you automatically join the union and its been good for me. And I tell you what, unions are good for the working man. You know they did so much for the working man, it's crazy. It's basically got you, any benefits you got it's usually done through the union. I mean your lunch breaks, your vacation, your vacation days, your time off from work, healthcare, it's just an enormous amount. Your holiday pay is gotten through the union and I'm a super union person. A lot of people argue with it but I'm super union to go with the union because I felt they're good people. You got your, some of them that abuse it, there's no doubt in my mind but to me, unions are the only way to go. It keeps the company honest and it keeps the people honest too. So, you can step over the boundaries so many times and even the union will say "I can't help you anymore, you got to quit screwing around." I'm super big on unions myself. JK: Most of my knowledge of the steelworkers union comes from the early 20th century. How would you describe, you're obviously pro-union, how would you describe it's changed over the time you've been there? DG: It'schangeddramaticallysinceI'vehiredin,dramatically.Unionsaren'tasstrong,thecompaniesare probably more in charge now than the unions used to be so, unions are weakened. They're still there, they're not going to go away but they've weakened quite a bit because, well, to me when Reagan came on 9  he forced, it all started with air traffic controllers, they were union and they were on a strike and he forced them back to work or fired them. Well, under a union contract you can't be fired for a strike. You can't be fired for being on a strike. Now they don't have to bring you back, they can shut the plant down or whatever but that was a big step when he did that it really cut into the unions bad. And it weakened the unions quite a bit and they've changed quite a bit. Like I said, it used to be they were pretty well-respected even at the mill, now not as much especially with these big corporations and everything, you know. They've got a lot of big attorneys, they can spend a lot of money on keeping you off that we don't have the money to be off. So it changed quite a bit, they're still out there, I think they're getting a little stronger again but eh I mean I'm still all for unions, 100% but it has changed dramatically. JK: How does that change make you feel? DG: You know what, it’s kind of scary because the unions have did so much for America, they basically made the middle class what they were. When this happened they started getting weaker it's starting to scare me now because all these companies are all sending jobs overseas. Well it gets to the point now we've got so many jobs overseas, there's no jobs here for us anymore. They all say we can make it cheaper over there for the consumer, but guess what? They make it overseas, bring it back here, they don't give you a cut. They're getting it done cheaper over there but we aren't getting any discount here. So to say we can make it cheaper over there for the consumer is really a bunch of bullshit. You never see the price go down on anything never but everything going over there, being made by pennies on the dollar so I think that's one of the big things hurting us here in America. There are no more jobs here in America. When I hired on at the mill back in '78 I could have went to a dozen places and probably hired in at $40,000 back then, there were dozens of places. Now you can't find a job anywhere, not where people are waiting to hire you. You might find one here or there for that price but these factories anymore, people are getting in them and staying in them because it's a decent paying job and you just don't leave that until you have to. So I feel that the weakening of the union has definitely weakened our economy too. Back then we had jobs and now they're sending all these jobs, I could probably name off fifteen places just in the last year that has sent jobs overseas. It's killing jobs and there's no place to work and people are wondering how come we're spending so much on welfare, well there are no jobs, even if they wanted to work, let's say they want to work, there's no jobs that are paying. That's one of the reasons, I don't mean to get all on a tangent, that's one of the reasons people at McDonald's need $15 an hour which I think is kind of ridiculous for a McDonald's worker but there's no jobs, that's the only jobs out there. And if you want them to work and stay off welfare we probably need to raise that up a little bit. As crazy as it sounds, cause that's all you got out there is part time jobs out there, you know, the fast food jobs. The industry is killing, hell, the Oreo cookie people, that gal just got a big raise for sending her company down to Mexico and that was over 6, 700 jobs that was lost going to Mexico to make Oreo cookies in Mexico. Carrier air conditioning is another one, down to Mexico, I just read yesterday, I don't remember which company it was, it's going to Mexico. There's so many jobs going to Mexico and people keep saying that Mexicans are taking our jobs but they don't have to take our jobs, all they got to do is go to Mexico to get a job because there's plenty of them down there. And that's one of the things that aggravates me about the unions. Another thing is they say Mexicans are coming here and getting our jobs, they’re not getting our jobs. The Mexicans are doing the jobs we don't want to do, we don't want to cut grass, we don't want to clean hotels, you know the crappy jobs Americans don't want to do, to begin with. A Mexican cannot steal your job unless someone gives it to him. The companies give them your job, that's the only way they can get it cause they can't legally go in and say “Hey I want that job, blah, blah, blah.” If the companies don't give it to them, they 10  can't steal them. So these are hiring these guys from Mexico to help cut grass and work in the hotels and whatever else, you know do the jobs we don't want to do. So to say, blame it on the Mexicans is not right you know because there's hundreds of grass cutting jobs if you want them but nobody wants to do those jobs cause there not enough money in it for them. And like I said, I didn't mean to get off on a tangent on you, it's just that and jobs are the biggest thing that's killing America right now, we're sending so many damn jobs overseas and then their bringing their goods back here, not getting charged for it, but when we ship our stuff out we get tariffed on our stuff going out—it's lose-lose except for the big rich guys you know, we can't win. I'm literally laid off right now because of Chinese steel coming in, Chinese steel, it's called dumping the steel, they're bringing Chinese steel, cheap steel, it's not good steel and people are buying that steel instead of the good American steel and that's what's killing us right now and that's one of the reasons I'm laid off, I've been laid off since February. This happened, the same thing happened in '08, we did the same thing, we idled the whole plant then because of Chinese steel. They put a tariff on it finally, then they slowly let it off someone's probably getting their pockets lined, they let it off and then, boom, we're flooded again. Well by the time we're flooded and you stop them, it's too late. Now all these steel mills are closing down and not just steel mills, it affects everybody, the mom and pop shops too. The lead hearts won't die, they did all of our work for us for a lot of our tool and die work, their shut down now, because of us. We were one of their biggest customers, now they're probably out of business because we don't have work, now they don't have work so it's not just the steel mills it’s all the mom and pop shops. Back in the day when we filed bankruptcy and went out, before US Steel bought us there was a lot of mom and pop shops that we owed money to, these are little shops, we owed 3 or $400,000 to, well we went bankrupt and you don't get your money now so those companies went down the tubes because we screwed them out of money because we filed bankruptcy. It all comes down to jobs, if we can keep our jobs up, fine and dandy, but if we can't things just keep getting worse and worse and worse, you got more and more people out of work and you got more and more people getting on welfare whether they want to or not, they have to survive, but that's my tangent about unions. JK: No, that is awesome. We had already talked about how Chinese steel has sort of undermined US Steel’s ability to produce a profit, could you elaborate on how that has affected, obviously that has affected you, temporarily laid off, but how has that affected you and your co-workers and how has that layoff... DG: Well, you know, a lot of us are lucky cause, well not a lot, some of my friends, I'm older now so I'm more established, got a little bit of money in the bank, I'm not rich by any means, but we're lucky that our spouses work. Back in the old days, the spouses didn't work that much, you know, my wife works, she makes good money, I got two or three of my friends who are in the same position, their wives work, thank God, and it's keeping their heads above water between that and our unemployment and our sub pay and stuff like that. We're getting by, we're doing all right. I mean, we're just barely getting by but we're getting by. Now, there's a lot of young guys out there that are hurting real bad because I didn't get laid off until February, some of the young guys had left decent jobs in the coal mines to come up here, they've been laid off since December. And these guys don't get what we get, a lot of them had just hired in. You know, we get benefits because we've been here for so many years through the union. We get our unemployment for 6 months and our subpay, supplementary income pay which makes up 80% of our pay between the two of them. Well, after 6 months, we lose our unemployment and we get 60% of our sub pay which makes up 60% of our pay. Older guys like us that are kind of established and have things paid off, we're getting by, we're making it right now, but that only goes for another 6 months then it drops down to 40% so it slowly 11  starts tiering down. Some of these young guys are hurting for sure because they just can't get by because they are young, some of their wives work, some don't, like I said, they just hired in, they have houses, cars they have to pay for, utilities, they’re probably out looking for another job, now they're probably working at some of these warehouses around here for $12 or $14 an hour compared to twice what they made at the mill, you know. So, like I said, there are just no good paying jobs, that's really hurting them, there's no doubt in my mind. You know what, we're getting by slowly but surely, it's just killing them, it's basically like losing your job. In fact, I'm hearing rumors where they're not going to have as many people working, bringing back as many people as we had working before we got laid off. Now, I don't know if that's just rumor or not but I learned that from one of my managers, and then we had a lot of managers, they’re laid off, they took other jobs, they're not going to come back. So, what kind of management are we going to have when we come back that knows how to make steel. A lot of our older guys are retiring, they are going to go ahead and take retirement, they can. So there are over 100 or so of those guys who know their job pretty good. Now, they're not coming back so as far as the older guys, we're getting by, doing all right, and if we go back in the spring like they're talking about now, that will put me off work for over a year, so that's a hell of a difference. These guys are going to go out and look for a job, they're not going to find a job paying what US Steel pays unless they have a craft of some kind which we have a lot of pipefitters, millwrights, electricians, if you have a craft skill and you're a journeyman, you can go out a find a good job like that. You can go to Anheuser-Busch and some of these other companies, but if you're not, you know you don't have a qualified job, you're going to be hurting. That's what some of these guys are feeling right now. I'm sure there are some of them that have already lost their houses and maybe cars and everything else. So, like I said, the older established guys not too bad, the younger guys, it’s really hurting them bad. JK: You mentioned your wife, Aunt Lisa, still has a job, when did you meet Aunt Lisa? DG: I met Aunt Lisa back in probably '79 or '80, I guess. Probably about the end of '79, we met and started dating in about '80, something like that. JK: What was it like in those first early years, in the early '80s? DG: The early '80 in like life itself or what? JK: Life in itself. DG: Oh, it was great, we were young and you know what, we dated about 4 or 5 years before we got married, a kind of long engagement, she always teases me about it. It was great, especially when I got back to work, I had a Z28 Camero, had my own place, it was nice. Then we got married in '84, I guess it was. Life was good, she was working and I was working, I was happy with my job. Then the kids started coming along, Cory was born in '87 and Krissy was in '90 I guess it was. Then it was just raising the kids, you know, going through life raising kids and eh other than that it was good. You know it wasn't a bad life, we were able to afford a decent house and travel a little bit so we did good. JK: We talked about the state of the steel industry, how it's kind of on its back foot. What would you say to the idea that the steel industry in the United States is sort of obsolete? DG: Well, I wouldn't say they're obsolete because we make good steel here and a lot of our imported steel 12  is not good steel. It's terrible steel, it's not made good and, eh, I wouldn't say we're obsolete, I think people just think, with the companies we have to charge more for our steel with the companies and everything, charge slightly more than the imported steel but as far as our steel, we have #1 steel. As a matter of fact, we just had Toyota come into our steel mill, try our new caster I was telling you about, the state of the art caster, and we run steel for them and they said it turned out real good, not too many companies can run their steel, they're very picky about their steel. They actually made the comment that you guys actually make your steel better than we do in Japan. They said you are making this steel better than we can in Japan for these cars. So, to me that impressed me quite a bit, when back in the day, years ago, we taught the Japanese how to make steel, well now, they are coming back and teaching us how to make steel cause they get it and perfect it they way they want it and they're actually coming back and teaching us how to make steel again. Now, we make good quality steel, especially with US Steel, we make good quality steel and I'd put it up against anything. Actually, some of our steel was in the twin towers when they fell. They found US Steel steel in there. And so I guess that's a good thing, I don't know, cause there was really great steel in there before it fell but it was so high, it was going to take down anything, but a lot of our steel at US Steel made the twin towers. So, we've been around for years and years and years and I think we make just as good of steel as anybody else, like I said, it's like apples to oranges, if you want good quality steel you have to have good quality guys to make it. And I think we do just as good as anybody else. I think the steel mills are good in America, I think they're here to stay but if we've come so far from back when US Steel first bought us we had so many steel mills in the United States and it got to the point where the steel mills were buying slabs and bringing them in because it was cheaper than making it ourselves, that's how low the price of steel was. So the companies themselves, National Steel and Bethlehem Steel and these guys were buying foreign slabs and making them and rolling them cause that way it cut out a lot of the process. It was cheaper to do that but we were kind of cutting our own throats by doing that. It's like owning a cotton factory and instead of growing your own cotton, buying cotton from somebody else, well eventually it's going to hurt you because you're getting it a lot cheaper from somewhere else but it's just hurting your own company by doing that and that was one of the downfalls of us, so the government came together and said we have too many steel mills in America here, we need to start slimming these down, there's way too many steel mills. So Bethlehem Steel was a huge name, Bethlehem Steel growing up was a steel mill, they went under, I don't know how many went under but there's quite of few of these small steel mills that went under and how we ever made it is beyond me but I guess we made good quality steel even especially at Granite City Works. We were an old steel mill, we've been around for over 100 years but we've also automated too so we've kind of kept up and changed things and other than that I think we just make good quality steel. JK: What is your most powerful memory of the steel mill? DG: Most powerful? JK: Most memorable, how about that? DG: Hmm, you know what, I don't know if I have anyone. Probably, of course, the day I hired in, that was scary, but I don't know if I really have one powerful thing. One thing I do remember, of course, 9/11, I was working that morning when it happened and I went into one of the offices, they had the T.V. on and I heard it on the radio. Eh, other than that I don't know if I really have any powerful memories you know, as far as, you know, there's been a lot of people killed out there. I've had friends that have actually died out 13  there. One guy, I hired in with, he was killed out there. You remember stuff like that of course. Kind of a powerful memory. We had a couple of explosions, guys hurt out there. I remember when we had the big breakout, one of the first casters out there, actually pulling the liquid steel into the slabs and they call it breakout, something comes loose and the steel splatters everywhere, we had about 8 or 10 guys get hurt really bad out there. I remember that. I had a really good friend of mine that worked over there at that time, luckily he was on vacation that week. He keeps telling me he has nightmares, not even being there, he would have been for sure, blah, blah, blah. Stuff like that, guys getting hurt out there, people dying out there, there's been quite of few people die out there since I've been there you know, crazy accidents. Other than that, that's about it. JK: How did you get started at the steel mill? DG: You know what, like I said, I was fresh out of high school, I knew I'd be working in a factory somewhere doing some kind of factory work. Like I said, back then there were jobs everywhere. I could have went to Guaranteed Electric, I could have went to American Steel, Laclede Steel, which is no longer up in Alton, they might be running again now. Hundreds of factories at the time were open and running and I could have worked at any one of them. My best friend, Guy Jackson, at the time, his dad worked down at the mill, he worked at the blast furnace there, stinky part they call it. He said they were hiring, he went down there then called me and said “Hey, you need to go down there” and I went down and got hired on right after he got hired on. And I went to the main side of the plant and he went to the blast furnace side cause that's where his dad worked on that side. So, that's just how it goes and the rest is history over there. JK: Do you have anything else that you think is interesting that you would like to add? It doesn't even have to be really interesting. DG: You mean like the mill or just anything? JK: Eitherone. DG: You know what, just as far as my life here, this is a nice place to live. I love the Madison County area for one thing. Glen Carbon, Edwardsville area, my grandparents have been there for my whole life so I've always loved Glen Carbon, raised off and on there. My best friend was from Glen Carbon, still lives in Glen Carbon. I remember there was a kid, you know how things have changed just in this area in Edwardsville. Over here in the park, the Center Grove park, I killed my first rabbit over there and that was all fields over there at one time. It's just amazing how things have changed and how really how fast life goes. Cause when the kids were born, of course, you're the same age, your age, Cory, and Kristin, how fast things go and how fast things change, you know. I remember them telling me you need to start saving for college now, I'm thinking the kids are little bitty things, well, they were right. Come college, now I'm scrambling so you know what, time flies. It's like, live in your moment, I had my brother-in-law. He worked at the mill too, he died at 45 of a massive heart attack. Ever since then, I'm going to live life a little bit, I'm going to save money but I'm going to spend a little money too cause you never know when it's going to be your last day. That's kinda been my motto, just kind of live life as you go and life's too short not to have fun. Other than that, it's great. The kids are grown up now, Lisa and I are back on our own now, empty nesters, just kind of nice doing your own thing again, doing a little bit with the kids now and then. But it's kind of nice, life kind of goes in circles, you're single, then you're married together, then you 14  start having kids then they leave the nest and you’re kind of back to your empty nest syndrome again, able to run and do what you want again. Other than that, that's about it. JK: How about as far as the steel plant? DG: As far as the steel plant, you know I don't know really what the future is, there's talk about going back in April. You know what, will they open back up again? They might not open again, they might sell that plant, I don't know. Rumor is, talking to guys, we're kind of like a step-child, I always say we're the stepchild of US Steel because they bought us later on, we're not one of the original plants, but we are a money maker for them. Now, things might start back up and we'll do just fine, I don't know just yet, it's one of those things and I'm at that age, I'm 58 now, I need at least a couple of more years before I can retire and leave. So if I can get a couple more years in I'll probably retire and do something else probably. But as far as the state of the plant I'm hoping they keep going. I've complained about it all the time but it's been a good living for me and it's like anything else, you don't know what you got till it's gone, we're just hoping it'll start back up and get things going again here. JK: How would that make you feel if it didn't come back? DG: You know, if it didn't come back, I guess I now wouldn't be at a point where I'd be so surprised, I wouldn't say I'd be devastated, I wouldn't be happy cause now I'm going to have to go out and find another job at 58 which is not easy to do, a decent paying job. And I'd never find a job for the money I'm making now. But like I said. it'd be different if Lisa wasn't working and making decent money it'd be a different story. But I'd just as soon keep working for another couple, three years if I can. JK: Do you have anything else you would like to talk about? DG: No, I don't think so. JK: Well, I'd like to say thank you very much for doing this oral interview with me. It's awesome hearing about your life and your history with the plant and thank you so much. DG: It's not a problem, I was glad to do it for you. 15 
MadisonCounty;Rita Bonds;1940;2016; Rita Bonds  1940 - 2016  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Rita Bonds Oral History Interview Kayla Kroder, Interviewer Alton, Illinois October 16, 2016 Kayla Kroder (KK): This is Kayla Kroder and I will be interviewing Rita Bonds. The interview is taking place at her home here in Alton, Illinois. Rita worked at the Owen's Illinois Glass factory. She currently works as a secretary for the NAACP. Thank you, Rita, for your time. So the first question is: where did you grow up? Rita Bonds (RB): I grew up in Edwardsville, Illinois. KK: Alright. What was it like growing up in Edwardsville? RB: It was lots of fun. Lots of runnin' and freedom you know. KK: Is there anything neat or special to do in Edwardsville? Was SIUE around? Or was that a new thing? RB: Oh no, when I grew up it was still a very segregated. I went to a segregated school. I went to Lincoln School, which is closed now, and it is the Mannie Jackson Humanitarian shop now. And when I grew up, that was my school. I was the last class to graduate before they closed it down and integrated the schools in 1950. KK: Wow. Whenever you graduated, what did you do? RB: I went to SIU Carbondale. KK: What did you major in? RB: I was studying to be a nurse. And then my fiancée returned from the war, I think it was Iraq War, and then I got married and moved to Las Vegas, Nevada. KK: That's really neat. What did you do in Las Vegas, Nevada? RB: I was a military wife and I had my first child there. We lived near the desert so it was really interesting, and I was there when they shot off the atomic bomb, the first explosion. I was there and I could see the huge cloud from where I stayed. It was Nellis Air Force Base. KK: Wow. So what were your thoughts on that? 1  RB: Yeah, "Wow." That was my thought. It is, I had read about it but, I was very young, I was like 20 years old, and I just thought it was fascinating. That I could see the huge mushroom cloud- and it was just like a mushroom. KK: Where was this again? RB: Nellis Air Force Base, in Las Vegas Nevada. We stayed in a small town called Henderson. And, my husband drove back and forth to Nellis Air Force base. KK: When did you come back to Alton? RB: Oh let's see...When he got, he transferred from Nellis Air Force base to Whiteman Air Force base in Missouri. And we moved back here and I stayed on the air base with him. We stayed in town first, in Sedalia Missouri. And then when we first moved back, he was going overseas, he went to a place called Thule. Thule Greenland, he there for about a year. And I stayed with my parents. And when he came back went to Sedalia, Missouri. He was stationed at Whiteman Air Force base. KK: So whenever you guys left Whiteman, you came to Alton, then? RB: When he retired. No, first, we stayed at Whiteman Air Force Base, and I had a couple more kids. We went to Madrid, Spain for 3 years, nine months. And when we left Spain, we came back to Whiteman. And it was almost time for him to retire. So he put in for- We came up to Whiteman and we stayed there and then the Vietnam War started. And he went to Vietnam and I moved back to Alton for that year while he was in Vietnam. And then he went to South Dakota for one year after Vietnam, and he retired at Ellsworth in South Dakota. And then we moved back to Alton. KK: Okay. So at that time, you'd been maybe about 40 or 50 or so? [Yelling in background] RB: Football game...the question again? KK: Whenever you moved back to Alton, you were about 50? RB: Let me see, how old I was? KK: Yeah RB: ...oh wow...no I was...when he retired I was about 35. KK: Oh, that's wonderful. So the factory was still open then and it was. RB: Right. When he retired and we moved back here he was looking for work, and I was too. And I had a friend that worked there, in the office. I forget what his title was. But, he worked there and one day he asked, me, "How would you like to go to work at the glass factory?" I said, "Well gee, I don't know, I've never worked at a factory before." And he said, "Well it's a glass factory where we make bottles and you would examine the bottles and pack them." And I said, "Well okay, I'll give it a try." And it was on the day they landed on the moon, that was the day that I was supposed to go down there for an interview. That would be July the 20th, right? Yeah. And he called me and told me to come down for an interview. 2  And I said, "Well I'm busy right now," because I was watching the TV, the landing on the moon. And so I didn't go for the interview. He called me the next day and said, "Why didn't you come for the interview." I said, “What interview?” [laughs] he said, "My supervisor called employment office and called for you to come for an interview." I said, "Oh, I was watching the landing on the moon, I didn't think about going and looking for a job." So he said, "Well I ask and see if you can come." So, he made arrangements for me to come to another interview friend in high places. So, he made arrangements, and I went down and started work the next week in the glass factory. I had never worked in a factory, in fact I had never worked outside the home before. Because I was a student, you know? And then I was a wife, mother, raising kids and so...I did volunteer work, but this was really something new for me. KK: How like, what was it like when you first went in the factory? Was it overwhelming? RB: Yeah. Very much so. But I was used to meeting strict people you know, because of travelling in the Air Force. And so, it was...I didn't know what to expect and we went to orientation you know and they told us what to expect and they showed us the factory. I was really overwhelmed because I had never been inside one. It was interesting, very interesting to see how the bottles were made. How they come out on this roller and they're really hot. It was like 100 degrees near the layer, where the bottles come out of the furnace room, and they mold and make the bottles. Then they come out under a long pad-like, bed-like roller. And they come out from under a curtain, and the workers stand there on either side of the layer and as they bottles come out, they're all numbered in rows. And pick up certain bottles to see if they have any defects. You pick them up and you look at them, examine them, and if they have defects you throw 'em away. They have an inspector who looks at them first. And if one of the molds has a defect they call out back, to the people making the bottles, and they will take the mold off and fix the defect, then replace the bottles. It was very interesting. They come out on like a big bed and they have rows and rows of bottles. I worked different companies, you know. Soda bottles...I didn't work on beer bottles at that time ,that was another area. But we worked on medicine bottles and soda bottles, and just bottles people use for different things. There was another layer there for medical bottles that they put black plasma in. KK: I know what you’re talking about RB: There was only one girl that worked that layer because the bottles came out so slow. And she could look at them, examine them, and then pack them. And she didn't have anyone working with her. And other layers usually had maybe 3 or 4 girls who pull the bottles off as they come through, and then they go down the line and you have girls standing at a light, and as they come under the light you can see the defects And they knock them down in a roller, and they roll them back to the back room, where they dump them, redo the glass, heat it again, and then redo the molds again. And then they come back out again, and hopefully you know the don't have defects. And then we get down to the other end and there are about 3 girls, and a light, and the inspector is there. And she will pull the defects out. She stands at the layer and she will cut the bottles, and measure to see if they're the right weight and see if they're the right density and thickness. She'll cut them and measure them and if they were okay, they would send them on down the roller. And we would stand under the light and pick them up, look at them, roll them over, look at the bottom, and then pack them in boxes. And they go down, don’t stop, they keep going, and so you have to kind of work fast. Where I worked, there were like 3 girls standing there working, and as they would come under the light, if she missed one, because she couldn't see underneath the 3  bottle, we would get the bottle, we'd turn it up, look at the top to see if there was a crack in the top. We look, roll it in our hands to see if there's a crack on the side, flip it up, look under the bottom for cracks. And if they were okay, we'd put them in the box And as the box got full, like 24 bottles in a box, then it would roll on down to the "End of the Layer," they called it. And there would be a young man there to take them off and then pack them on a crate you know. And roll it out to the warehouse. KK: Wow RB: And you had to work fast. Because if you didn't pull them off, that round table where the bottles went, it would fill up. And then they would start crashing and falling. And, it was really funny, the guys in the back room who made the bottles. If they heard all the bottles crashing, they knew they were losing money. So they want to know, "Why are you letting our bottles fall in the floor? Pack those bottles up!" You know? Yeah, it was really interesting. So you had to work fast. but you had to accurate also you didn’t want to pack. And then we had an inspector, they would take the bottles to the warehouse and inspect them. And if they found too many defects they would send them back from the warehouse and they wouldn't get shipped out to the customer. They'd go back to the warehouse and the girls who, it was sometimes a special group of girls that would go to the warehouse, and redo those bottles. And go over them again, pull out that- they all had numbers on them, and they pull out certain numbers, and throw those away. And repack the bottles to be shipped to the customer. KK: That seems like that would be actually pretty tough to do. RB: No, it wasn’t tough. It was interesting. Well, I thought it was interesting. Cuz I had never experienced working before, so to me, it was really fascinating. To see, to see it work. And there was one, where you made baby food. And they were really strict on packing baby food bottles. Because that was, you know, you don't want to send broken bottles. because as they leave there, they'd go to the company and they would pack baby food in them. And you didn't want them to pack, pour applesauce or green beans into a bottle, and it would break? Well That would stop their production, and mess up the whole thing. They'd have to stop production, clean up the broken bottles of baby food, and then start over. So we had to really be careful. But that's on all of them though, be really careful you know about sending out defective bottles. Because it would go to the manufacturer and if you broke up too many bottles they would lose that contract, you know? You see what I mean? So we had to really be careful about sending out defective bottles. They call it "Ware" W-A-R-E. They called it WARe, you know,That was the term for the bottles we did. KK: WOW, That's really neat. So, where there any benefits to working for the factory? RB: Yeah there was a union. We had a union there. They paid good money. Well, I thought it was good at the time. Cuz I had never worked before. They had a union and they had hospitalization if anyone got hurt, you went to the doctor there at the factory there. And if you were sick enough you could go home. You had breaks. You worked so many hours and then you got a break, and then you got a lunch break. There was young lady in charge of the shift, there were three shifts. I worked B. there was A, B, C, and D. And I worked B shift. And if you worked on line you didn't go home until someone came to relieve you. A group had to come and relieve you. You couldn't just walk off, and cuz the bottles kept going. So you had to wait for the shifts. They shifts were like 7 in the morning till 3 in the afternoon, and then 3 to 4  11. There was another shift from 11 to 6 in the morning. Well 7. And you had a break, and you had a lunch room where you go. Not a lunchroom, but a room where you go to eat your lunch. They didn't have a cafeteria. You brought your lunch from home. KK: Were you able to get any free bottles or anything like that, or? RB: Free bottles? KK: Yeah, you know from working out there. Like sometimes Subway does, you get a free sandwich when you work on a shift? No? RB: No. We didn't have free bottles. We had a little club. We had a little club where we played softball, among ourselves. There was a bowling team. And golf league. Yeah. They had recreation things. They had a beautiful park that was out in Godfrey. Beautiful acres of park. It had a pavilion, area for playing softball, a little lake to fish. And things for kids to play on. And they had an annual picnic every year. So there's a lot of benefits there you know. For socializing. Then they had a club-room across the street from the glass-works. They would meet there for different club organizations and union meetings and things like that. Yeah. It was fun. The groups, the groups too. The interactive club, with just the people on that shift. But then when we had a big picnic it would be different ones from different shifts would come to the party you know. So it was nice. We had Christmas parties and yeah, they had things for families too. KK: That's really nice. Did you face any challenges while working there, at all? RB: Facing what? KK: Difficulties with the factory, co-workers, management? RB: No, no I didn't. I got along well with the girls I worked with. And management, they didn't harass you or anything or make you work in an unsafe environment. It was always really, in fact sometimes, we would be working and one of the supervisors would be down, walking around, you know, and if he would stop to pick up a box...I’ll never forget this, there was a union rep standing on the walkway, the catwalk, they called it, and company man would stop to pick up a box or something, and the union man [slapping sound]. The company could not interfere with our work, with what we're doing. It was a union representative walking around. he was a worker, but he was observing, too. to see if anyone from the company interfered or mistreated the workers. So, I didn't ever see any interference or, you know, things from the union. And I would go to union meetings. You had to pay dues to be in the union. The company, I thought, they were pretty good to the workers. It was a safe environment, because if you got hurt you immediately would go to the medical office there. And if you felt ill you'd upstairs to the lady in charge of the hour that we worked. She was our supervisor call her. And you'd go up there if you had a phone call to call home, she would contact your family. If someone at home called you, say a member at home was sick, they'd get in touch with you. And they'd bring you up, they get someone to replace you on your job, and they bring you upstairs to talk on the phone. Because I had a son who had asthma, and, I got called several times and I had to leave work and take him to the hospital, because he was having an asthma attack. And there was never any problem about me leaving work, you know, to see about him. So, all in all, I thought it was a very good environment to work. I don't have nothing to 5  compare it to because I had never worked before. But after I had worked there for a couple of years and I realized, this isn't the place I'm want to spend 30 years, because I was talking with the different girls there who worked there. And most of them had worked there since they were 17, 16, out of high school. And some of them didn't finish high school. And I said, we weren't supposed to talk about how much money you made, you know, but you did. You found out you know without asking, really. it came up after I had been there several years, talking with an older woman about working there. And she had been there a long time and, I don't know how the money part came in, but I found out she was only making fifty cents an hour more than me. And I had only been there like 3 years. And I said, "You've been here how long?" "Twenty-five years." And she was glad to have the job. You know? I said, "Oh." I was just talking with her, and I talked with several other people, and so when the young girls would come and work in the summer, you know. When school was out, they'd come and get a job in the summer, and they'd go back to school. I would tell them, "You don't want to stay here for no twenty-five or thirty years." I said, "This is okay for the summer, but you go back to school and get an education. Because you don't want to spend..." They were really nice ladies but I could not imagine myself staying there that long and still making just fifty-cents more than what the girls who just walked in the door were making. Because, by then, they were renegotiating, and wages were getting better, and the union wasn't working to improve the working environment. So I encouraged the young girls who came to work in the summer to go back to school. You don't want to stay here. She was a nice lady, but she was old and thin, and reachin' up and pullin' these boxes down. She didn’t' really have to do that...if the boxes got jammed up she would lift them off and sit them on the floor, and they'd pick 'em up. And she was an older woman. And I said, "No. You don't want to do this when you get that old." So I encouraged the younger girls, you know, work for a little while, but then go back to school. This is not what you want to do for the next thirty, forty years. But, the ladies I had talked to, they had worked there since they were 17. And bought a home and raised their family, but things were not as high then. The economy was getting higher, things were changing. We'd been through another war. And things were just different. And I could see that. And the younger girls, they thought it was fun. They enjoyed it because they liked that paycheck and liked the hours and the shift, and it was a lot of fun. but then they would work a couple of summers and I never saw them back again. They went and got another job, probably, and graduated, and moved on. Very few stayed after I left. I stayed there, some of them stayed because they had families and had started buying a home. So they needed that paycheck if their husband's check didn't cover everything you know. Some of them stayed until they closed the factory down. Some of the younger ones left and went back to school. KK: When you were talking about the economy was changing, during the wars. Would you liked to explain that a bit more? RB: Well, I would say as the prices got up higher, the price of food and housing and everything started changing like that, and the money didn't go as far as it did when I first started out. Everything was higher by then. So the check that you made just didn't go as far. It's just like it is now, your paycheck doesn't stretch as far this year as it did last year. Because the groceries are going up higher, every time you go to the grocery store, the prices are up again. That's the way it was, even then. I noticed it. I don't know, I imagine those other ladies did. One lady, she'd been there....she was like fifty-five years old, and she'd been there twenty, twenty, thirty years. but she's only fifty-five. So she couldn't retire and get social security or anything. And then when they started closing down, offering you to retire, a lot of them had the time, but weren't old enough. You see what I mean? And they wouldn't get the full 6  benefits, because of the difference. And this lady, she'd been there all that time, but she wasn't old enough to get full retirement. So they lost part of their retirement money. I don't know...it was...interesting when you look at it like that. But when I first went there it was just fun for me. Because my husband was still alive and I wasn't completely dependent on my paycheck. My paycheck didn't have to pay all the bills and things. Some of the girls, they did. They were single. Yeah, it was interesting. In the fun time, we had lots of fun activities, too. Playing softball and bowling. And that's where I learned to play golf. And they even offered a self-defense classes. Little things like that. Perks, I called them. They always offered something. It was a good company until everything started changing. I think they changed ownership. Then the next thing you know, they were talking about safety. Because we didn’t' wear goggles or hearing aids. Actually, my hearing's not too good. I say that, but my hearing...the noise level was really bad. Breaking glass all the time. I think the company changed hands and they came in with the glasses for us to wear. Lot of people didn't wear the glasses because they weren't used to it. Some of them wore the glasses. I noticed different things, different safety things started coming around. They start checking when they change hands. KK: That kind of makes me think about this next question: Owens Illinois was actually really well known for being environmentally ahead of its time. They had recycling centers, they were really well known for their safety, as well as the clean factories. Do you want to further that those thoughts? RB: It was. It was clean, yeah. i thought it was. I had nothing to compare it with, but I thought it was always clean, the environment where we worked. It was well kept, they seemed to care about your safety. Because if you got hurt, you immediately had someone to come and take your place and you went over to the nurse's office. I remember when someone in my family got sick, I had to go home. They didn't hesitate to have me replaced, or tell me to wait an hour or so. I could immediately leave and they found someone to replace me. And I could go take care of my family. And when they would shut down for the summer they would offer you to work in another area if you wanted to, if you didn’t want to take the time off. Because I left packing bottles and went to making boxes one summer just to try it out. I didn't care much for it. It was different but I didn't think I wanted to work there all the time. So I worked there but one summer. And the next summer when they closed down I just took the time off and just started back. Because they had a lull in orders, orders started slowing down, and they would close it, for a couple of weeks. You could take the time off. Or, if you they had room for you, you could work over in the boxes. And then they had it where you worked on a layer, and then above you they made boxes, and they would send the boxes down to you on the runner to pack. The boxes would come down and you would pack them up and push them out to the big layer, where they usually had a young man there, assigned to pull them off and pack them off. To take them to the warehouse. So everything was moving, you know? Boy, you didn't want to stop. because the bottles would back up. And the men in back, they would come out. They had a good job going, no defects, the men out back who made the bottles, they would come out sometimes and watch us pack their bottles. To see how we were doing. Packing up the wares. And they'd say, "Got a good job today." And I'd say, "This one has a fault in it. Fix it." But the inspector, she would find it, cut it, and write a little note in it, and send it in the back room for them. "This was too thin. One side of the bottle was too thin." they'd have to pull that mold off. We'd fix it in the back room, and send it back down the layer again. But in the summer it was really hot there. it was like 100-some degrees. Standing there. Sometimes they had extra girls in the warehouse, and they would come up and pull bottles off that were defects. Before you packed them there were a couple of girls that would stand there, and they'd give them a stick that they'd use and lift the bottles up, 7  or you'd reach over and get them, and pull off a whole row of bottles that were melted on one side, or the neck of the bottle was crooked. But, they would tell the guy in the back, that that certain bottle, with that number on it, was defective, and they'd have to stop that whole row of bottles from coming out. And some of them were still coming out and they'd have to call someone up to pull them off and throw them away before they went down the line for the girls to pack. Because they couldn't stop. They would move, I loved that, you'd get a girl that would move, changed, get a turn to sit under the light and as you sit there like this. [Motions] You knock 'em off, knock 'em down in the run. One time we were knocking a bunch. A man from out back came, "What are you fooling [inaudible] way for?" I said "It's no good. Fix it." [Laughs] They didn't like to hear that crashing. Oh they would come from out back, cuz they were making bonus money, see. At that time there was a bonus if they made good ware. If they all got packed, they made more money. And they could kind of take a break and rest. Because they had it all fixed up, and the bottles were coming out being packed up. And going out. Yeah, it was good. Now you got plastic. So you don't have the glass factory anymore. Everything is plastic now. KK: When you were talking about doing the cardboard in the summer, you said you didn't like it. What about it did you not like? RB: The dust. Dust falling all over you. You'd be covered with dust. It was interesting making it, the boxes, but I didn't care for it. Because it was a little bit dusty, and very hot. You'd put the boxes on a huge runway. They would run on a big roller in the warehouse, like a train. Like Track A, it would automatically roll down here, then it would turn and come back up this way. It was interesting. But I didn't care that much for it. It was kind of quiet, too. There wasn't a lot of people there like it was when you were packing bottles. It was interesting, but...I'd rather be over there where there's more activity. There was one area where they made this big gallon bottle. We had the only mold for that in the United States. Europe didn't even have one. It was a five gallon jug. You ever see those big milk jugs? Yeah, we made those down there. And we had the only mold for that. I didn't never work there because they were so large. They had a special crew that went over there and worked. I went over there one summer when work was slow, rather than take time off, I volunteered to go over there and work. It was interesting. But it was too quiet and slow. Because it took a long time for those big jugs to come out. Then you'd just pick them up and pack them. Then they shipped them overseas or wherever you know. KK: Whenever you found out that the plan was going to close down what did you think? RB: I thought, oh wow. I was about ready to retire, though. I think I had my youngest son there. I was ready to leave because my husband had gotten a job. He was working a good job and I could spend more time at home with my youngest son. I had another child that I wasn't expecting at the time. All my kids were in school and then after ten years, here comes this other baby. So, it was kind of like a bonus. Then I could spend more time with him because the other kids were older and I could spend more time. He turned out to be asthmatic. He was the one that I had to leave work all the time and go take him to the doctor. I had to run up to Scott Air Force base all the time to see the doctor up there. When they started getting ready to close down it affected a lot of people, because people, like I said, had been there since they were straight out of high school but they weren't eligible, they weren't sixty-two, to get retirement money. Well, I was. I had been there that long, that I could start drawing, I could get my benefits. And then a few years later I could get social security. But a lot of them couldn't because they had the forty years, but they weren't old enough. So it was a lot of talk, conversations about....they had felt like, it 8  wasn't coming out for them right. There was this one lady, she was, at the time, she had been there over thirty years. but she wasn't old enough. I think she was only like fifty-something. And that was really too old to start another career. And this one was being taken away....So, it was a lot of emotional problems going on. Husband and wives worked there, there was a lot of husbands and wives there, who worked. But it didn't affect me, financially as it did some of the others people there. KK: So did the company ever help them try to find other jobs? Like try to look at trades and see if they could be located somewhere else? RB: They had little classes and talked to them about what could d job-wise. A lot of them left there and went to the Ollens (Spelling). Went down here to Ollen down in East Alton. Several of them went down there. And some of them just retired and got other little jobs around. Some of them had savings, I guess, and they just had a couple of years to go before they could reach that age. I was able to get a pension because I had vested rights. I had been there long enough. I got a small benefit. The other people the amount they were getting wasn't enough to cover expenses. I don't think they union could do anything to help them because, they had sold the company. It was sad to see them leave the place. Because, like I say, it was a lot of fun. It was like a big family. We always had things to do after work. It was a good place to work. KK: Whenever the factory had finally shut down were there any talk of what was going to be put in its place or were they just going, just gonna? RB: Well there was talk about some of them staying there but, some of them were dissatisfied. I heard a lot of disgruntled people talking, and they didn't like it. And the union was negotiating with them, there was a lot of talk about it, but, as far as I can remember, there wasn't much they could do about it because it was a done deal. They were going to sell and they were going to close it down. They didn't close everything down at once because there was still another factory down in Godfrey, Illinois where people were working. But those down there on Broadway, those who could collect the benefits, they got them and then left. Some of them when to Ollen and worked and some of them were just out of work. KK: After the plant shut down it definitely affected the economy? RB: Yes, it did. I would say so. Yes, They had like four shifts, and that's a lot of people. Some of them, like I said, went to Ollen but the older people, the men, I don’t' think they could go. Some of them I think....I don't remember really if some of them went out of town to work. There was another factory that some of them went to Indiana, I believe, and worked. If I remember correctly, some of them went up there. This friend of mine was a supervisor, he was offered the job but he didn't take it. He stayed on in East Alton. KK: Did any of the businesses here in Alton, since I know a lot of them kind of relied on the factory, did you see any other shut downs of mom-and-pop shops or was it just unaffected by it? What would you say? RB: Well, yes. The Bonaire. That was right across the street from it. That was there they all gathered before work and after work. But as far as I know, it didn't affect them, as far as I know, because I didn't 9  go there. But a lot of people would go there before work and after work. But I think they continue to do business, as far as I know, they didn't financially affect them. KK: So after the plant had shut down and other people had found other jobs or retired, did you retire right away? Or did you end up working for the NAACP sooner rather than later? How did that come about? RB: No, I retired and I stayed home for a while. And then my daughter was working for Miller's Mutual Insurance and she asked me did I want to go to work. I said yeah I would, because I would like to have that extra money. I call it mad money [Laughs]. So I said yeah. There was a job open in the cafeteria. They had a cafeteria at Miller's Mutual Insurance. so I applied there and I went to work in the cafeteria part in the cafeteria part. I worked like 10 to 1 or 2 in the afternoon. Four hours I think I worked, punching meal tickets. Then after that I would help do the dishes. Rinse dishes and put them in the dish washer. But at lunch time I would sit on a stool in the cafeteria and punch the girls' meal tickets. I had to add real quick. They got each item was so much and I sat there and add it up in my head, because I didn't have a machine. I sat there and added it up and punched their meal ticket. And they'd go through the line and eat lunch. Then after lunch I would help with the stack the dishes in the dish washer. Then after that, I did that for a couple of years, I liked it because I was still able to take my young son to school in the morning. And if he had an asthma attack it would only usually happen if they cut the grass before 10 in the morning. So if they cut the grass and he had an asthma attack I could go get him and bring him home. And I had a babysitter for him and I would go to work. I was only gone like 4 hours. And after I worked there they had a job opening in the mail room. So I bid in on the job to move up to the mail room. It was a full-time job. And that's what I did, I moved to the mail room at Miller's Mutual Insurance. Where you go around the office and pick up the mail off the desks who had policies and everything they had to do. I'd go up, pick those up off their desk, bring back to the mail room, and sort it out and get it ready to go through the postage machine and mail it out. The other young man that worked there, he was son-in-law. And they said, "You're gonna work for your son in law?" And I said, "Well yeah, I can work for my son-in-law. I know how to follow directions." [Laughs] They said, "He's going to be telling you what to do!" I said, "Well if he tells me what to do, I'll do it" It wasn't a problem. Everyone said, "Oh, I don't know about that." I said, "Hey, don't you know how to follow directions?' [Laughs] So I worked there until I retired. Well they shut down. They started downsizing the Millers Mutual, too. So I had to go through another downsizing. And then I stayed at home after that. A girlfriend I had known from Edwardsville, went to school with, she was living over here, and I met here. And one day she asked me, "What are you doing?" And I said, "Oh nothing much, why?" She said, "My husband is the President of the NAACP and he needs a secretary." And I said, "Well I don't know how to be a secretary." "Yeah you'd only have to do it for a couple of weeks before they find someone because the girl quit. Just do it for about a month, maybe, until he finds someone." I said, "Well, okay." She said "All you have to do is take down the minutes of the meeting and then that's it." I said, "Well okay, I can do that." Cuz I had done that kind of volunteer work before when we were in the air force. Worked for different committees. So I said okay. I went. I'm retiring this year. I've been there since...oh....twenty years. Yeah. [Laughs] KK: That month lasted pretty long. 10  RB: Yeah [Laughs] That couple of weeks turned into. But I enjoy it. It was fascinating. I loved it. I loved working with him, Mr. Gray. His name is Mr. James Gray. I love working with him. He's retiring also. So I said, "If you're retiring, I am too." And I kind of had health issues with my arthritis and my eye-sight and my hearing, so, it's time for me to a stay at home grandparent. Great grandparent. KK: So when you were working at the NAACP as a Secretary you were talking about how you would take minutes. Was it just that or did you end up doing more and more? RB: No, well yeah, really...When they started building the new high school they had to get the proposition passed. Well I had to help with folding up papers and sending them out. And then at different meetings, for hiring minorities contractors, to build the new school. Well we had to go to the different meetings. He would have us go to different meetings. Myself and two of my friends. We were elderly ladies, and he would call me up and say, "I need you to meet me at the hotel, at the Holiday Inn, we're gonna have a meeting at 10 o'clock." And I'd go get the car and pick up another lady and another lady and we'd go to this meeting. And we'd sit there and listen to the meeting. And just sit there. And then when the meeting was over he would thank us. Then we would leave. We went to so many meetings. We were at one meeting because they were talking about minority companies. One lady up walked up and said, "What construction company do you own?" We looked at each other and said, "We don't own a construction company." "Oh you don't?" "No, were just grandparents who have an interest in the school because we have our grandchildren and our children in the school. And we would love to have a better school so they can have the best education that they're entitled to." They said, "Oh..." because at the time they were hiring minority companies. So they thought we were a minority company who might get the contract. So they wanted to know what company did we represent. [Laughs] It was interesting. Very interesting. I thought that was great. Then watching Mr. Gray handle different situations that he did around town. It was really interesting. Like getting the police to hire black policemen and the firefighters here in Alton. helping open up jobs and helping young men who had been incarcerated get back into society you know, to get a new start. All kinds of interesting stuff like that, I observed him doing. I went to several meetings with him. It was very interesting. KK: Did you ever take part in that? RB: No, I just took notes. [Laughs] Took notes and listened. Because he had it all figured out and together. It's a lot of book work because we have to have an election every so often. And I have to have all the membership up-to-dated and make sure all the members are notified about the meeting. And I have to be at the election from 6 in the morning to 6 that evening to make sure they can vote and they're eligible to vote. I have to keep records of their membership and make sure they're eligible to run for office, and to vote for the office. KK: Well since you will be retiring in a year and you want to hang out with the grand-babies RB: [Laughs] Right. That's what I plan to do. Hang out with my great grandchildren. Bake cookies with the great grandson. Yeah. KK: That's so sweet! Do you think they're going to stay around here in Alton as well? Do you think you'll see them grow up here? 11  RB: I hope to, yes. I would love to because Alton is a good place. It's a good place to raise kids. And I'm close to Edwardsville, and that's where I grew up. And my sister still is in Edwardsville and I have roots here. At the cemetery. [Laughs] My husband, this is his home. he grew up here. And I have a few relatives here, nieces and nephews, grandchildren, family friends, my church. KK: So do you hope to see another, not industrial boom, but do you hope to see another surge of economic growth? RB: Yes, I hope to see that. And so far, it's beginning to happen. I read the paper all the time. I get the Telegraph all the time. And I read it, it's interesting to see what's going on down in East Alton, with the building of these warehouses down there. I was talking to one of my grandchildren and he's working down there and he said there's lots of work down there. Sometimes he gets to work and sometimes he doesn't because a lot of people, they get there at like 5 in the morning. And most of them are of the illegal people who have crossed the border. And they are in this area and they get there at like 4 o'clock in the morning before he can get up and get down there. And they're already first in line to get the jobs. So a lot of times he wouldn't get picked to work the area. Because they lived down that way, I guess close to 270. They pick them first. Then when they fill up the line he would have to turn around and come back home. He kept going and finally he's working pretty steady. But he did run into that problem of them being down there first in line to get the work. And a lot of the young people who live here in this area got turned away. That's what he told me. I didn't go down there. But he kept going though, so he's working pretty steady. Because they have increased the warehouse And if he missed going at this warehouse, he'll go to another one And he's able to get on the job. His problem is he has a record. I said, "I thought they're not supposed to hold that against you any more, I thought you didn't have to put that on your application anymore." He said, "Well sometimes they do." So it's pretty hard for him to try and get back into the work force after he's been incarcerated. But he's still trying. I said "Well that's what you have to do." I said, "that's just a lesson learned. Pass it on to your friends. Just stay out of trouble." Because the record will follow you. KK: So what are your hopes for Alton in the future years? RB: Oh that it becomes...this has started out to be more inclusive. Include everyone. Don't clique here, and this little group here. Just come together and work together to make it good for everyone. So everyone has a fair chance. Job-wise, living conditions, everything. If you work, you should be entitled. Don't go back, go forward. That's what I'm hoping to see for my grandchildren. If he's qualified for that job and he passes the test and he's number one, he should get the job. Not say, "Oh well, come back tomorrow." And then you go back tomorrow and then "oh the job's filled." By someone else. That's what I'm hoping for. I hope to live to see that. I lived to see a black President. I never thought I'd live to see that, but I did. So I'm still praying and hoping. And I think I see it coming. but it's going to take time. Hearts will have to change, not just paper, not just rules on paper. People's hearts will have to change. KK: Is there anything that you would like to see come to Alton? Anything fun or library you know, anything? RB: I can't think of anything right now. No, I can't think of anything [Laughs] Like what for instance?" KK: Oh, I don't know just anything that would be neat that Alton doesn't already have. RB: I can't think of anything right off the bat. 12  KK: Is there anything else you'd like to share that we haven't discussed? With Alton or you, your family?" RB: I can't think of anything, Kayla. [Laughs] Um, it's been an interesting interview. I had no idea. But I like living in Alton. I like Edwardsville. I can see it changing, and I'm hoping for the better. For the young people today. It's an awesome group. I was at the banquet last night with one-hundred black men, and I saw that the group of people there were working for a better country. That's what I would love to see. Everyone working together to make it better for everyone. The kids they gave out recognition to last night, the things that they are working towards. It's to make everything better. To include everyone. Not just a few. That's what would make a better world. KK: Well, thank you very much for taking the time to meet with me today. I really appreciate the opportunity. And it's been really wonderful meeting you. RB: Oh, it's nice meeting you. I had no idea it would be like this  but it's been interesting. Thank you, Kayla, for choosing me to help you with your program. I wish you all the success. Kayla: Thank you. 13  
MadisonCounty;Sam Stemm;1954;2018; Sam Stemm 1954 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Sam Stemm Oral History Interview Jeff Manuel, Interviewer Simmons, Hanly, Conroy, LLC, Alton, Illinois June 12, 2018 Jeff Manuel (JM): The following interview was conducted with Sam Stemm on behalf of the Madison County oral history project that is part of Madison Historical, the online encyclopedia and digital archive for Madison County, Illinois. The interview took place on Tuesday, June twelfth, 2018, in the offices of Simmons, Hanly, Conroy in Alton, Illinois. The interviewer is Jeff Manuel from the Department of Historical Studies at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Ah, good afternoon, Sam, thanks for conducting an oral history interview with us and I guess we could start at the beginning and you could just mention where and when you were born. Sam Stemm (SS): Well I was born on July seventh, 1954, right here in Alton, at St. Joseph's Hospital. My parents, ah Gerald Stemm and Bonnie Stemm and I am the oldest of six siblings. My mother always tells the story that she, she suffered greatly. She was in labor for three days, she went into labor on the Fourth of July and I guess I didn't wanna be a firecracker baby. I held off for three days and um, apparently was somewhat of a miracle baby because the doctor had told my my father and my grandparents that because of the hard labor that probably neither one of us was going to survive and we both did so, that's the good news. JM: Can you tell me a little bit about your parents? SS: Um, yeah, you know they're typically a typical fifties parents, they met in the workplace shortly after World War Two and you know Dad, Dad worked at Owens Illinois glass company. Mom was a stay at home mom raising six kids and eventually dad transitioned into the savings and loan business that which he worked in for the rest of his life. And you know we were the typical middle-class family. My father was an only child and so it was, it was I think kind of interesting that he ended up with six kids, but my mom came from a big family so on my mom’s side we had lots of cousins and aunts and uncles and on dad's side it was just grandma and grandpa. JM: How would you describe Alton during the years when you were growing up when you were I guess a young child? SS: Well, I spent you know my earliest memories are when we lived, and I guess I ought to cover that, from that, I remember going to kindergarten at Clifton Hill school out on what was then route one hundred, now route three. But right after my kindergarten year, dad worked for Owens Illinois glass company and he was transferred to the plant up in St. Charles, Illinois, and so we moved up there and so my first five years were spent up there and that was interesting from the standpoint that, you know, we didn't really haven't we didn't have any family up there. And the subdivision in which we lived was all seemed to be all people from elsewhere in the country who had come, it was in Geneva, Illinois, which is 1  a west Chicago suburb. It was an outer suburb then, now Chicagoland I think goes west past Rockford, but everybody seemed to be from somewhere else and so neighbors sort of became family. And so for, you know, my first through halfway through fifth grade, that was the environment in which I was raised so when we moved back to Alton, you know, we knew we were moving home. I was a ten-year-old at the time, but I didn't really have any memories of Alton so it was all it was all kind of new and it was it was a lot different family environment because now there were all these relatives I mentioned Mom came from a big family and her youngest siblings were, her youngest sibling was just seven years older than me, so he was almost like an older brother more than an uncle. And so then you know it sort of became this family environment, and then of course all new friends and school and in the neighborhood, but we lived in Middletown, in an old house, two-story house with the big trees and within walking distance of school. We went to a Catholic school of St. Mary’s and then eventually to Marquette and that was all fairly much in the neighborhood. So it was really kind of an exciting time that was 1965 when we when we moved back here and it was a completely different environment than the subdivision that we lived in in Geneva was all new construction, and because of that you know there were no big trees or anything like that. Here we moved back onto Liberty Street in Alton and it was, it was a completely different environment. Alton of course in the sixties was still a bustling factory town and so even just, you know, walking to and from school hearing the factory whistles and the, the rumble of the trains going and the barges on the riverfront, it had a completely different vibe than a Chicago suburb from the sixties. And so you know those are my earliest memories of Alton other than, you know, my faint memories of kindergarten out on at the Clifton Hill school. But you know it was, it was exciting because of that vibe that, hey this town has energy and it has history and I didn't really realize how much history at that time as a ten-year-old and then of course you know that they just kind of progressed through, through high school. And you know after college my opportunities seemed to be, stay in Alton I didn't make a, I don't think I made a, I don't think I made a conscious decision that oh I’m going to spend all of my life in Alton. It just worked out that way. But those are my memories of Alton, especially the feel, the feeling of the energy also the topography was interesting in, you know, all the hills and that that wasn't something that was common up there in the Chicago suburb either. So, you know, for a ten-year-old it was even though I’m a native of Alton, it was it was all new to me at ten years old as well. JM: Uh, moving forward a little bit, you'd mentioned you went to Marquette high school here in Alton. How would you describe that, or do you have any experiences that stand out to you when you look back on those years? SS: Well, you know at the time it was just, it was just what we did, you know? I went through all through Catholic grade school in Geneva five years at St. Peter’s grade school in Geneva and then midway through fifth grade moved back here to St. Mary's and it was, it was all we knew and then it, you know, Marquette was the next step and so, you know, Marquette was much different back then because they still had a lot of nuns on staff. The Ursuline nuns where the, most of the classes were taught by the Ursuline nuns, a few lay teachers. But that was that was what we were used to from grade school as well, so it didn't really stand out to me and I don't think I ever realized how unique an opportunity it was until later in life, when I look back and, and saw what a sacrifice it was for my parents to send all six of us through Marquette. Now back then it was, I distinctly remember my senior year my tuition was two hundred and thirty dollars. Well that was, that was deemed to be fairly steep in 1971 and ’72, you look back on it now and it's like it was dirt cheap compared to what families pay now. But it, you know, I think one of the great things about Marquette was that it was, it was much smaller than Alton High and so there was, there 2  was a collegial feel to it and I can give you a little anecdote, my junior year our English literature teacher was Miss Dorothy Colonias, who had been the department chair for the English department and the drama department at Alton High for years and years and she had recently retired and Marquette apparently had a need for somebody teach an English literature course so as a retiree from Alton High she took that position. And as that school year progressed Ms. Colonias would just rail from time to time about how our class drove her crazy because, there was always all this chatter, and finally about mid-term that year she said, you know it finally dawned on me, she said you kids all know each other. She said when I taught at Alton High, you know, they’d send me twenty-five students and a few kids here and a few kids there might know each other but the others were in essence strangers because, you know, they came from different middle schools and, there were so many different classes in any given discipline. She said but at Marquette she said you all know each other and so you have so much in common that you just have all this energy. Well that wasn't anything that we knew at the time, but now you know looking back at it, it really was you know the, there were probably then four Catholic grade schools feeding Marquette. Well, you know about one-fourth of the students you already knew from your grade school experience and you became fast friends with the rest. And you know, it really did make for, for lifelong friendships. And I’ll say this about Marquette, I’ve kind of kept a lifelong association, from the standpoint that, you know I served about ten years on the school board. Just, that ended maybe six, seven years ago. But I’ve also broadcast their football games on the radio continuously since 1987 and so I’ve had you know I’ve had this relationship with the coaches and the administrators and even the, many of the football players, and so that you know that something that has been a constant almost from my high school years to the present. JM: Now were you involved with sports yourself when you were in high school? SS: Well to a very minor degree. I did play, I went out for football my freshman and sophomore years and both seasons I got injured before the first game, so I never played a game. For two years I went through, back then they had the summer two-a-days, which were pure hell. You know, because you go out and practice in hundred-degree weather for twice a day. And then you know I went through all of that and then when it came close to the first game, I got injured both times so my junior year I decided, no I’m not going to do that. I did play basketball as a freshman and I was, I was the fifteenth man on a fifteen-man squad. I was not terribly talented in basketball. I would have been, my best talent was in football, but I couldn't stay healthy and stay on the field. So I never played a game, but I’ve broadcast hundreds of games over the years so I guess I’ve made up for it. But less, much less likelihood of being injured up in the broadcast booth. JM: Outside the, outside of schooling was church and the parish important to your family as well, beyond just going to a Catholic school system? SS: Yeah, it was, you know, that was all wrapped up into one the church and school was adjacent to the church if you're familiar with St. Mary's in Alton. It was the grade school my mom and her siblings attended, it was the church where my mother and father were married, all of us kids were baptized, you know grandma and grandpa’s funerals were there, so church, it was it was very instrumental and the longtime pastor Monsignor Suddes, he was an assistant to Monsignor Brune when my mom and her siblings were in school. And then he became the longtime pastor and, just as an anecdote there, my father was not raised Catholic, he was, he converted prior to my mother and him being married, and so his 3  parents were not Catholic and years later back, ah I’m trying to think what year it would have been, probably in the late eighties not too long after Monsignor Suddes had retired, he went, Monsignor Suddes lived down at Marian Heights apartments and my dad's mother, my grandmother, who was a widow at that time, she sold her home and moved down to Marian Heights. Well by happenstance she ended up across the hall from Monsignor Suddes, and I’ll make this story quick, but it, I think it's kind of interesting, one Friday in Lent he was trying to fry fish, and he set the smoke alarms in the building off. And so she went over and told him what he was doing wrong and why the oil smoked because he had the fire too hot and all that. So she vowed to teach him how to fry fish. So they sort of became fast friends, and of course he realized who she was because he knew, you know, all of her grandkids and kids and all that, so, ah, a couple of years later for just prior to Easter she announced that she was going to be baptized Catholic that she taught Monsignor how to fry fish and he converted her to the Catholic faith. So, you know it's kind of interesting, the Lord works in strange ways and all of those relationships always seemed to tie up. But in response to your question about, yes, church and school were very important. They were really kind of the core of family life and you know it all kind of had the neighborhood feel as well. Many of the kids in our neighborhood over on Liberty Street were students of St. Mary's, parishioners at St. Mary's and so neighborhood and family and church and school all just kind of seemed to have, gel in into a nice, nice tight little package. JM: Were there religious divides in Alton that you could perceive at the time between, you know, Catholics, non-Catholics, things of that nature? SS: You know, not that I, I suspect there were but it wasn't too terribly apparent to us. Now I do have recollections of at least a couple of nuns cautioning us in Catholic grade school that you know we probably were best to avoid making fast friendships with the Protestant kids, you know. But that my recollection was that kind of seemed to wash off my back because there were kids in the neighborhood they attended First Presbyterian Church or you know Baptist church or whatever and they seemed just perfectly normal to me. And I think the nuns even more so were attended to caution against when you grow up and get married you, you know, you don't but in terms of just in the neighborhood or in Alton society in general at least in our neighborhood within our family there never seemed to be any animus towards people of other faith and you know so other than those couple of cautions from the sisters and that wasn't really a big deal it was maybe almost kind of anecdotally, like you know when you get married obviously you're going to marry a Catholic girl because we don't, you know, we don't share the same faith with the others. Now there were some rivalries when we were in grade school, we'd walk home from school it was about a mile walk every day but for the most part we'd walk home from school and there were a couple of public schools nearby in the Middletown area and sometimes we’d cross paths with the kids coming home from the public schools. And there were some rivalries there. And every once in a while, maybe a little fight, you know under a shade tree or whatever say here you hold my books and somebody holding these two guys were going to, you know, defend the honor of our school and it never was anything too terrible, just I think normal rivalries between boys. But beyond that that didn't really have a religious connotation, that was just more of, hey you know we're from St. Mary's and you’re from Garfield and we're better than you are oh yeah, well, you know, I’ll show you and okay tomorrow you know under the shade tree up there in the corner we’ll settle this you know. And word had spread and everybody’d gather and usually it turned out to be more of a shoving match than anything else and then everybody went their way. You know the one thing in terms of talking about neighborhood and school and family and all of that, the one thing that really stands out in my mind, and I had three brothers. Our 4  family the four oldest were boys and then the two youngest were the girls and so you know us four boys were, did a lot of things together. But the one overriding memory I have is we went everywhere on our bicycles. And that's so different from today. I still live in Middletown, Alton, and I hardly ever see a kid on a bicycle and you know from the time we moved back to Alton when I was ten years old all the way up through probably, you know, early high school, that was our primary mode of transportation. We went everywhere on our bicy-, we rode our bicycles to school when the weather permitted it, we went all over town on our bicycles, if, you know, we wanted to go over to grandma's house we’d get on our bicycle and go. And you know there was even there were even rivalries there. Hey my bicycle's faster than yours and we'd have bicycle races and you know and that part of growing up and that part of culture is just so different from today because I don't even know if parents would let their kids go all the way across town on a bicycle, you know, let a ten-year-old, eleven-year-old, twelve-year-old but back then it was just commonplace. JM: The 1960s is also sometimes remembered in Alton and this, southwestern Illinois in general, as an era that had a lot of contention around race and civil rights. I’m wondering were you aware of any of that when you were in school here in Alton? SS: You know, I think only vaguely and I know there was some, I know historically now that there was some racial tension in Alton, there were some buildings burned as some racial unrest but none of that ever seemed close to home for us. And so, I think really my knowledge of that is more in a historical sense, having looked back and read and, you know, seen newspaper articles than it was actually experiencing anything like that. So, yeah, you know, you're right there were those issues but it just never really hit home it didn't seem close to home. Now I will tell you this, looking back in all my years in grade school, we had one black classmate. And we didn't think of him as black, he was just, he was just another classmate. But you know then, I’m and now I know, looking back, that was so much different than what the public schools were, so you know maybe there was more, the kids in public school may have had more of a sense of any unrest than we did simply because there were a lot more black students and, you know, those tensions may have been more openly expressed there than they were. And then even in high school, my class at Marquette we had two black students or three and again you know that, so you know maybe we were just insulated from that. And I look back on that I wonder, I don't know why that was. I guess in part if you look at it socioeconomically, and I do have my minor at SIUE was sociology so, but if you look back at it, apparently in Alton not very many black families were Catholic, and so, you know, I don't think it was that they weren't welcome in the Catholic schools they just weren’t Catholic and therefore you wouldn’t, you know. I think nowadays there are more non-Catholics in the Catholic schools then there were back in the sixties. And then you know the other point was even the black families that were Catholics sometimes I guess the economic conditions might have made it somewhat difficult for them to access private schooling but, you know, the short answer to your question is while I know historically that there were racial tensions in Alton I don't have any overriding recollections of remembering the experience at the time or being fearful of it. I think it was in the early seventies when I was in high school when there was, you know, there were some buildings burned, some arsons and so I was aware of that but again I think it was before I was driving and so, you know, it wasn't like I felt like I was going to be in harm's way. I was safe in my cocoon at Liberty Street. So never any fear, but some knowledge of it at that point in time. JM: So, wrapping up with high school, I guess what came after high school for you? 5  SS: College. I uh as a high school student, I do have this recollection of, you know, proceeding through the second half of my junior year and into my senior year, and guidance counselors saying, okay, you know, you need to you need to make a college choice and a career choice and all of that. And I had no idea what I wanted to do I really didn't. I just I just really had no career aspirations. And so being pushed, um, it was like okay for whatever reason I kind of liked to tinker with things and electricity kind of, uh, intrigued me, and I had you know helped my dad rewire some things around the house or whatever and it's like, well yeah that's kind of cool, I'll become an electrical engineer. And, and you know my ACT scores I had a very high score in math, so I had a high math aptitude so it's like okay. That's fine, I'll be an electrical engineer, so that led to choice of a college being Bradley University in Peoria because they had a strong engineering department. So I went away to college in the fall of 1972, believing that I was going to major in electrical engineering and let that take me wherever it was. Well, I took my first calculus course and decided there was no way in the world I wanted to be any kind of an engineer, let alone an electrical engineer. So there I was right back to okay you know I'll finish my freshman year and my guidance counselor at Bradley is like, “okay well if you're not going to major in electrical engineering, you're going to have to declare another major. What's it going to be?” It's like, I don't have a clue. And when I look back on it, I probably would have been better off if I had taken a year between high school and college. And just experienced life. But that wasn't a common thing, I think that's much more common now than what it was back then. It never really was presented as an option. But fast forward so I had to choose another major, again I didn't have any strong career aspirations, and it was like, well what do I like. Well I'm a huge sports fan. You know, I listen to every Cardinal game on the radio, loved Harry Caray and then later Jack Buck and all of that and wouldn't it be cool to be like a sports writer and get to go to ballgame every, that's your job, you go and sit and watch the ballgame, you write a story, and they print it in the paper and that's your life. It's like, okay, I'll be a sports writer. So I changed my major to journalism, took some journalism courses at Bradley and enjoyed them. But in the course of it, there was a multimedia class that we had to take and I kind of got to rub elbows with some of the students that were in the radio program. And so the next thing you know I'm kind of hanging around them and it's like now this is really cool. This is much cooler than being a writer, being a journalist, and so I really then started to think about a career in radio. And at that point in time changed my major to Mass Comm. After my sophomore year at Bradley, I changed uh I transferred to SIU Edwardsville because Bradley didn't have a strong, you know they were an engineering school they didn't have a strong Mass Comm program. SIUE back in the '70s had a very strong Mass Comm program. On top of that, I had in two years had accumulated ten thousand dollars in student loan debt. That doesn't sound like a lot now, but back then it was a lot of money. And it was like well, SIUE's a better school for Mass Comm and its a heck of a lot less expensive I can live at home and save room and board expenses and all of that and so that was the that was the switch I made then. And from that point forward worked, well I say part time, but it was nearly full time, because I had two part time jobs and went to school part time. And so I graduated from high school in '72 and did not graduate with my undergraduate degree in Mass Comm until 1978 because I, my, you know, junior and senior years I was attending part time but fell in love with radio and you know was just sure that that's all I wanted to do with my life was be in radio. But then there were some twists and turns after that. JM: What was SIUE like in the years once you came back there? SS: I found SIUE to be very exciting. It was different because it was a commuter school, and so, you know, two years at Bradley I lived in a dorm, so you had that aspect of it. SIUE was much different in 6  that, you know, you show up and attend class and maybe hang out for a few extracurricular activities, but then it was off-campus and forget about it until the next time you went to class. So it was very different from living on campus at Bradley, and, you know, in essence having all these buddies that were almost like family because you were living together. Um but SIUE at that time had so much energy. Now, this was, I enrolled there probably...when, probably about '74, '75, so it was still a relatively new campus. In fact, it only had the one classroom building at the time, the Peck building, the next two classroom buildings were built during my time, they were buildings two and buildings three, I think they have names now. Back then, they just had building two and building three. But there was just a vibrant energy to the campus, and the one thing that struck me was that the faculty seemed so young and energetic compared to what the faculty was at Bradley. Not that they weren't energetic there, but that you know they were, seemed ancient to me. They were probably in their fifties, you know, and as a twenty-something or less, nineteen-year-old, they seemed ancient to me. But SIUE was just a really great experience for me and being involved in the radio program there, the radio station was on the air at the time, WSIE and I got super involved in that. And uh you know when I wasn't in class, I was hanging out at the radio station. And always hoping to pick up another air shift, or are they going to need someone to go do a ballgame or whatever and those are the first play-by-play opportunities I had, was at WSIE, and I just loved every minute at SIUE. I really did, it was an exciting experience for me. And really, I think one of the keys to my maturation process, I look back on my life, and you know when I enrolled at SIUE, I think I'm still a kid, and when I finished there and had a degree, I was more of a man. JM: What was the general perception of SIUE in Alton, as far as you could tell? SS: Um, I don't know that I had any sense of that, truthfully. I think, to some extent, it was looked at, it didn't have, it didn't have a lot of stature at the time. So it...but, because I transferred midway through my college years, it wasn't like I got a lot of feedback from people about, you know. When I was a senior in high school, "hey where you going to go to college? Bradley University," well, you know, that has some stature to it  it's a long time private university and so it wasn't like I told anybody I was going to SIUE and got any reaction out of it, so. I can't really give you a strong impression about what the community thought back then. JM: And, once you graduated, what came next after that? SS: Well, actually, what came next came before I graduated, shortly before I graduated. I was, I was, back then, SIUE was in a quarter system and I was working on, I had like one quarter to go. Maybe eight quarter hours to finish to get my degree. And there news came to the radio station that there was an opportunity at the Alton radio station, WOKZ. They were looking to hire a sports director. So, like, holy smokes, it's my hometown radio station, and sports radio was what I love, and so I went and applied and interviewed and I got the job. But it was a full-time job. And so, at the time, this was in, uh, 1978. So I went, when I interviewed for the job, I said to the general manager, you know, I um, I would, I understand it's a full-time job, but I would like for my schedule to be flexible enough that I could, over the course of a couple of quarters get these, maybe take one class each quarter so that I could finish up my degree. "Oh, that's no problem, no problem whatsoever." So, you know, I didn't enroll in the next quarter because I wanted to get my feet on the ground at the job and so my first job, my first paying job in radio was at WOKZ in 1978. And I went in as the sports director and that was a real eye-opener. I learned, I learned more there in the first two weeks about what radio was really like than I had learned in all those years in 7  the classroom. And I loved, loved every minute of it. But I only stayed in that job for about two years because, despite the promise of the flexibility, the flexibility never came, and I was really starting to get anxious, that my goodness, I'm ninety- eight point five percent away from having a degree, and here I sit doing a minimum wage job. And entry-level jobs in radio then were like that, they probably still are at most places. And, you know, the more time I let pass, the lest likelihood there is that I'm going to get that degree. And to this day, I still have dreams where I am, like, one class shy of getting my degree, and for whatever reason I can't get that class completed. So, ultimately what happened was I left the job for that reason and some others. I left the job, went ahead and finished, took the last two classes that I needed to take in order to receive my degree, and that was in 1980. I said I graduated in '78 from SIUE, well, I did, I went through the graduation ceremony even though I was that close, because at that point in time I was enrolled and, you know, it was like okay, you don't have to wait until next year, you can go through the graduation exercises when you get those final eight quarter hours, then we'll mail you your diploma. So that came two years later. And, and so you know, I left radio in 1980 and for the next seven years did other things. I became a licensed insurance agent for the Equitable life insurance company, that lasted a couple years. Uh, and then I worked for a couple of years at St. Joseph's Hospital here in Alton as an orderly, simply because that was the only job I could find at the time. And then ultimately transitioned to a job in their educational department, at St. Joe's, where I oversaw a program of video continuing education courses. They had installed a satellite dish on the roof, which was cutting-edge technology at that time, in the mid-'80s, and were downloading video programs for doctors, nurses, and allied health professionals which gave them an opportunity to earn continuing education credits, which they needed to keep their licenses current. And I oversaw that up until 1987 when, um, the healthcare environment was changing at that time. You know, there were four hospitals in the region, St. Joe's, St. Anthony's, Alton Memorial, and Wood River Township Hospital, and the handwriting was on the wall there was no way all four were going to survive. And St. Joe's was the first to go belly up. And so I was in one of the early waves of lay-offs in 19, in the spring of 1987, they eliminated my position. Eliminated most of the education department. And, uh, at the time, um, my intent was to start applying at hospitals over in St. Louis to try and find a similar position because I knew they all did things similar to what was going on there, and I loved, loved that environment. But the, the then-owner of WBGZ, now, I mentioned that in '78 I worked at WOKZ. The station changed hands in 1984, the Dreith family bought the radio station, changed the call letters from WOKZ to WBGZ, and they, um, uh, the then-owner and general manager, Louie Dreith, had, he and I had become acquainted and I had done a couple of sports broadcasts for them. Somebody had introduced me to him and I told him when I was still working at the hospital that if, hey, if you ever need anybody to do a sports broadcast or whatever, I used to do that and I'd, you know, I'd like to do it just to dabble. So I had done a couple of things like that. Well, he had heard that I got laid off at the hospital and he called me and he said, you know, "why don't you come see me, I've got a job opening, and I'd like to talk to you about that." I said, oh, Mr. Dreith, I've been there, done that, my radio career is over. Well, he was persistent! He said, "well, just come in and talk to me. Just come in and talk to me." And I distinctly remember my thought process being, I haven't been on a job interview for about seven years, and so I'll just go talk to him to brush up on my job interviewing skills. Because I'm going to need, need to, you know be on my game when I start applying at these hospitals over in St. Louis. Well, I went and saw him and he told me about this opportunity he had, and there I was in the studios where I had worked in the late '70s, seven or eight years previous to the time of this interview, and, you know, all the juices started flowing, and the excitement of the radio station was refreshed in my mind, and in my soul, I guess. And when I left that job interview, I had accepted the job, and um, and I, that was spring of 1987. 8  April 13, 1987 was my first day at WBGZ and I'm still there. JM: If I could back up just for one second, to those hospital years... SS: Mm-hmm. JM: Uh, why, in your opinion, was the market for hospitals changing, or, you know, what lead to the sort of downsizing layoffs of that era, as you understand it? SS: Well, it's, it's pretty complicated. And again, as somebody with a minor in sociology, you know, you could write papers and books about what happened. But a lot of what happened was, and, I guess part of what I'm going to say is somewhat my opinion, some of it could be backed up, I think, by experts, and some of it is probably open to debate, but I think the healthcare system started changing when the government got into the business of providing healthcare. First through Medicare, and then later through Medicaid programs. And early on in those government- sponsored plans, there were incentives offered to doctors and hospitals and other facilities to get them to accept the Medicare and Medicaid patients. So in many instances early on, and my numbers may not be right, but the reimbursement rates were more than one hundred percent. It's like, you know, "Doctor X, if you will see, if you will take on our Medicare patients, for every dollar of care we'll reimburse you a dollar ten," or whatever. And so doctors and hospitals were anxious to provide that care because there was an economic incentive to do it. Well, fast forward a decade or two, well, a couple decades, and, you know, the cost of those programs were starting to become a burden to the government, and so there were, um, the government had to find a way to cut costs, and part of the way of doing that was by cutting the reimbursement rates. So, ultimately, it got to the point where, well, for a dollar's worth of care you might get reimbursed less than a dollar. Um, and, so, you know, some doctors in hospitals were given the option that well, "if you don't want to accept these patients..." well, that became a big chunk of the possible business, so nobody really could, for the most part, reject them. Some specialists did, but you know the hospitals didn't. Well, where it really changed the healthcare environment, then, was when the commercial insurance companies said, "well, now wait a minute," you know, "government, this is not fair. We're in the same business you are, we're trying to give people access to healthcare as well, and we should have the ability, you're doing it by statute," the insurance companies said to the government, "we should be able to do it by agreement so that if a hospital will give, take our patients, if we're, insurance company, the ACME insurance company, we should be able to make deals and we should be able to also take a look at what services are being provided that they're really necessary." At that point in time, the government and the insurers started having a profound effect. And if you go back in the '60s and even into the '70s, if somebody had a tummy ache, they would go into the hospital for three days and have an upper-GI series and all that. Well, you know, the insurance companies, the government said, "Well that's not really necessary. You don't need to bill for three days in the hospital, you can do that on an outpatient basis." And so, I was kind of there in the early '80s when this environment was, was all changing and some of it was necessary change, but it also reduced the need for a lot of the services that were being offered. There weren't nearly, wasn't nearly, if you're not going to put somebody in the hospital for three days to give them an upper-GI series to find out why they got a stomach ache, well, now you don't need as many hospital beds. And so, all of those pressures, and probably my explanation is overly simplistic, but it kind of gives you a flavor. It had as much to do with the fact that the, the payers, the government and the insurance companies, were starting to mandate what was allowed for reimbursement, and therefore the hospitals and the physicians had to react to that. And so 9  there was less need for inpatient services especially. And that's when you started seeing the, you know, back in those days, there's no such thing as an outpatient clinic, or even an outpatient procedure, you know. If you needed a procedure, you were admitted to the hospital. Either that or you went to the emergency room. And so as that environment changed, of course that put a lot of pressure and it was not unique to the Alton Riverbend area. I mean, in communities all across the country the, you know, the number of hospital beds were drastically reduced in that time frame. And, uh, led to hospital mergers and closures and all of that. And the result of that in our community is where in the mid- '80s we had four fully-functional hospitals and ultimately that got down relatively quick, quickly, I'm not sure when Wood River Township Hospital closed, but probably around the turn of the century. So, you're down from four hospitals to two, and the number of hospital beds, I would suspect if you went back and calculated, was probably cut in half. And rightfully so, because there wasn't the need for that many hospital beds, just based upon, you know, the evolution of the healthcare industry. JM: Now were there other industries that closed, or left town, or downsized during the 1980s, here in Alton as well? SS: Oh, yeah, almost all of them. Um, yeah, the Alton of my youth, it was a factory town. And actually, you know, there was a period of time in the '40s after the war and through much of the '50s and well into the '60s that, you know, if your dad and maybe even your grandpa worked at a particular factory, you had a pretty good chance of getting on there and working there until the day you retired. There were whole families that they all worked at the glass works or the steel mill or the box board. And so yeah, we had the Alton Box Board Company, which later became Jefferson-Smurfit, and eventually closed down. The Owens Illinois glass plant, well, the big one down on Broadway and also a facility out in Godfrey. And my mother's family, my maternal grandfather worked his entire life at Laclede Steel. And his oldest son worked his entire life at Laclede Steel and two of his other sons worked there until they decided they didn't want to spend their whole life in the steel mill. So that, and you know that was Alton in its heyday, I think at one time our population I think peaked right around forty-five to forty-eight thousand. And as those, as that industry started closing in the '80s, the population dwindled, the town changed radically. And one of my frustrations, um, I became general manager of the radio station in 1990, so it was not too long after most of the industry had left or some was still leaving. One of my frustrations was city leaders who would not let go of the idea that we need to bring the industry back. Because for whatever reason, it became obvious to me that it's gone and it's not coming back. We need to find another path. We need to rebrand ourselves, we need to redefine our city. But that was a hard thing to do simply because you had a city of forty thousand plus that that was all they knew, was industry. And even today you look at, in this last Presidential election, you know, there was talk out in West Virginia about bringing the coal mines back because that's all they know, you know. And if you grew up in a mining family and the mines are closing down, you're desperate to get the mines reopened because that's just the way it is. And that's the way it was here, you know, a lot of people were, they're a Box Board family, they're a steel mill family, and they're a glass works family, you know, and there was Duncan Foundry and, I'm trying to think if I'm leaving any of the other industry out. But once it was gone, Alton changed radically. And it was a painful transition. And I think, to some extent, there's still pain being experienced. Although, you know, you now have probably a couple generations that never knew that, and so it's, that sense of loss is not there for them. So eventually, I guess, time will, time will mitigate those circumstances. But that really was a very painful period and led, I'm not sure what Alton's population is now, I think it's around twenty-five thousand, so I mean our population was cut nearly in half and it was, it was primarily a result of the loss 10  of industry. Now, you know, we weren't the only, the only factory town to see its factories roll up, roll away and be done with, and the beauty was what we had left was history and, you know, scenery, and a lot of natural resources. And I also recall when, in the early days of our Convention and Visitors Bureau being formed and talk of, well, you know, "we can be a tourist destination!" Oh! People scoffed at that! Who in their right mind, what kind of tourist would want to come to Alton? Well, they probably wouldn't have when it was a factory town, because there wasn't really much to see. But, you know, over the course of several decades I think we've done a good job of identifying the historical and the natural resources and all the factors that do attract tourists, even if it's "let them come look at turkey vultures because they think they're eagles!" JM: So, back to it's 1987 and you've gone back to WBGZ. What was the station like when you returned there in 1987? SS: Well, it was exciting. Um, at that time, they were still running music, it was a music format. And when the Dreith family took over in 1984, they had put a music format, a country music format, and soon discovered that many of the advertisers said, "well, my customers don't listen to country music," so they kind of changed to a light AC-type of music, but they had a daily talk show and a swap shop called the "Garage Sale of the Airwaves." JM: Can you clarify, what's AC mean? SS: Adult contemporary music. Light AC. You know, basically middle of the road stuff like Neil Diamond and Barry Manilow and that sort of stuff. And basically their music, their music choices were made of, what is, what kind of music is going to alienate the least number of people? Because that was not their forte. Their forte was, and still is, local news and information. And they had a pretty aggressive news department, Jim Scanlon who was a long-time news man for St. Louis radio had made his name at WRTH, which was one of the top radio stations in St. Louis in the '60s. But Jim lived and raised his family in Godfrey, and he was later in his career and Louie Dreith had prompted him to come work at the radio station so the news department was strong. At that time, the radio station was a daytime only, the AM. Now, when I was there in the late '70s, they had an FM, but they sold the FM in 1979 to a St. Louis group, so the FM kind of went away. And the AM was a daytime only. When they sold the FM, then they lost their ability to do live sports in the evening, high school sports. Um, and daytime only meant that at sundown they had to sign off the air and they couldn't sign on until the next morning. Well. In the summer of 1987, Ronald Reagan signed a treaty with Mexico and there was an agreement to allow many of these daytime stations to stay on at night. And I could get into a lot of the technical reasons why that happened, but it you know Mexican stations were protecting U.S. stations and vice versa, and Reagan and Mexico signed this pact, and basically it's like "okay, if you've got a station in the U.S. that's on a Mexican clear channel, where it previously couldn't broadcast at night, now it can, but it has to be at reduced power." But at any rate, the effect of that for us was that in 1987, then, beginning in the summer of that year, we were able to stay on throughout the night and that allowed us, then, to start doing our high school sports broadcasts in the fall of '87. And we started it then and we're still doing it today. And that was a great boon for, because there's nothing, nothing local like a local high school sports broadcast. So, yeah, the station had a commitment to the community, local news and information, had the talk show with local guests, had the local news, and then we started the high school sports in the fall of that year. But I was hired in the spring of '87 with the title of program director, but along with that was a five-hour on-air 11  shift each day from one until six p.m., which was sign off. Um, and I pretty much continued in that mode until the spring of, late winter of, well it was February of 1990. When Louie Dreith went on to other endeavors and his brothers who were his partners and formed the management group approached me and said, "would you manage the station on an interim basis?" and I figured if I said no that, you know, I, truthfully, at that point in time, it's like, I don't know anything about managing a radio station. I never set out to manage, I just, you know, I just wanted to do some sports play-by-play, and you know my afternoon on-air shift, that was fine, and had fun making commercials and I was happy doing that, but it's like, well, if I tell them no, then any chance for advancement probably goes out the window, so I agreed and after a few months as the interim general manager they said, "well, you're doing a good job, we'd like you to keep the job." And that was the beginning of my management career. Shortly thereafter, I was offered the opportunity to become part of the ownership group because Louie Dreith had expressed his desire to sell his stock and his, I think part of it was his brothers couldn't afford to buy him out completely, so it's like, "hey, maybe your new general manager would like to be part of that, too," so 1990 I became the general manager, 1991 I became a small stockholder. And then over the course of the '90s I had more opportunities to buy more stock and until it got to the point where it was me, one of the Dreith brothers, his name, actually, was Clyde Jones, he was a half-brother to Louie and Chuck Dreith, but I bought about half of Louie's stock and then I bought about half of Chuck Dreith's stock when he expressed his desire to sell out. And it was Clyde Jones and I who formed the majority interest. And in 2006, I believe it was, Clyde came to me and said, "I don't want to sell to anybody else, but I would be willing to sell to you, if at some point you want to buy me out." He said, "I'm perfectly happy being your partner." But he was not a radio guy. He had a job in the military, ah, and just kind of was an accidental partner in this radio station that his brothers had bought in 1984. But he was a driving force, and you know, keeping the radio station going, and giving me the opportunity, he was probably my greatest mentor, in terms of teaching me how to manage a business. And so in 2006 I bought him out and became the majority owner, which I still am as of today. JM: Just to, uh, zoom back to sort of those, maybe those early years, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, what was the, how would you describe the landscape of Alton media in those years, both including radio and maybe other media in town as well? SS: Well, the, the most respected and the most, uh, visible medium was the, the Telegraph. Then, I guess, it was the Alton Evening Telegraph. Um, you know, it'd been publishing since 1837, I believe, 1836 or 1837. And, you know, as far as I knew, growing up, everybody, everybody took the Telegraph. Truthfully, when I first went to, in 1987, when I first went to work for WBGZ I'd run into people in town, maybe somebody, an old high school classmate, or an old friend of the family, run into them, and say, "what are you doing?" and, "oh, I'm working at WBGZ." "'W' what? What's that?" Um, so it was, it was a much different media landscape then. There were also some, uh, some small weekly newspapers, the Alton Citizen, the Bethalto American. I think there was one down in Wood River, they later became affiliated with the Suburban Journals and then got folded into the same company that then later on, you know, bought the Telegraph. But it was a much different environment back then because the Telegraph was, was the primary medium, and the primary advertising vehicle for local, local businesses. And so that was something difficult. And I have to tell you, my early years of managing the radio station, it was, it was a real struggle. There were some, there were some really lean times where, you know, we were, we were just trying to scrape by. That changed over time. In part, I think, because, well, I'll tell you, there was a seminal moment, I think, two, two things that happened. That really created awareness for the radio 12  station. And I'm trying to think of the chronology, I think the first one was, if you're aware, the Paula Sims case. The, the second child that died, Heather Sims, uh, Paula and Robert Sims had lived up in Brighton, and their infant daughter Loralei had disappeared and, ultimately, they found some remains, but the case was never solved. And everybody, everybody, thought well, the parents had something to do with it, but there was never any proof. Fast forward a couple of years, and they were living up on Washington Avenue in Alton, and the same thing happened: the infant daughter, Heather, disappeared. And, of course, it was a sensation. Well, you know, every television station in St. Louis, every radio station in St. Louis, every newspaper within a hundred miles, they were all over this, and so were we. You know, it was like, hourly updates, what did the police, what did this, you know. The chief of detectives that Alton was doing three times a day news conferences with updates, and ultimately, within a couple of days, they found the baby's body in a trash barrel over across the river. So, I was in the middle of all of that, that had to have been 1989 or 1990 if, you know, if I had a chance, I could go, if somebody could go back and do research and find out exactly when it was. But at any rate, with that breaking news and then the arrest of Paula Sims and questioning and all of that, events were happening faster than the newspaper could cover it. By the time it was in the newspaper, it was old news. And maybe two or three things had happened in the case since the paper was published. And so a lot of people were turning to the local radio station. And we were fortunate in maybe having some access, you know, to, through the police department that some of the St. Louis media didn't. And so, to an extent, having a strong news operation worked to our benefit there because people were looking for information, didn't want to wait until the next issue of the newspaper came out, so they were turning the radio on, you know. And St. Louis, yeah, the five o'clock news and the ten o'clock news, they'd have an update, but they weren't breaking in and doing updates, like we were. You know, any time something would happen, boom, there we were, we're live on the scene, here's what's going on. I remember, I myself covered, I was over across the river at the boat landing over there where they found the body. I mean, the news came in, "hey, they've discovered a body and they think it's the Sims baby, and it's over cross the river over there." And doing live updates with the, you know, our very first, we had just procured a cell phone. It was one of those big, bulky bag phones, and it maybe the battery lasted maybe twenty-five minutes, so. We could do a couple live reports on that cell phone and then, and then it was somewhere to plug it in to get it juiced back up before we could do, do a couple more. The next seminal moment for awareness, locally, of the radio station, was the flood of '93. And, again, events were happening faster than the newspaper could, could keep up with it. Um, and it was a, it was Sunday morning, August first, when the water plant was inundated, and also the sandbag levy downtown Alton failed at the same time. Downtown Alton was flooded. And we were on the air doing live updates every step of the way. We had the IEMA, Illinois Emergency Management, director was in town, and we had the first reports of the water stations that were being set up that people could go get bottled water and could bring their own containers to get water out of a tanker truck because the, the running water didn't work in Alton anymore because the water plant was under, underwater. And again, it was a situation where people were looking for immediate information and the only place they could get it was the local radio station. KMOX wasn't cutting it with updates, but the Big Z was. And, um, I'll never forget, shortly after everything had calmed down after the flood of '93, I got a note from a fellow that I had gone to high school with, and I hadn't talked to him since high school, so it was, I graduated '72, so this is twenty-one years later. I got a note from him saying, "I never listened to the Big Z before, but during the flood my mom and my wife and I started listening," and he said, "and now our dial doesn't leave 1570 AM." And I don't think that that was, I think that was repeated many, many times throughout, throughout the community. So, you know, sometimes, you have to do what, you have to fill the need. And 13  then you have to find those moments when people have the need, and suddenly, then they discover you. One of the most heartwarming moments for me during the flood of '93 was, that Sunday, August first, when the, when the water plant failed and downtown Alton was inundated, and I got a call from, and he was a friend of mine, Don Miller was the publisher of the Telegraph, and I got a call from him and he said, "We're publishing an extra." He said, "But I need to buy some commercials to tell people that our extra will be on the newsstands at five o'clock this afternoon." And I said, "You know, Don, if I was a no- good S.O.B. I'd tell you no way in the world," I said, "but I'll gladly take your money." But it was heartwarming to know that even the publisher of the newspaper realized that the radio station is the only way to let people know that hey, if you want to read about, if you want to see pictures of what happened today, these big events in the flood, the only way to get the word out to the people is on the radio station. And, uh, it felt kind of good cashing that check. So. But, yeah, that was the media environment. Now, you know, it's changed much now. It's a much different environment, you know. I take no pleasure out of saying it's hard times for newspapers. Not just our newspaper, but newspapers everywhere, because the media environment has changed so much. And the dawning of the Internet, and now the nice thing is in radio, you know, we were able to embrace that, and, I can't even tell you what year it was, it was probably ten years ago now when we established our first website at the radio station. We immediately put all of our news on there because we give our news away anyway, so if there's just another way to get our brand out there, we did that. Newspapers at that time, it's like, well, "we can't give our news away, you know, because we have to sell subscriptions. We're dependent upon the revenue model of subscriptions." Well, nobody's ever figured out a way to put a meter on the radio that you have to pump a quarter in there to listen to the newscast, so. Um, but it's a much different media world, but radio's still relevant. Radio's as relevant now as it ever has been. Um, it faces different challenges, but radio is resilient, and radio is, is adapting to those challenges, and is able to, in ways that print can't. You know, but magazines are almost nonexistent, and newspapers are struggling, and radio continues to have a, a great reach into the community. In fact, the latest Radio Advertising Bureau studies show that ninety-four percent of Americans listen to broadcast radio on a regular basis, and that's no different now than it was ten, twenty, thirty, forty years ago. And what's really surprising to us, an industry, is we look and we find that even among Millennials, broadcast radio is still of very strong medium. And there are many who can't believe that, but, uh, you know, broadcast radio is ubiquitous. And, uh, it's portable, and it's relevant. And, I think, in our case, being a local radio station, as long as we remain committed to the community and filling a need that the community has, I think we'll continue to be relevant. JM: Can I ask, in terms of programming at WBGZ, were there other major sort of programming changes that you made in your decades where you were there as general manager? SS: Yeah, it didn't take long. I became general manager in February of 1990 and probably by about May the "interim" tag was released, was lifted. And it was August of that year we did away with our music format and became a news talk station. And in fact, we were using music primarily as a filler, I talked about our strong news presence, and so in morning and afternoon drive, we were doing two newscasts an hour, top and bottom of the hour, and we were just using music to fill from news segment to news segment. In the mornings, we were, we did our swap shop, our "Garage Sale of the Airwaves," at the nine o'clock hour and had a local talk show on at ten. Ah, and then a strong news block at the noon hour. So the music was kind of just tiding us from one news information talk segment to another, and, um, by that point in time, syndicated talk programming was becoming more widely available through satellite technology, and so it started to become a little bit easier to fill out a complete broadcast day with talk 14  programming. And so I made the decision at that point in time, that, you know, if we're going to be news and local information based, then let's just go all the way. And the, the programming fare has evolved since that time. Okay, that was 1990, so, what that's twenty-eight years ago? Yeah, I hadn't really stopped and thought how long we've been doing the news talk format. It's evolved, but, you know, our focus always has been to do as much local as we can. So, currently, and for most of that twenty-eight years, we're live and local from five a.m. to six p.m. with the exception of two hours: from one to three in the afternoon, we do carry a syndicated program. So that's eleven hours out of the day that we're live and local, nothing syndicated at all, except for the top of the hour three-minute national newscast, you know. And then evenings, overnights, weekends, we then use some of the syndicated fare to fill out the, the broadcast schedule, but that's a, that's a really strong commitment. I can tell you that there are lots of local radio stations like the Big Z that don't have near as much live, local programming that we do. But that was a commitment I made. It's like, if we're going to do this, we're going to, you know, we're going to do as best we can. Now, you know, somebody said, well, "why don't you, why aren't you live local twenty- four hours a day?" Well, part of that is just economics. You know, when you're live and local, you have to be paying an announcer to be there in the studio. When you're carrying a syndicated program, syndicated programming is not nearly as expensive as paying somebody live and local. If, uh, you know, we could sell enough advertising to support live and local twenty-four hours a day, we'd truly do it, but you know, there's a, there's a trade-off there. But it, uh, it was a good decision in hindsight, because the station really took off from that point, and uh, and I think people in the community have recognized it, then. I think part of the problem is when you're trying to program music, you're never going to attract everybody, because I don't care what music I play, there's going to be somebody that says, "I don't like that music. I like my country music," or, "I like my rock music," or, "I like my classical music," or whatever. So if you're going to play a music format, you're going to lose a good possibility, a good chunk of the audience. If you're doing local news and information, you know, even the music listeners will tune over to you, say, "well, I want to hear the news." And then you hope that your programming's interesting enough that they forget that the news is over and you've gone into another segment, and we know that happens. A lot of times people will tune over to the, but we don't mind if they do tune back, you know, they don't want to hear what's in between the newscasts, they just want to hear the news, and that's fine, too. Ah, but yeah, that was a decision. And I'll tell you that, I hate that. I started to say, "I'll tell you the truth." Like, up until now, everything I've told you is a lie. But, I'll just give you a little insight. When, when I was trying to sell to the then partners in the management of the station, the concept that I had that I wanted to go news talk, one of the mission statements, to a certain extent, that I said, you know, KMOX at that point in time was, and had been, and continued to be for many years the number one station in the St. Louis market. And my positioning statement was, "I want to be, I want the Big Z to be to the Riverbend what KMOX is to the entire region." But our focus is going to be, simply, the Alton-Godfrey-Wood River-Bethalto area. Back then, we didn't even call it the Riverbend, but, you know. Our local community. We want to be to our local community what KMOX is to the entire St. Louis region. So that was our mission statement. We tried to emulate what they did, but do it on a local basis, and I think we did a pretty good job of it, because people started to take notice. JM: Has the audience changed over the years? SS: Well, yeah, a lot of the old listeners died, and some of the new ones have come along. Um, I don't think it has, because I think that the audience is the same now as it was before, and it's basically people that are interested in their community. Um, and, and I'm shocked, to this day I'm still shocked sometimes, 15  because, you know, after a while, what you do in your vocation, what you do for a living, is just what you do and you don't think too much about it. But I just get shocked sometimes like I'll be at the supermarket and I'll say something to the checker, and a total stranger behind me is like, "I know you." You know, and it just kind of, kind of shocks you. But you know I know people at church, and I know people in my family, I know total strangers who come up to me that, and they're from all walks of life, and they listen to the radio station. And what they have in common is nothing more than the fact that they're interested in, it may be their only source for news, or they might like, you know, to hear the local talk, or they might be interested in listening to the Alton High or the Marquette football game, or. So, you know, the audience is local people who want to know what's going on in their community. You know, and a lot of times, advertisers say, "well, what's your demographic?" You know, well, what we know is generally talk radio tends to skew, in terms of demographics, to an older audience, slightly more female than male. It's more highly educated than the average radio listener. But I think a lot of that goes out the window when you're talking about local radio. You haven't asked this question, but it's a question that comes up a lot of the time. Well, "who's your primary competition on the radio dial?" And the answer is, we don't have any. There's nobody else doing what we're doing. You can't turn on any other radio station that you can receive over the air here in the Alton area and, and hear the local news that we're doing or hear the local talk or hear the high school football games that we're, or basketball, or baseball, or softball, or soccer. Um, and so when it comes to competition, who do we compete with? We compete with the newspaper, we compete with Riverbender, we compete with the Advantage, and that competition, primarily, is for advertisers, because, you know, just because somebody listens to the radio doesn't mean that they don't read the paper or don't log onto Riverbender or don't take a look at the Advantage when it shows up in their mail box. So, you know, the audience is pretty much defined by, um, the fact that it's local and that it's people who are interested in the community. And sometimes, nowadays, I told you earlier in our talk that in 1987, when I went to work for WBGZ, people'd say when I'd tell them what I was doing now, they'd say, "'W' what?" You know, and now, on the rare occasion when I tell somebody, I'm shocked when they don't know what I'm talking about. And that happens every once in a while, it's like, "what do you do?" "Well, I own WBGZ." "What's that?" But that doesn't happen very often. That was the common response in '87 and now it's like almost immediately, you know, most people don't even ask me what they, what I do because they know, because they've heard me on the radio. JM: So, one thing a lot of historians have said in recent years is thinking about the role that talk radio has played in politics. I think especially among conservatives and the Republicans with big syndicated folks like, especially Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, today. Uh, it strikes me, as a local news radio person, you were maybe, had some perspective on this. And I guess I'm just wondering your thoughts on that and whether or not WBGZ was involved in any of that, sort of the politics of talk radio. SS: Well, yes. We get involved a lot in the local politics, and from the time I was made general manager up until the present day, I've always done a two-hour open line on Fridays with our news director. Now the news directors changed a couple of times over that time period, but I haven't. And, you know, we get into the local politics, we get into the national politics, and, um, I don't know if I have an explanation. It's almost somewhat of a mystery and there are a lot of theories out there as to why, but it's somewhat of a mystery as to why conservative talk does so well, and progressive talk doesn't. But it's just a fact. I mean, there was a, I'm trying to think what the name of there was a conservative talk network, I think it was called Air America. That debuted back in maybe the late '90s, and I think Al Franken was one of the talk show hosts. 16  JM: This was a progressive, or liberal, leaning network, correct? SS: Yeah. And it failed dismally! I mean, it went belly-up in nothing flat. You know, but the concept was, "hey, we're going to go out and put the antithesis to Rush Limbaugh," Sean Hannity wasn't even a baby back then, I guess, but, you know, "we're going to go out and we're going to counter-program, and we're going to sign up all these radio stations." And lots of radio stations signed up, but it just failed dismally because nobody wanted to listen to it. And, you know, to this day, I don't know that anybody really knows why. But conservative talk does well. I think, I have this theory that part of the reason conservative talk does well is because conservatives like to listen to it and cheer it on. And I think liberals like to listen to it because it gives them something to hate. And for whatever reason, conservatives aren't going to waste their time listening to a bunch of progressives because they already, they've already heard it. That's just my opinion. But, you know, it's really never been much of a factor for us, because quite frankly, when I program syndicated programming, I've always tried to shy away from the political stuff as much as I could. Sometimes, you didn't have any choice because for technical reasons early on, you could only take what was being made available in that time frame. Now, the technology gives us the ability to time-shift programs, and we can digitally record it and spit it out of the satellite receiver at the time that we actually want to air it, so there's a lot more flexibility now. But I always tried to do more consumer-focused things and kind of just stay away from the political stuff, but not to the total exclusion of political talk. And I can tell you, when there are hot political races locally, yeah, on our local talk station, talk shows, we talk about that, and of course when, this is especially during some of the most contentious national political things, you know, on our local talk programs, there's a lot of that as well. But it is certainly true that talk radio really made its mark with, with political talk. And of course, Rush Limbaugh was probably the leading pioneer there. And there were some that said, you know, Rush Limbaugh was part of the reason Ronald Reagan got elected in 1980 and part of the reason that, you know, conservatives have done well from that point forward. I don't know, that might be an overstatement, but maybe not. But, you know, to this day conservative political talk continues to thrive. JM: Related to that, uh, just given that you've covered so much local politics here, I know it's hard to generalize, but what would you say is the political character of Alton and the Riverbend area, from where you sit? SS: Wow. It's changed. You know, there was a time when this was just a staunchly Democratic area, and you could forget about, you could forget about running for anything as a Republican, but that's changed somewhat over time. We now have a Madison County Board chairman who's a Republican. That would have been unheard of even a decade ago. Interestingly, um, in each of the last two national elections, Madison County went for the Republican Presidential candidate: Mitt Romney carried Madison County in, I got to remember my years, in 2012. And I believe Trump carried Madison County in 2016, so. Um, and our U.S. Congressman from this area is a Republican and has been for a couple of cycles now. That was all, would have all been completely unheard of. So, you know, politically I think we've changed in part because socioeconomically we've changed. You know? We're no longer an industrial powerhouse. And so therefore I think a lot of the union representation, the union vote is not as strong as it was at one time, which traditionally would go Democratic. In terms of local politics and Alton or Godfrey or Bethalto, most of that's nonpartisan. Well, all of it's nonpartisan. You know, they don't even go on the ballot representing a party. So that tends to be, you know, on the county level, Democratic, Republican, and we've seen the county swing from just, you know, almost one hundred percent to now Republicans 17  have a fighting chance, and in some place, cases, surprisingly strong. But in terms of local elections, I think that changes from election cycle to election cycle depending on who wants to run and I do think the one thing that I've looked at, I think, locally, whether it's local races, whether it's county-wide races, whether it's state-wide races, it's national races, I think the voters are much more cynical than they used to be. I think there was a time when people were idealists and believed in who they were electing as their leaders, and now I think a lot of times, it's like, "well, I'm going to vote for the lesser of two evils, and I don't have a whole lot of hope that the one I'm voting for is going to make anything better than, than it has been." And I think that continues and I think some of that is part of the reason that we have the current resident of the White House that we have. I don't, I don't know that a lot of Trump voters were sold on Trump, I think they just saw it as, "well, here's a way to upset the apple cart and maybe something will change. Then again, maybe it won't." You know? JM: The last question I have for you is, just from your perspective, how has Alton changed, in your lifetime? What stands out to you in that, in those changes? SS: Uh, it's changed dramatically. How it's changed? It's changed in its perception of itself, it's changed in its perception to those from the outside. Um, but in many ways, it's retained some of its strengths. From a media perspective, there's one thing I always like to point out to people, is that Alton is just so incredibly unique. You cannot find many communities our size that have a quality daily newspaper, a quality local radio station. And, you know, some of the other media opportunities that exist. Look around, there was a time when Belleville had that, they don't anymore. There was a time when Granite City had they, don't anymore. Ah, Edwardsville never had it, Collinsville never had it, and so, you know, from the media standpoint, you know, we've got, we've got some resources there that other communities don't have. But, you know, Alton changed from being that industrial town that, that was always going to be a good source of jobs, you raised your family here, your kids graduated from high school, and there was going to be a job for them in the factory, and they were going to live a good life, and they were going to get a good pension when they retired. That all went away. But our perception of ourselves, our recognition of our history, and we have great history here, we haven't touched on any of that, but, you know, historically, Alton is a very important point on the map. And I think we've started to cultivate some of that, and started to appreciate some of that, and started to recognize some of that and some of the service clubs that I belong to or am aware of are doing things like putting historical markers out there and noting, you know, the statues of Lincoln and Douglas at the Rotary Club erected back in 1995 to commemorate the site of the final Lincoln-Douglas debate and what an important chapter in American history, and it's all right here in our backyard. We don't, you know, the Lovejoy monument recognizing the martyr to the first Amendment, Ken Burns called the assassination of Lovejoy the first shot of the Civil War. And what a lot of people don't recognize is that the Lovejoy monument is the tallest monument in the state of Illinois. And, you know, we drive by it and don't even pay any attention to it, it's just always been there, and yet. So, you know, the recognition of our history and our natural resources, the, the three great rivers here and the history tied in with Lewis and Clark and Marquette and Joliet and, you know, the steamboats. And I was involved in the Rotary project that put the steamboat mural on the side of the Family Services building down here to, to pay homage to that chapter in our history. I live in a house that was once the home of Frank, Captain Frank Tesson, who was a steamboat captain on the Mississippi River. And in Middletown Alton, there are many, many homes with the widow's walks up top and the steamboat captains could go up on the widow's walks and look down and see their steam ships being loaded or unloaded and then they'd know when it was time to go down to the wharf. And, you know, so, how has 18  Alton changed, well it changed from those days into a great industrial power and now, and now, you know, we're recognizing our history and our tradition and, um, I'm a member, a longtime member of the local Rotary Club, and one of the things we've started doing is recognizing young business people who grew up in Alton, went away to get their education, and then came back and put their roots back down in Alton. We call them the "hometown heroes." It's like, this community is worthy of coming back to, and it is worthy of, you know, establishing your business or your professional career here and raising your family here, because, you know, we, do we have problems? Yes, but do we have a vision for the future? I think we do as a community. And I don't think that vision for the future has been articulated by city government, I think it's more of a grassroots thing. People that have gotten interested in the history, gotten interested in, in the culture and the possibilities for the future, and, you know, we try and embrace that. And the only thing that I regret is, you know, I may not live long enough to see what it all eventually leads to, but it's been exciting to see the transformation begin to take place. It was depressing to see the death of the industrial factory town, and the, the heartache that that caused, and the decay that it caused, and the despair that it caused. But it's also, you know, it's almost like a phoenix rising out of the ashes to see what the possibilities are for the future. And this, you know, small business revolution that Alton just recently won, what a great burst of energy that was for the community, all pulled together. And, you know, now we're going to be featured in a, in a TV mini-series and hopefully they portray us kindly, but if nothing else, it really did show the possibilities that we as a community have when we work together, so. JM: Well, those are all the questions I have. Ah, but is there anything we didn't get a chance to cover that you wanted to mention? SS: Oh, my. I don't know. I probably, I have a pension, as you can probably tell, it's probably good that I went into radio because if I'm doing a talk show and nobody's calling in, I don't have any problem filling the time. I could, I could tell lots of stories. You know, I have some stories, some family stories, let me share just a couple of things that I think are interesting. My great- grandfather on my father's side was a bootlegger back during the Prohibition. And my grandmother, who was a little girl at the time, always used to tell the story of one day Grandpa had a batch a-brewing in the bathtub, he'd brew, I don't know how you brew moonshine, at any rate, I didn't follow in that line of the family business, but he had a batch of moonshine in the bathtub, and somebody knocked at the door and Grandma, it was actually my great-grandma, thought it was the revenuers so she went and pulled the stopper out of the bathtub, and drained the, drained the batch of brew. Well, it was just a neighbor coming over to borrow a cup of sugar or whatever, and my grandmother was told the story, then, when her dad got home that day and found out that my great-grandmother had pulled the plug on the batch of moonshine, he was none too happy. So that's always a story that's been told in the family, and it just kind of tells the story of how people adapt to the times, that jobs were tough, that was Depression era, and Grandpa was doing what he had to do to get by. And Grandma messed it up because she didn't want him to go to jail if it was the revenuers checking to see if there was any moonshine in the bathtub. Ah, but that side of the family, my dad's mother and her family, they all grew up in north Alton. And that's the one thing about Alton, historically, you know, it was a lot of different communities. North Alton, also known as "Bucktown," and, you know, people were from north Alton or there were from upper Alton or they were from Milton or they were from the East end or the were from Christian Hill or they were from Middletown, and a lot of times families didn't even criss-cross within, within town. The other story I like to share, because I think it's, it really illustrates how our norms as a society have changed. But, on my mother's side, my grandparents raised a family of five children, lived in meager, middle-class neighborhood. This would have been in the '30s, Depression era. 19  But Grandpa was one of the lucky ones. He had a job. He worked at the steel mill. And he would get up every morning, and the first thing he would do is go down and put coal in the boiler and stoke the fire so that the house would warm up so that when Grandma and the kids got up and started getting ready for school, the house was warm. And Grandpa would get dressed. And their home was on Royal Street, which is here in Middletown, for those who may not know, it's in the vicinity of Haskell Park. And he would walk to Laclede Steel. And I've often said, because they didn't have a car, I've often said I was going to go up there to their house and drive down to Laclede Steel and look at the odometer and see how far it is, but it's probably a walk of a couple miles. And it didn't matter if it was a hot day, a cold day, didn't matter if it was raining or snowing, or icy, or whatever, that's what he had to do to get to the job so he could support his family. And he would get up and he would walk to Laclede Steel. And he would work by the blast furnace all day and, you know, that's exhausting work. And then walk home. And get cleaned up and have dinner, and after dinner, then, he would walk to downtown Alton where he had a part-time job in a shoe store. And the shoe store stayed open until, like, ten o'clock at night and he would walk from downtown Alton back up to Royal Street, go to bed, and get up and do it all over the next day. And I think what that story illustrates, and I'm fully aware, I have young family members, twenty- somethings, who, if you told them that that's what they were going to have to do to get a paycheck, "You're going to have to get up at five o'clock in the morning and walk down to Laclede Steel and work in the steel mill all day and walk back." "I'm not doing that." But it shows the difference of, you know, 1930's Alton Depression era, the value of work. The value of a job, a job was something to be treasured. A job was something that you would Heaven and Earth to have because that was the difference between you and your family having a comfortable existence or perhaps living on the street or having to live in a relative's basement, or whatever, you know. And it just pains me, here in this era, in the twenty-first century, that I don't think, I don't see work given that same status. And I don't, I guess we could get into a lot of sociological discussions as to why that is. But I, I was, I grew up in the '50s and '60s and I had the advantage of having grandparents who survived the Depression and I, many times, was told by a grandparent or another, you know, "you need to cherish the good times," because, you know, the sixty, '50s and '60s were good times compared to what the '30s were. Because "the good times are a blessing." And you know, when you have an opportunity to earn a living, that's something you cherish because it's not, it's not a given. I don't know if, hopefully, we never have to go through another Depression, but that certainly was something that was indelibly marked on them, and something they passed on to me, but I think maybe younger generations now have no sense of what that's like. So that's kind of something that made a mark on me. I always felt like whatever endeavor I was involved with, I was going to give it my all, because it was a privilege that I was given to be able to do this. Somebody's writing me a paycheck to do it, and I owe them my very best, and it's something I should cherish. You know, that's part of what having been born and raised in Alton gave me, as well. And something about having a strong extended family to lean on and knowing some of the history of the family that gives me, you know, some appreciation for the blessings I have had. And then the final thing I'll say is, when I set out, I told you I had no idea coming out of high school what I wanted to do. And then, you know I had to change mid- stream in college and I still wasn't sure. And then when I got into radio, and then I got out of radio, I never set out, I never set out with a career goal to manage anything, let along my own business, and I never set out to own a radio station. But those opportunities presented themselves and I think it was through a strong work ethic and through being excited by being given a challenge and meeting that challenge that those opportunities presented themselves, I embraced them, and now as I look back, or even as I look at my current situation, I can't imagine anything that would have been more exciting than 20  the opportunities that I've been, been given and the enjoyment that I've gotten out of it. And I'm proud to say that I've lived here all my life and I appreciate the opportunity to share some of my remembrances. JM: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Thanks for contributing to the Madison Historical Oral History Project, Sam. 21 
MadisonCounty;Mary Dean Huntley;1930;2019;Mary Dean Huntley 1930 - 2019   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Mary Huntley Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer Edwardsville, Illinois May 27, 2019 Steve Hansen (SH): Okay, so today is May the 27th 2019, and I am Steve Hansen. I am talking with Mary Dean Huntley, and Matt and Laurie Huntley are also present today. Um Mary Dean, can you tell us about? Tell us first when you were born, and then a little bit about you know, your childhood and your family? Mary Dean Huntley (MDH): My birthday was March 18, 1930. I am an only child, was an only child. My mother and father were both North Carolinians and had met when my mother was in college in the town where my father grew up. And that's how they met, and then they married, and they had me, and I was the only one. And as a child, we moved to Chapel Hill, North Carolina, the University, and that's where I met my husband, and our life began. SH: Were your parent's academics? MDH: No, my father was just a salesman, a shop clothes horse, and my mother thought she could do anything. She was great. SH: So, was it unusual for your mother to have gone to college? MDH: Not at all, that was accepted by my mother's family. He was...she was a baby of eight and all of her brothers and sisters had gone to college. SH: And so the expectation all along was that you would go to college? MDH: Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. My father had gone shortly, but it was during the early, early stages of the 20th century. And so...they...he went to work and worked as a clerk and had businesses and so forth. SH: So your father owned his own business? MDH: No, he did not own, he worked for. SH: He worked for, okay. Did either one of them come from wealth? MDH: My mother did, my grandfather, my mother was a baby of eight, and my grandfather, Will Sutton was a very wealthy farmer in the North Caro... in Chapel, outside of North Carolina, in North Carolina in the state. SH: So, like tobacco farming? 1  MDH: Oh yeah, tobacco, you name it, my grandfather had a farm. SH: Okay, so you grew up in a farm town? MDH: Farm town, Clinton, North Carolina, which is between uh Raleigh and Wilmington. So it's right here. SH: Okay, and um... so tell me about the house, tell me about some of the traditions you had growing up. MDH: Well, my grandfather had this big plantation, and all of us would spend a lot of time there. Cousins, and all that kind of family. I was an only child, and I wasn't very spoiled [Laughter]. But I liked it. And my mother and father met when my mother was in college, and my dad was working, and then they had me, and then we lived in Clinton, North Carolina, which was close to my grandfather's plantation. And so we were there a lot, and then after that, they moved to Raleigh and lived there for a while and then moved on to Chapel Hill, and lived... and I grew up in Chapel Hill. If you know anything about the University of North Carolina, that's where I grew up. SH: Okay, so you grew up in the midst of the depression, but do you have any memories of the depression? MDH: Not from me, not from...my mother and father did, but I never worried about the depression. I was looked after very, very well. Spoiled a lot. SH: Did your folks have any deprivation as a result, or a concern were they were hit hard by the depression that you remember? MDH: My dad struggled. He lost his job and paced and looked for a job in Raleigh, North Carolina where they were living. Ultimately, he got into Efird's store and stayed there for a while and then move onto other areas and became quite well to do and did very well, and my mother was bound and determined that they were gonna have money, so they did. [Laughter] SH: Well, your mother sounds like a strong... MDH: She was a baby of eight, and she could do no wrong until the day she died. SH: So then you must have been about seven when World War II broke out? MDH: It was 1942, wasn't it? ‘41 ‘42 so I would have been twelve since cause I was born in 30. It was easy for me to remember how old I was. SH: Do you have many strong memories about the homefront growing up during World War II? MDH: Oh yes, my cousins were great, and I had great cousins, and we spent a lot of time at the beach, we were only an hour away from Wilmington, North Carolina where we were living. And uh so I just grew 2  up as a spoiled only child who liked being an only child, but I had great aunts and uncles, and 42 first cousins. SH: 42? MDH: Because my father had brothers and with children, and my mother's brothers and sisters had children, and I had 42 first cousins, and we all liked it. I did, I thought they thought I was wonderful, I was spoiled rotten. SH: Well you are wonderful, I don't know if you were spoiled rotten but... So your dad would have been, he probably didn't serve in WWII... MDH: No no, my father did not serve, and neither did my mother. SH: Okay, so how aware were you of the world at war? MDH: I just heard a lot about it, and when you lived in Chapel Hill at that time, the university was going through flux because of the war, uh but I was never scared, I - I was very well aware of what we were going through, and my mother and father had friends by that time in Chapel Hill who were very much involved in everything with the city and so forth. So I just had a very free feeling life, I was an only child, I was spoiled, but I never wanted for anything, I was - my family were very... all my relatives were very kind to me, and I am the last one of all of us. SH: What is your maiden name? MDH: Williams. SH: Williams. MDH: Williams, my father was a Williams, my mother was a Sutton, and my Mary Dean were my mother's aunts' names. SH: So you didn't follow the war news closely? MDH: Uh by the time the war was over, I was very well aware, and of course, then the army, the soldiers began to come and go back to Carolina to go to college. And so I became more and more aware of it and the university had grown, and it was such a wonderful little town, still, have you ever been there? SH: No, I have not. MDH: Well you should treat yourself to Chapel Hill, North Carolina between Durham and Raleigh, great town, beautiful university, very very up and coming, so yeah it was uh... I had a very good uh life. SH: Did you have any close relatives that served in the war? MDH: I had a cousin or two that did, but that was it. 3  SH: Alright, so what was, what was, what was life like, I know you said you had a good life... um, what was...were you aware...what was the racial climate like when you were...? MDH: There were black people who lived in a segment of Chapel Hill, in ah one area, and uh they were maids, and my mother had servants. Uh but the people within the town were very liberal, Chapel Hill was a liberal town, we didn't put up with mess, so we gained a lot of stuff. SH: Um...You said that you were, you were kind of expected to go to college? MDH: Oh, absolutely! SH: And where did you go? MDH: Chapel hill, Okay. SH: And um, were you aware that - that was unusual? MDH: No, I was aware that was one of the best schools in the state of Illinois... or uh of the state of [Laughter] SH: North Carolina... MDH: North Carolina... didn't get any better! SH: But you weren't aware that it was different or unique for a woman to go to college? MDH: Oh no! My mother went to college, I had cousins going to college, we all went to college. SH: Did you go to public high school? MDH: Oh yes, a great public school, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, in the little town of Chapel Hill. It was a great high school, and I had a ball. I did a lot of stuff. [Laughter] SH: Oh, I bet you did. MDH: Oh, it was fun... it was fun! SH: And in college, tell me what college life was like, did you... MDH: The college in North Carolina was and is a great university, and that's where David and I met each other. He was a freshman there, and he, we met in the spring passing each other on the street, and I said hello, and he turned to me and said hello and then that weekend he was dating a girl that was at a party that I went to, and he came up and I looked at him and said, "you know what, you're probably the ugliest boy I've ever met," and he looked at me and said "Honey, I'm ugly, you're ugly, I can get uglier, you 4  can’t." And I thought I have got to have him, and next thing I knew I was dancing with him and wasn't long after that we got serious. SH: What year was this? MDH: 19...what was it, oh god, my final year in college, where would 1940, we graduated in ‘49 or ‘50, and we married in ‘51. SH: Okay, and so you went, and you must have gone to college then... MDH: In Carolina, as a freshman... SH: So I'm trying to get the chronology, so like ‘47? MDH: ‘48, I graduated from high school in ‘48, started college in ‘48 in fall, and then we, once I married David I didn't go back until I came to here and started to finish up my college. SH: Ohh Okay MDH: So I graduated from here ultimately after I had 5 children and decided I needed my education finished, and David wanted me to also. SH: Alright, okay, and tell me a little about David's background MDH: Oh my lord, have mercy that boy, that boy, that boy. He was the second child. His older brother, uh Neil, thought he was the most brilliant thing in the world, and he wasn't, David was. [Laughter] But uh David was very gifted, even as a young child, but he was sickly, and had some major heart problems and so forth and outgrew them. SH: And where did David...? MDH: And it was in Elmore, North Carolina, in the foothills, close to Morganton, North Carolina, right on the highway between Wilmington and Asheville. So they were very... my grandma's husband's father was head of a pharmacy, very bright, very... and big Repub... uh, Democrat, who was in all kinds of stuff. His mother was very ambitious and very smart, and they had uh the brother and then two sisters, two children, so there was a full family, and they were very interesting people when I met them and grew to love them, and they was always so kind to me. SH: So you mentioned that you grew up liberal? MDH: Oh, yes. SH: So how did ... how was it to be a liberal in the South? MDH: Easy for us, my mother and father were always big Democrats, always my grandfathers on both sides of the house, and they were just people that were very interested in their churches. They were all Baptist, or whatever [laughter] That wasn't easy. But it was interesting. 5  SH: In what way? MDH: It was, they were interesting people, they were intelligent, argumentative, uh all did extremely well in business, all of em, my uncles, and uh they were people with great backgrounds, and uh very liberal, very liberal a-lot of them. SH: Okay, so I'm gonna come back to that, but let's pick up where you and David got married, uh... MDH: We were in graduate school, I mean David was in graduate school, I went - we were living, and I immediately got pregnant, so I had to drop out of college, and I started having these babies until one day I just said enough is enough, and I didn't have any more. [Laughter] That took me a few years. But no, we lived in Chapel Hill, and then from there we went to Gaffney, South Carolina when David taught for two years, from there we went to Alabama, and we were there for five years, and then we came here. SH: And David was pursuing a graduate degree in... MDH: Ohh yes, degrees... SH: in Art History? MDH: Oh, yes, art, everything. He was the art teacher that ran the... to that particular group. SH: And where in Alabama were you? MDH: Uh [sigh] Where were we son? Matt Huntley (MH): Montgomery MDH: Hugh? MDH: No, not Montgomery MH: well it was Mobile or Montgomery MDH: No, either one... Uh, the city in Alabama was the big city... SH: Birmingham? MDH: Birmingham, there we go. He was in Birmingham, we lived in right - 30 miles away in the little town of...ga... or uh no... I can't remember the name, it's all running together. We had a... it'll come in a few minutes... SH: This was at a public university? MDH: No, it was a small college, Yes. And we lived there for 5 years, built a home there, and had the...the four children and I got pregnant with the other as we were leaving town. So Matthew was born once we moved to this area. 6  SH: Okay, and tell us about how David got recruited and uh to come to SIU Edwardsville and your reaction. MDH: Andy Coachman and his wife had been our close-close friends in Alabama, and uh Andy got a job at SIU and called David and said: "I want you to come for an interview." David said, "I'm not interested," Andy - "I want you to come and see this college, and I would like you to come and stay for a day or two." So he did. MH: You all were pretty miserable in Alabama, with what was going on. MDH: Oh, yes, we were...David... uh we supported the Black movement, and we had things burned in our yard because David had been part of a black movement of a black. So that was very important for certain people in town, and we left there after 5 years, and that's when Andy then talked David into coming to SIU. I said, "Where in the hell is SIU?" And we moved to town, and we've been here ever since. SH: Okay so let's go back then to talking about Civil Rights MDH: oh yes MDH: ... and being a liberal in the South. How... did you guys... during the 50s when the civil rights movements were beginning to pick up steam. And uh the...When were the freedom riders? 58, 59, 61? MDH: Yeah, see we had finished high school, and we were just starting college when a lot of that civil rights stuff was starting. But my family was liberal, his family was liberal, all my cousins were, and we didn't mess around, and we were friends with black people, we were, we did as much as we could for em. [Coughing] SH: Okay, so now when you were in Alabama, how deeply did you get involved in... MDH: David and Andy and some of our friends went with the black movement into Birmingham and the big Sunday thing that happened in Birmingham, where the children were killed. And we were 20 minutes away, or half an hour away, and we went into the city. David had to get involved. And that damn Sheriff... Oh, I wish I could've... SH: Connor? Bull Connor! MDH: Oh, Connor! Son of a bitch. Oh, he was a terrible human being. SH: Say again? MDH: He was a terrible human being! Bull Connor, good for you. SH: Okay, so when the church was bombed, and those little girls were killed, you guys went... MDH: Yes, we were still in the little town outside. But, uh David immediately went into the city of uh... 7  SH: Birmingham. MDH: Birmingham dear I'm having a lapse. SH: That's alright. And uh then how did you and David work with the black movement in...King was... MDH: Throughout the area. They would go there for meetings. SH: David would? MDH: David and Andy. SH: And Andy. MDH: Yes. SH: But then you stayed home with the kids? MDH: I stayed home with the kids, and we only lived there 5 years. But that was sufficient, we were ready to get out of Alabama, we had enough. But uh, we felt we did what we needed to, and we were ready to get our children out of that area... SH: Okay MDH: ...and came into Alton, and it was a whole new life for my children and uh so we were very lucky, and then that's how we got involved, with, that's how Andy and David, because Andy Coachman was working here as a dean, and that's when we came and have been here ever since. SH: Well, let's go back before, let's go back to Alabama, did you participate in the March on Selma, across the bridge? MDH: Oh no, I did not  now I had friends that did, but uh no. David didn't march then, but he had participated in small movements. SH: Okay. And do you remember some of the people uh some of the civil rights? MDH: Oh, the Selma, the march in Selma, and all of that kind of thing, yes. We were very much aware of ah all of that. SH: Do you remember. Did you interact with any of the civil rights leaders? MDH: Now David did, David and Andy did, I didn't. I had black maids, and I was very conscious of the fact that I liked these women, and they liked me, and they would come down, and a group that came to call one day, black women, and it was delightful. They came in, and we had a nice visit, and that was just the way. Now other people, "Oh my goodness," well, it was lovely. 8  SH: It seems to me that you told me one time that you and David had met Martin Luther King. Does that? MDH: Yes, David did, and we saw Martin Luther King just before he was murdered. Yeah, we happened to be in the little town for something, and he was on the porch of a little hotel, and we saw him. But yeah, we saw him. We knew. David was very much involved in that whole movement. SH: Okay, and Matt said that you had, there uh was stuff burned in your yard? MDH: Oh yeah, we had... Let's see. How can I tell you this... A... a good. We lived at least almost a half-mile from the road to our house. [Crosstalk] And outside of the little town of... where we were living, It'll come to me in a little bit. it falls on me. Anyway, we bought this piece of property, David's father bought it for him, and we built a house there, and we were there 5 years. And the boys could play football with friends and the older boys, Mark, and Matthew, and Bubba and so it was a fun, great place for me to teach these children how to be nice to other people. Yep. SH: And so, why was there stuff, why was there some vandalism at your house because of the civil rights? MDH: Oh, they burned crosses in our front yard because we, David was a civil rightist. SH: Really crosses burned MDH: They burned crosses in our driveway. SH: more than once? MDH: Oh, yes. We would go out and blow them down. But it was... we weren't scared, it was just... it was Alabama. Get the hell out of town. That's when we moved to Illinois. SH: Okay, so you weren't scared, intimidated? MDH: No, we were not scared, we knew these guys don't know what they're doing, coming over and burning a cross in our yard, big deal. SH: And what were the years that you were in this little Alabama town? MDH: 5 years. SH: Yeah, but do you remember, was it in the... MDH: What was the first... we moved from Illinois. MH: I was born in ‘62, Mark was born in ‘59, so it was from ‘61, so ‘56. ‘56 through ‘61 were those five years. SH: So ‘56 through ‘61 you were in Alabama. 9  MDH: Hmm. Yep. MH: I'm the only Yankee in the family. SH: So you were born in Illinois? MDH: He was born in Illinois, pregnant in Alabama, and on a cold winter night, we had been out playing in the snow, and I thought "This is dumb." [Laughter] Next thing I knew, I was pregnant, and we had our last one, and that's when we moved to Illinois. SH: Okay, so you were quite early on then in the civil rights movement in Alabama. MDH: Oh yes, and very proud of the fact that we were, we cared, and we were involved, and our neighbors were also very much liberal. SH: Oh, is that right? MDH: A couple on each side. There were those of us that uh were part of the university there that were ready to hightail it out of town. Yep, we had enough. SH: Okay, so you came up to SIU, and Andy coachman recruited David and uh to come up to SIU. MDH: And that's Right to come to SIU. And he came back from the interview, he had driven his car in into Alabama, into the city, and then had flown into St. Louis, and Andy met him, took him all over Alton, and thought "Good God what kind of place is this." So they had a good visit and then came back. And I went to the door and let him in, and he said, "don't say anything to me. I think I've just been hired by a phantom outfit" [Laughter] And so, that's when we knew we were moving to Illinois, and we had just bought this house 3 years before, and so we buckled up and came to Illinois, came to Alton. SH: So you, you...you moved to Alton? MDH: Came directly to Alton, because that was where David was going to teach in uh the building there in Alton, and uh the college there. SH: At Shurtleff? MDH: Yes, at Shurtleff. And we were there, good God, we lived there for how many years 12, 10? MH: You lived there until I was 9. Well, yeah, because I had my tenth birthday here. MDH: Yeah SH: Okay, wait a minute, let me get that chronology. You moved up to Alton about ‘61? MH: Yeah, so ‘62, winter of ‘62, cause I was born October of ‘62 at Alton Memorial. MDH: We had moved there in the summer, 10  SH: Okay. MDH: We had lived there until ‘71 when we moved to the house here SH: In Edwardsville. MDH: In Edwardsville, and then when David died, I moved here. SH: Now, when you guys moved to Alton, and you had all these kids, what was it that David did for the university? MDH: He ran their art department  he was chair. SH: So he was chair of that? MDH: Yes, he was very involved. SH: When did David become in charge of the Museum? MDH: Okay, he was involved in all that, and Andy was moved to the president's office, and he said, "David, I want you on campus." and he said, "What the heck," he said "I want you on campus. We're building a new building, I want you to have the art department." And so, we moved to Edwardsville. SH: Okay. Now, so now pick up the story now with you, you have the kids. MDH: We had five. That's enough! SH: So now you're living in Alton, when is it that you decided then to finish your college degree? MDH: Let's see. How old were you when you started... We had a lady who came in, were you three years old? You were older than that after, cause you were sickly. MH: When I got my first case of pneumonia, you were going back then. MDH: So how old then? MH: So I would have been... I was in 1st grade so I would have been 5 or 6 years old, so about ‘68. SH: Bout ‘68? and at SIU MDH: Yep, about ‘68 that I started back to college. And what did I get a Degree in? MDH: Library Science. SH: And from SIU? MDH: Yep, and got a degree in Library Science. 11  SH: From SIU? MDH: Yep, from SIU. That's right. And then I got a call. David, after I had graduated, he said he wanted to take me to New York for holiday, and I said that was lovely. So we got on a plane, and we left the children with nurses, and we took off and went to New York, had a week, came home, and the phone rang. And I answered it, and said: "This is Nick Yost." I said, well hey Nick he was the neighbor, but I didn't talk to him very much. And he said, "We want to interview you, I'm on the board of the library in Alton." Yes, you know we're living in Alton? And he said, "Yes, we would like for you to come to a meeting of the library board." And I said, "Well, for what?" "Well you have a degree in library science, we'd like you to come and interview with us." And I am thinking hell, I just finished college, I haven't had time to enjoy doing nothing. I said "Okay," so I went to this library board meeting, had a great meeting, next thing I knew they had hired me as director as a public library that I had just got a degree for. And for 25 years I ran the Alton Public Library. SH: The Hayner library? MDH: The Hayner Public Library in Alton. For 25 years when David retired in December and I quit in June. So that was the end of that. SH: Alright, so tell me uh, tell me about some of the things you did for the Hayner library, for the public library. MDH: Oh, mercy. I had it gutted from top to bottom, both buildings, I saw to it refreshed, redone, everything. Got rid of a bunch uh well... Anyways, it was a big, big thing and it is a great library, it was a little piddlin' thing, but it ain't anymore. SH: How did you build the collection? MDH: Hugh? MH: How did you...What did you focus on? MDH: Everything, everything. I had my feet in... I had good women working for me, and we really rebuilt that library's collection. It is still a very, very good collection and a good library. MH: You fought tooth and nail to get the tax bill through. With the election with Mark Finida to get the tax bill through. MDH: Oh yes, I forgot about that. SH: Okay so, tell us about that, the funding, and how did you get the money to physically renovate the building? MDH: Well, I went to the city and I said, I want some money to run this public library, and I said, then I will go to the people of the city of Alton, Godfrey, and Fosterburg and I will hit everybody in those three counties and we'll will build a library, and I did. I went on air, I don't know, I just talked a lot. 12  SH: You talked a lot? Alright, so you campaigned? MDH: Oh yes, I would go to this lovely luncheon. and ohh yeah, the old bat I was, I knew what I was doing, you want a library, we're gonna have a library, and we did. SH: And, was there a referendum to increase the taxes? MDH: Yes, hh yes, we won, I was there in the middle of the night and came home and David had been somewhere. I had been a big referendum, and he had gone to a friend's house and came back and went to bed and I said, you son of a bitch! Get up! I just won an election! [Laughter] SH: Okay now, were you aware of the so-called democratic political machine in Madison County? MDH: Well, because I was a democrat and I could've cared less, and I knew as long as you're a Democrat, we're gonna win, and so I did. Republicans can be damned. [Laughter] SH: And uh Matt eluded to the fact that you worked with Mark Von Nida? MDH: Yeah, Mark Von Nida came and worked for me. Yeah I hired Mark for a while to go out, and he was very good. This is before he really got terribly involved in the courthouse, but he did a good job for me. SH: Doing what? MDH: Whatever he wanted to do, and whatever I let him do, I don't know. He just went out and talked. MH: He did what Mark does, he campaigned in campus and neighborhoods, and Mark and I had been friends in college, and that's his first real step outside to announce, to campaign and run and try to get a foot in the door. SH: Okay, this is going to be hard to pick you up, sitting over there, but just to summarize again, Matt Huntley and Mark Von Nida went to high school together? MH: College. We met at SIU, and we were part of the political action committees, we campaigned for Paul Simon, and so when Mark finally got his first step outside of college, and his first real campaign, was with mom. Back in the '80s to get funding for the library. SH: Okay so Mark Von Nida... MDH: Oh God he worked very hard for me. SH: Okay, worked on the campaign to increase the funds. 13  MDH: To help me really get the funding that I wanted for that library. SH: Okay, so how was it interacting with all of these hard-boiled politicians? MDH: I schmoozed. I just go uh "hello da da da da," but I knew what I was doing, I knew what I wanted, I knew how to get it. And I did. SH: So you knew how to get it because...? MDH: I wanted the city of Alton to have one of the best libraries anywhere. And that's what I worked on. I didn't know if I was going to achieve it or not. I thought I would blow the whole thing, and David never said a word. He just sat back, and every time I needed something, I take care of that. He was back there behind me 100%, and the kids were there. It was... everybody was so kind to me, but then I was a bitch. SH: I, uh well I think you were determined, that may not be the same thing... MDH: Well, this is true. I started out in a little bitty office, I ended up in a new office with a new desk and just have to be asked in. But I was there 25 years, and it worked. MH: Mean Mary Dean, the librarian. SH: Mean Mary Dean the librarian? The library queen? MDH: Oh no. Not quite. But I had a terrific staff. I really had a, I fired a few, you know, I had a couple of guys that thought they were hot stuff and I got rid of them. Let the women do it, and the women did it, and have always done it. They ran a first-class library. SH: So what year were you hired in as director of Hayner, and what year did you retire? MDH: What year did I retire? What year did I finish college? MH: You would've finished college in... You graduated right before we moved? MDH: Yes. MH: So that would have been ‘70, ‘71. MDH: Okay, that's when I took over at the library. SH: Okay. MH: And then dad decided he had to be here, and then she was commuting. SH: Okay and then, so then you retired about ‘96? MDH: Yes, yes, yes. SH: And over that span of 25 years, Alton went through a lot of changes. 14  MDH: Oh, a lot of changes, and Steve Cousley was running at the Alton Telegraph and he and I were good friends and he kept telling me how great he was and I kept saying thank you very much, but we, we were running a tight ship. The Telegraph became a much better paper, and it was an interesting town. It really was an interesting town. It was awful every night to come home to Edwardsville, to my big house that David and I had finally, we had all moved into. It was a great, great life. SH: And uh, describe some of the changes you witnessed in Alton over those 25 years, with the steel... MDH: Well the steel mill closed, this one, the glass factory closed, uh it was difficult to say because there were so many changes. Attitudes changed, a little bit more liberal than it had been before. I was always welcomed and always appreciated, and for that I was grateful. And so I don't know, we just built a good system, and the town grew, and its a... it isn't the greatest town in the world, but it's a first-class town. SH: Matt or Laurie, I mean, do you have any particular remembrances that you want to jog Mary Deans memory about? MH: Oh God... Laurie Huntley (LH): Well maybe the reason why her father wasn't in WWII was an injury that had quite a story. MH: She wants you to tell the story of K.P. getting shot. MDH: Well, yeah you can do that. MH: I just political and historical reference nothing maybe, but it is a family story... SH: Okay Mary come over here, Matt. MH: And how you came to be kind of brushed over a lot in your childhood. My mother is one generation removed from slaveholders. The plantation that she talked about in the big family [inaudible] had slaves. He was a slaveholder. Her mother, youngest of 8, was raised with the last of the family slaves as a maid taking care of it. So yes, there's a lot of family history there you sort of glassed over mother, which is kind of big. Whatever. The reas... when my grandfather was in his mid-teens, about 17 if I remember the story correctly, he and his friends, one of the boys had taken a shine to one of the girls in a town nearby, so they all piled into a model-A, and cruised over, and the father did not particularly care for this young man, and had warned him not to come back by. Well, they came by and out stepped the old man with a gun on the porch and shot at the car. My grandfather was sitting, and the cabin sat 3 across and took a bullet right here. SH: Where were you pointing at? MH: Right at the sternum. He never went bare-chested from that moment on. MDH: That's true. 15  MH: After several months in the hospital, he had met Gladys at that point, Gladys being my grandmother. MDH: She was a student at the girl's school there in town. And my daddy had just finished high school when they met. When he was recuperating, my mother and some of her girlfriends dropped by to say hello to my father, and that's how my father met my mother. She came to see him because he had been really sick. MH: He had been shot! MDH: He fell in love big time. SH: That must have been in the late 30s? MDH: In the late 20s. In the 20s. MH: In the late 20s. And so thats... and so then they got married and you came around. There's a bit of a gap there. Whatever. MDH: Whatever. SH: So did you know any of the people who had been enslaved? Were they still...because during the 1930s there were still people alive who had been enslaved. MDH: Ohh yeah, my mother. Well... There reached a point that they were still hiring black people to run the farm for my grandfather and women that would work in my grandmother's house. As a little girl, she grew up with black women. When we were living in and I was growing up, we thought nothing of having lovely black women come in and work at my mother's home. And my father had black women, men, work in the store, department store where he worked, and uh it was... we were very liberal. MH: Now you keep saying that, but no, you weren't. Your family was not. You were liberal, you didn't think anything of it, but uh to actually think about K.P. and everybody else, they were still letting the, they were using the black labor at half the price. MDH: Well, you may be right. I was just different. I thought I was being interviewed, I didn't know my daddy was. He died. SH: Alright kids, so let's pick this up again and fill me in more about what happened in Alabama. Did you remember the name of the town? MDH: You wouldn't. He would not. MH: I texted to mark, to see if he'd respond. I can't... can not remember for the life of me the name of the town. MDH: Alton? 16  MH: No, in Alabama. MD:. Oh my god... the little town with the university in it where we lived... MH: I wasn't born yet... [laughter] SH: Outside of Birmingham MDH: 25-30 miles outside of Birmingham. Uh, It'll come to me in the middle of the night. We lived there for 5 years. SH: Okay now, so David took the lead in the family, in your famil- MDH: yes. SH: In your family, as far as the civil rights. MDH: Oh absolutely. SH: And, um you are completely supportive of David's actions, and activism? MDH: Oh completely, completely supportive of what David wanted to do. He was very liberal, the friends in the university were very liberal, and he was bound and determined to do... and we had guys on the department that were black. There were 2 or 3, and they were good, good, good. SH: Okay, so this was in the late 50s then that this was occurring. MDH: 60s. MH: Wasnt there a black college nearby? I remember him telling the story of Andy having a friend, a black professor? MDH: About an hour away. This black guy and his friend and they would go there. MH: And they would have to show up and- MDH: Yes. MH: Play the dumb farmhand for the security guard to let him on campus, and go around back, and yes, yes. "Those ignorant bastards." Left with dad and Andy. MDH: Well, so they were very supportive. SH: Well there was an Alabama- MH: Montevallo! MDH: Montevallo, Alabama. 17  SH: Montevallo? MDH: Why can I not remember? Okay, that's the name of where we were, just outside of Birmingham. SH: Okay. What is the historically black college in... MH: Not Tuskeegee, that's in Mississippi... SH: Yeah, in Birmingham. There's Alabama A&M which is in Huntsville... MDH: Yes. MH: Tuscaloosa, Birmingham... MDH: There's a big black college in Birmingham, and I can't remember the name of that either. SH: It’ll come. So is there other remembrances that you two... that she has either glossed over, or I failed to ask... MH: Well... SH: Now I know, and I'm not making this up Mary Dean, you told me that you and David had Martin Luther King in your house. MDH: Yes.I'm trying to remember which house...but I think it was a big house of plaster we had... MH: Well, it wasn't Alton, and it wasn't in Edwardsville... No, cause it was before we moved to Edwardsville... MDH: He visits and eats, and leaves... but yes. MH: That was in Alabama... MDH: Yes, that was in Alabama. SH: That was in Alabama... MDH: Oh yeah, Martin Luther King. SH: Well, because his first pastor was at the Dexter Avenue Church in Montgomery. MDH: Yeah, Montgomery, this is true. SH: Okay. MDH: And David went to Montgomery often with Andy, to meetings when Martin Luther King was there. Oh yeah. And he would come back and tell me. 18  SH: So, David was very active. MDH: David was very, very liberal. SH: This would've been probably before the Montgomery yeah, bus boycott... MDH: Yep. SH: And before the march to Selma, so you guys were early on pioneers... MDH: That's when the things were burned in our yard because the word was out that David and Andy were out with the black people. SH: And this was Andy Coachman? MDH: Hmm. SH: And Andy Coachman became- MDH: The President of the university here in Edwardsville. MH: The dean of the college of arts and sciences. MDH: He was the president before... SH: Rendleman. MH: After John, before Earl. MDH: No, after Rendleman. Because Rendleman got sick and then Andy took over, and then... SH: Bushaw. MH: I always forget about those MDH: But what happened, got Andy out of there, was he and the guy on the board who was... guy from here... in southern Illinois that was part of the... oh he's a son of a bitch. [inaudible] It began with an "S." And he lived in southern Illinois, and he came to Edwardsville on a board meeting, and took Andy on, and walked out and left the university, gathered his stuff and walked out. Oh, it was awful. David was ready to kill him. But they were really- it was an embarrassment for all of us, because of Andy. They all felt so terrible, so awful. And what...The guy's name will come to me. Elliott somebody from southern Illinois. Elliott. Banker? Well neither here nor there. SH: Well, you guys were here when the core campus was built after the referendum passed to build the Edwardsville campus, and it must have been exciting times with the faculty that were being gathered, and tell me about the community you guys developed at the university. 19  MDH: They just came, uh everybody was out looking for them, we had some guys from way out that began to bring in, that's how the faculty grew because they had terrific support from all the friends that had been at universities that wanted to come here. And when we watched it grow, that first building was built, and then the library was built, and then the... it was all, an interesting, interesting time. SH: Who uh who were some of the faculty that you socialized with? MDH: Oh my god, everybody. we were a small faculty, all of the women went to luncheons together and we had a great time, and we'd go to the country club and Lupps and, it was a big group and so many of them are dead, and I can't remember. SH: Was it people like Jack Shaheen? MDH: I remember very, very well Jack Shaheen  I like jack a lot. MH: John and Francis Sabot. MDH: John and Francis Sabot, closest friend right across the street, yeah. The 4 of us were best friends, and then uh the, oh the couple- he was- that in the student union MH: Well you didn't, it was Delyte Morris- MDH: Yes, Delyte was president. He was president at the time. Delyte and Dorothy. No, no I'm thinking in different areas. oh I can't remember, MH: Shyla Stempson. MDH: Shyla Stempson, big mouth Shyla, did you know Shyla? SH: No I didn't. MDH: Oh, honey! You ain't miss nothing. She thought she owned everything, but she didn't. LH: She was my first boss. MDH: There was a great group though up on the hill. SH: Where does that mean, up on the hill? MDH: Well, Andy was up there, had his own office up there, called it up on the hill. MH: The Rendleman Building, yeah. I adored Rendleman. He and I were Buddies. SH: John Rendleman. MDH: John Rendleman. He would pick- we would pick on each other but I enjoyed John, I really did. What a character he was. I knew what he was doing in Springfield, he was screwing around like crazy, 20  and everybody knew it, and he'd come home, and he was so perfect with her, and I thought poor darling, he's been at it again. Oh dear, he was funny, but John died a quick death, he really did. He had a rough go. SH: Yeah, he was deeply involved in democratic politics. MDH: Oh yes, he was a good Democrat. SH: When David became director of the museum, he was able to collect some very interesting and impressive pieces, like the Sullivan collection. Tell me about your memory of that and your involvement in. MDH: Very little, because I was so involved in what I was doing, all I was doing was supporting him, and I didn't get involved in his choices, I knew he went to New York a lot, I pushed him to do that, he bought a lot, he was being David and he was wonderful, and so, I was doing my thing. SH: Do you have any recollection of how he was able to get the ornamental collection, the Sullivan ornamental collection? MDH: I think he just decided he wanted to do that, and I have forgotten who he screwed. But I think he was hell-bent on doing this. He really was. SH: Matt? MH: So the Sullivan collection, Louis Sullivan designed a lot of the classic buildings that were in Illinois and Chicago downtown and in the outskirts of Chicago, and Springfield, and in the early 80s progress moving forward, the buildings were being marked for destruction, so daD at that point now at that point dad, head of the university museums, grabs Jerry Feyhe and a couple of the grad students, and they get 3 of the university vans and they drive. And they get up and have just enough time from the demolition team, to go in and grab whatever they can off of the building and from inside the buildings, before they explode before the buildings are completely destroyed. Ah there are shots, there are books someplace of Jerry hanging out a window getting one of, a couple of the ornaments off of the side of the buildings, they took a blow torch with them and took the bolts off of the elevator doors that Sullivan had designed, these buildings were uh... they did it at the last second, they got stuff out. That collection is the largest collection of Sullivan ornaments left in the world, because dad and those crazy kids got in, and dad screamed "let us save this, let us save this," and the foreman went "We don't blow it up until tomorrow, you have got until then, but we're not responsible for anything that goes on in there. You're not covered by our insurance, university I'm sure did not know what they were doing because they would have never allowed it. But they saved everything. So that's how the Sullivans came, that's how the Sullivan collection got saved and got brought back. MDH: They worked themselves to death. MH: They did- And that was another one of dad's heart attacks. Dad's first heart attack was the James Madison statue, then the courthouse. SH: Tell us about that. 21  MH: For the bicentennial of our nation, he was commissioned to do a statue of James Madison. So you wanna take the story from there? MDH: No, keep going, I'm tired. MH: You're tired. [Laughing] MDH: Keep going, telling the truth. MH: He starts doing the clay and then the wax in the basement- MDH: In the basement, in our basement. He's building the Madison statue out of clay in the basement. MH: At that time, I am 5 foot 2, and in 7th grade and I am the perfect size for Madison, so he uses me as the model. Me in my pajamas, standing there for proper proportions for Madison, I didn't know madison was that short. MDH: Short little sucker. MH: Yep, but he again, out of the old Wagner complex, which is now the N.O. Nelson complex, I still call it Wagner, always will, eventually poured, and then worked on that piece, they started in January originally? MDH: Something like that, I cant remember. MH: And had to have it done by July 4th for unveil. MDH: Worked until 4 in the morning on July 4th to get it into the... MH: They just finished everything up and moved it into place, well... MDH: Had the police watching. The police get them, the group into the courthouse, and uh Dick Mudge MH: Dick Mudge showed up who had keys to the courthouse, opened it up because he wasn't going to miss anything that dad did, and the police come swarming because the courthouse is being broken into, and dad and all the grad students and they're moving this bronze statue and base, and Dick says "I got this David, put it in" and he told the police to back off, and this was what it was. MDH: And they did. MH: And they did, and they said okay were watching, they knew the instant they knew what was going on they were thrilled by it. MDH: They wanted to watch. MH: But that was what caused him to have his first heart attack, he worked so hard. 22  MDH: He was so ready to get that- and it was that morning at 11 o'clock, there was a crowd at that courthouse and there was the unveiling, and you've seen in since, but that was his piece de resistance. He had worked so hard. SH: What things should I- should I ask Mary Dean about? MH: [sigh] Let's see. LH: The trip, the travels that you were able to do? MH: Your travels with dad? You went all over the world, you and dad traveled everywhere. MDH: Ohh yeah! Hell, I don't know, we've just been to everywhere. MH: Well you got to see the Sistine Chapel before and after the cleaning, MDH: That's true. MH: You're one of the few people to see it right after the cleaning. MDH: Oh no, we had some great trips, we really did. He was so, he'd get so involved and I would sit over in the corner and think, okay David, hed just redo this mentally, this piece. But very exciting and fun. MH: You hosted some amazing people at your house from the arts and issues when dad was in charge of arts and issues. MDH: Yeah, we had some interesting, interesting people. SH: Like who? MDH: I can't remember. MH: Edward Albee. SH: Edward Albee? MDH: Yep, Edward Albee, I remember. With bedroom slippers on. We had interesting, interesting people in and out. LH: You guys hosted Japanese or Chinese students. MH: The Chinese students when dad was doing his teaching. MDH: I can't remember all of those people. They were fun. SH: Okay, alright, so we have a chronology down pretty well, we uh have some glimpses into your life, during the 30s and the 40s, and 50s, and 60s. 23  MDH: And the 60s, keep her going. SH: And so you have, you had a career, a professional career, you went to college, MDH: That's right. SH: Did you, did you have any sense at all that you, were um, that your life was different than the norm of most American women? MDH: I never thought about it. I never... [sigh] I'm doing what I'm doing. I'm enjoying what I'm doing, I hope I'm doing a good job, but I'm not going to go out and compete. I just never had - I couldn't live with myself if I had to be competitive. SH: I don't understand what you're trying to express there. MDH: I didn't ever want anyone to feel that I was better than I thought I was. SH: Okay MDH: Yep. SH: So you were active in the Civil Rights movement, were you active in women's rights? MDH: Not particularly, not particularly. MH: Mother! MDH: By that time, I had all of these children, and I had a business to run, and I just stopped, let somebody else do it now. MH: Well, you worked with the League of Women Voters. MDH: Well, a little. I made a few phone calls, but I never did anything major. SH: And you had your fingers in politics, in county politics. In county politics. MDH: In county politics because I needed to at one point, to clean - to get what I wanted for the library, that I had to get out there and get my fingers involved in the politics, and I did, and it won. So, yep. SH: Okay, um I would say that there's something that you're going to remember and say I wish I had asked Mary Dean or had my mom say something, and the thing will be you - you'll think of something particularly after you get the transcript. So we can add to this, but I would ask that you kinda jot something down, or send me an email, or a text so that we can do a follow-up. Is that alright? MDH: Yes. SH: I'm going to turn this off unless you have something profound to say before. 24  MDH: No, I think I've profounded enough. [recording stops] SH: Alright go ahead. MDH: Her family were very well to do farmers, she came along in the middles of a rather large family, and she was limited, mentally. Her name, oh God what was her name. SH: You had a nickname for her didn't you? Didn't you have a nickname for her? MDH: Oh yes, had a nickname that everybody called her. Why would I not, remember, I loved her. I felt so sorry for her, but I loved her. And she loved me. And we’d pick at each other, and just have the best time passing in the yard and so forth, and but anyway, oh God I wish I could remember. But she was a farm girl and she came to see me once when I was at mother's with all of you and you may remember being in the entryway to mothers house and this little woman walking in and all of you just fell apart because of, she had found out I was in town and she had made a point to come to my daddy's- my mother's house, and knock on the door and my mother called from downstairs and said, Mary Dean, what is her name, "So and so is here." I said where? She's down here waiting to see you. And I came down, and there she was, it was quite moving. And I cannot at this point remember her name, and I'm sure she's been gone for years cause she was much younger than me. MH: The only other story that comes to mind for you to tell right now, Is um, I hate to put you through it MDH: You what? MH: I hate to have you do it, but your cousin who had the store and was murdered? MDH: Yes, Aunt Eunice? MH: Yes, that's the story of Aunt Eunice getting murdered. Is a story that is important to be down. MDH: Well... MH: They had a general store? MDH: Yes, they had been farmers, my grandfather left them a big, big plot of, but my uncle was sorry as water and he was my aunt's husband. And so, they sold the farm and she finally had some major money and they bought this little store with this gas station and my Aunt Eunice would just go in and fiddle around with the customers and so forth. But she was in the, my uncle was off fishing, or something and my little cousin, my aunts youngest child, had the flu. And so she had closed the store and, he was in the, uh, this black man came to the door and knocked. And Aunt Eunice went to the door and said "Hello" and whatever his name was, "what do you need I have the store closed.""I need some cigarettes." She said I'll follow you out, she slipped on her shoes. They walked out, they opened the door to the store, she goes in, goes down, goes around the counter, bends down to get a carton of cigarettes for this young black man, and the next thing she knew he was on her back and he had killed her. She was dead. On the floor. He had 25  just knocked her and killed her. Well, he took off. At about that time, my uncle came back and the door was open to the store. And he thought, "why is the door open, Eunice is not in here." He came in and she wasn't there, and he didn't look around, he went in the house, my cousin was there still in bed, and my uncle said: "Where is Eunice?" He said she went to the store, so he went back and went around and there she was dead on the floor. So he immediately called the police, and then they started searching because for some reason, the son had heard the man ask for the cigarettes, so they knew what had happened. And they knew he was not bright, the man, and so they broke through woods and farmland, and finally the police found this guy, and he ended up in the federal prison, and they killed him. But he was- she was my favorite aunt. SH: You dont, did you remember roughly when this was? MDH: Okay, I was in high school. I was 16, so that would have been 194- SH: ‘46. MDH: Yes, ‘46. Yes, that is exactly when it happened. I had forgotten so... I purposefully forget things like that. SH: Yeah. MDH: She and I were so close. It was a terrible-terrible...[gasp] MH: Sorry mama. SH: Well that's rough. MDH: [Sniffling] But things like that happen. And you don't get over, it ever. She would leave the store and I would go in the summertime and go and stay with her for a week or two weeks at a time in the little country town and where the little store was, and I walked in the store, and I said "Hey Eunice what're you doing?" "I don't know what I'm doing, lets go for a walk," and I said "Okay, we'll go for a walk." We walked out the door, we walked down the road, and there's a church there, a baptist church, and we went into the church, opened it up, and went in, Aunt Eunice sat down and started playing the piano. And we sat there, and Aunt Eunice just let me listen, but that was the way she was. It was, it wasn't long after that before she was killed. And that was really rough. Good lord, I've told tales I haven't told forever. [Laughing] SH: How big was your parent's house? MDH: My parent's house? SH: Yes. MDH: Four stories, basement, 1st floor, 2nd floor, 3rd floor, 4th floor, attic. SH: Did it have, was it built it kind of a southern style with a porch? 26  MDH: No, I can take you by there, it's right there on- MH: Not our house honey... K.P.'s house. MDH: K.P.'s house. Oh, K.P.s house was just three floors, a basement and two. Nice house, but a living room, big long living room, sunporch, little bar, kitchen, backroom, uh dining room, and a bathroom and den. That was the first floor, and then upstairs was one, two, three, four bedrooms, and two baths. And that was the house, it was a nice house, yep, in Chapel Hill. SH: In town? MDH: In town, right in town, right off the main road, between Chapel Hill and Durham. SH: Okay, alright. MDH: Yep. SH: Well, thank you for indulging me. MDH: Oh my god, you put up with a lot. [Laughter] 27 
MadisonCounty;Edward Hall;1952;2017;Edward Hall 1952 - 2017    Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Edward Hall Oral History Interview Lesley Thomson-Sasso, Interviewer Quality Meats, Edwardsville April 19, 2017 Lesley Thomson-Sasso (LTS): This is Lesley Thomson-Sasso, interviewing Mr. Hall at Edwardsville Quality Meats April 2017. So the butcher shop has been in Edwardsville since 1947. So it's like a staple of the main street. Would you consider this shop a legacy of the post-World War II economic boom? Edward Hall (EH): Yes it, it definitely probably would be. LTS: Um, is there any like I know that the original owners, we're now on the third owners of the butcher shop EH: Right LTS: Um, but the original ones that um first purchased it, was there any history passed down as to why they decided to have a butchery here in Edwardsville? EH: Not really, I mean at that time, you had two or three, four small grocery stores, but you didn't actually have the butcher shop. LTS: Okay and so they saw the need and then decided... EH: Yeah, Yeah. LTS: A lot of press touts this place, like I found a lot of old ah, newspaper ads from the 1960s and 70s, that advertised, um, like the classifieds for the butchery, and they said that this was always considered an old fashioned meat market. EH: Yeah LTS: So, can you a little bit, extrapolate on what does that mean? EH: Well everything's done more in the older way, versus the new way of cutting open boxes with the meat already cut, we still have swinging beef, we still cut our own pork, our own chickens, it doesn't come from the manufacturer straight here ready to go into the case. LTS: Okay. So what is um, for those that don't know...what would be swinging beef, or like the way that the meat is processed? EH: Well...it comes it comes in like in sides and quarters and gets broke down from there, so that's that's 1  the biggest deal there. Here. LTS: That makes it old fashioned? EH: Yes. LTS: Okay. LTS: Okay, what what's the difference then would you say...is that the only difference that's this butcher shop has versus like a grocery store? EH: Not really. Ah, you're biggest advantage is you can cut things the way people want ‘em cut things more custom cut to order, ah we've got the means where we can can age beef which they don't do in a grocery store, which makes a better quality of meat. LTS: Okay. What does the aging process do? EH: It just breaks down the tissue LTS: Okay, and then it makes it... EH: More tender. LTS: More tender so, okay. Interesting LTS: The other part of the ads that I thought were interesting from the 60s and 70s was it always advertised that Edwardsville Quality Meats were home killed beef. EH: Okay. LTS: So what does that mean? EH: Well, years ago, now we don't do it anymore, but years ago we actually cut up beef for farmers that killed it theirself at home. LTS: Okay. EH: They'd have somebody come out or they'd kill the beef, slaughtered, and bring it in to us, we cool it and age it and then cut it up, which doesn't happen anymore. LTS: Okay, so you have like a distributor that you get all of your meats from and then you... EH: Right Right Right LTS: So now a little bit about yourself, so you grew up in Edwardsville EH: Correct 2  LTS: Your entire life? EH: Yeah. LTS: What was your first image of this butcher shop when you were little? Do you remember it, or... EH: Not really, a lot of it. I remember coming in here as as little kid, you know. LTS: Okay, um, what made you want to work here? EH: Well, when I was 15, um, they offered me a job because two months later I was going to be 16, and I was a kid, you know, wanting to expand, buy a car, and stuff like that LTS: Sure. EH: So I worked here the daytime, worked next door at the Widley [Wildey] at night. LTS: Oh wow, what'd you do for the Widley [Wildey]? EH: Usher. LTS: Usher? EH: Mm-hmm LTS: So you've seen a lot of change then, over the course of time in Edwardsville. EH: Oh yeah. Yeah. LTS: So when you started first here as - when you first started here, um, what's the process of becoming a butcher like? EH: Clean - you start as cleanup and then just gradually work your way up through it-- through back then it was a 2 year apprence - apprencieship. LTS: And so cleanup help is just...? EH: Everything. LTS: Everything, ok. Um. Why do you think that the butcher shop has remained a staple on the main street of Edwardsville? What about this place makes it? EH: Probably the quality of the service. LTS: Okay. EH: You know, that's what you've gotta do, to stay in business. This type of business is quality and service. 3  LTS: Okay. What types of particular services do you think people love about the shop? EH: Um, gettin' things personally cut the way they want, and if there's something that they know they want in advance where they give us an order, we.. we make sure to do everything we can to get it in. LTS: Oh. Okay. Um, the butcher shop--so, what um, about what year did you start? EH: 1965. LTS: 1965. Okay. So um, I found some old ads again, from the 60s and 70s when it seemed like it was really starting to boom would you say that was like when it really began to pick up steam, or was it always popular since the 40s? EH: It was always pretty popular, from what I can remember, even as a kid, coming in, here with my parents. LTS: Yeah, and what did your parents like about the shop? The same things? EH: Well, my dad raised beef too, and they would bring beef in, have it kept and processed here, and then for like your pork, and your lunch-meats and stuff like that my mom would come in up front ya know? LTS: Okay. So they had--so your family, so when you said um [phone rings in background] that you thought that you wanted to be a butcher your father and mom [phone rings] were like - they were supportive. EH: Oh yeah. LTS: And did you keep the the [phone rings] cattle business as well? EH: No no. That was my dad's hobby really, we didn't have a lot of cattle, he just raised 4 or 5 a year for something to do. LTS: Oh okay. Um, and what part of Edwardsville was that? EH: Ah, the North end of town. LTS: Okay EH: Out North. LTS: So in the 70s I see that the butcher shop has always had a kind of community outreach, that they helped support like the Lion's Club, and things like that. Do they still do that? EH: They do, they do support a lot of your non-profit organizations like that, some of those clubs have got to the point where they don't even have enough members now, you know. They just - your VFW's your legions and stuff just won't have any members. 4  LTS: Yeah, um, do you think that outreach was important at the time for the butcher shop to maintain its customer base and things like that? EH: Yeah. LTS: Okay, I saw also in the 70s that they started accepting food stamps here. So, like was that like a big deal, were other businesses in Edwardsville doing that as well, or...? EH: I would say probably all - anybody that that handled food probably everybody got into it about the same time. LTS: Okay - so it wasn't perceived as anything like different or controversial, it was just the status quo of the area? EH: No, no. Right. LTS: Okay. Um, so I noticed also that in the 70s you also started to diversify products, like you started selling pies, um, things like that, is there any reason why the market began to change away from just the meats? EH: Well, probably just to do more one-stop shopping. LTS: Okay, like how much competition, um, I'm not from the area, I'm originally from New Jersey, and I'm now at Edwardsville taking classes, but I noticed that Edwardsville like the downtown area has a couple grocery stores, so how much competition was there in the 70s and 80s? EH: Well you had 5 or 6 stores downtown LTS: And was there any point that this place was in danger of closing? Or did they always? Never? Just always had that solid customer base? That's great! EH: No. Yeah. LTS: How have seen the town of Edwardsville change around the butcher shop working here everyday you've probably saw Main Street? EH: Well, Main Street is just been fantastic with what they've did with Main Street, and like on a Saturday morning, Main Street is busy up here especially when the farmer's market opens up. LTS: Yeah. And um, what was it--was it always like that? Since you remember growing up here? EH: Saturday was always a busy day - you know because most people had Saturday off, and a lot of times, back in those days, you didn't even have anywhere to go shop on Sunday 'cause everybody was closed. LTS: Okay. And now, you used to work at the Wildey, and so you saw the Wildey, like, open and then it's closed, and now it's run by National Park Service, what were some of your favorite memories of 5  working at the Wildey? Because it has such a great legacy like you know? EH: Well it's just - I mean, it was enjoyable, because we were all young kids, all the same age, you know it wasn't hard work, wasn't nothing physical to it, you know? And it was a good place just to enjoy yourself and still get paid. LTS: Any favorite movies or shows. EH: Not really, I didn't I didn't watch many of them even when I worked there. That was a busy place too on the weekends, you know LTS: Oh sure, and now you know, it's a little bit revitalized and they have cheap shows, and so you see that--that's cool. LTS: Um, what is your most popular product that you sell? EH: Bratwurst. LTS: Bratwurst. Um, has this changed over the years? Or has it always been? EH: Well, when Fred and I bought the business in 1980, we were the first ones in the area to even make Bratwurst. LTS: I read that, and I read that originally, was it popular, or not so much? EH: People didn't know what they were. LTS: Really? Because there's a pretty decent size German population around the area, so they weren't... EH: They weren't really--it wasn't that big. LTS: No? EH: But see, when you say "around the area" some of that too, like your German population might be up around Highland, and a little bit more rural than what Edwardsville was at that time. LTS: At the time, when did you um, first create the or first make the Bratwurst? EH: 1980. LTS: In the 80s you said, and then when do you think it peaked, or it still is popular but when do you think people started to say ... EH: It took off pretty quick. As far as people, but we gave a lot of ‘em away just for people to try, you know. But it took off pretty fast. LTS: Okay. Is there anything special to the way that you make the Bratwurst? 6  EH: Well, we've got our seasoning and our own formula. LTS: Okay. EH: Which is - everybody's is different, you know. LTS: Right. And is there anything--I don't want you to give away a top secret [laughs] but is there anything different about it as opposed to like, the Bratwurst you would just get at Schnucks' or Field's Foods? EH: I would say they're spicier. They're not hot, but they've got they're spicier than even what Johnstonville's is. You know. LTS: And people like that - you know, yeah. Um, so now, one of the things I read too is that hunters could come and bring their deer here to be butchered. Was this common? Was this something that was unique? EH: That was started back in the...I would say...either probably mid-80s when it become pretty popular. LTS: Okay, um, was this unique just to this butcher shop in this area? EH: Yeah, um, so of your other meat markets did it like when you got out in the rural area. You know like Highland, Grantfork, and places like that. But for a city butcher shop it was unique. LTS: How many - how many deer do you know would come in during the season? Do you have a lot? EH: We've had ah, deer is water related. LTS: Okay, right. EH: You know, and we've had real good years, where we might get 400...450 in. We had one year where we had an ice storm and the second season we didn't even open up. LTS: Oh wow. EH: You know, so that it's it's very weather-related. LTS: Yeah, um, what um, [PHONE RINGS] I can just wait until it’s done. [WAITS.] LTS: What types of products do people want from the deer? EH: A lot of salami, a lot of summer sausage, deer sticks, and quite a bit of deer bratwurst. LTS: What's a deer stick? EH: Just like a Slim Jim. LTS: Ah, and so you do the whole process here, so you can dry it, and season it ... oh wow....Oh 7  interesting. EH: Yep. LTS: [door opens] So, I have to ask to ask about Herbie [laughs] EH: Okay LTS: Because I'm not from here so I don't know. Um, he's been apparently this icon of the butcher shop, was stolen 3 times, um, I guess they finally removed the ladder that was next to the Wildey. EH: It was a fire escape, see, so all they's did was walked up this big white fire escape and it was right on our roof. LTS: Okay, um, so how did Herbie get his name? What's his ... EH: The way I remember to understand to understand it, is they had like a contest, and just picked a name. LTS: Okay, so that was, so nothing ... EH: Right LTS: I heard--or I read that he even survived the hurricane back in 1981, I guess he was just EH: Tornado LTS: Tornado, yeah, he was just tipped up on his side. Um, did the business sustain any damage? EH: Very little. We were very lucky. Um, just a couple window lights, and just little things like that we were very lucky. LTS: And how did the rest of Main Street? EH: It got hit pretty bad. LTS: Yeah. What businesses do you remember...? EH: A lot, there was 4 or 5 maybe more than that, feet of the Wildey got blowed over, out back yeah. LTS: Okay, and then most of these other businesses that are on the opposite side they're different now than they were back then, or have any ... EH: Other than other ah, like Eker's Barber Shop, they've been around for years too. LTS: Ok. Um, so now the ownership of the market has switched EH: Correct. 8  LTS: Um, and so all the butchers have kept their jobs, so they haven't brought anybody new in. EH: Correct LTS: Some of the new changes are going to include more of like a "farm-to-table" feel, and they are going to work in collaboration with the Goshen Market? So, where you can buy like fresh picked vegetables, um, are you excited about the changes, and do you think it's going to bring new appreciation to the business? EH: I think...change is good. LTS: Yeah. EH: You know, you get to my point, or my point in life, where you've got a good business, it's a successful business, but you just don't go for the changes you know what I'm saying, you don't reach out for ‘em, because changes take more time and more time and more and more employees. LTS: Right, what's your favorite part about working here? EH: Customers. LTS: The customers. You've know most of ‘em... EH: Years. LTS: Years, their entire lives, that's cool. EH: Their kids, their grandkids, you know. LTS: Yeah. What do you hope that the legacy will be from the shop? EH: I would say, really just keep what you've got the good service, the good quality, and make some improvements. You know, as far as reaching out to more things that people want. You know, more prepared foods, more anything will bring more people in the door. LTS: Yeah, do more people, does it seem like there's more of a demand for prepared foods? EH: Oh yeah. LTS: So something that's like quick that they don't have to... EH: There's some things now that the that we're going to go ahead and start eliminatin' and try to bring in something more prepared. You know, we're not getting rid of any of the butcher shop part of it, but you've gotta get in more for easy easy things to... LTS: So what things do you think they're gonna start to eliminate? EH: Well, it's it's your type of lunch meats and stuff that was with your older generation, and now you're 9  big thing with your younger people like ham, turkey, roast beef, and salami. So, some of these other loaves and stuff like that need to be eliminated and bring in maybe more salads, maybe like a 3 bean salad, baked beans, stuff like that. LTS: And then you're going to work with the farmers of the Goshen Market to get like the fresh products. EH: Yes. That's the way we understand it, yeah. LTS: Ok. Yeah, that's an interesting concept, it's different but it's good. EH: It is, yeah. LTS: And that'll sustain year-round right as opposed to just in the summer time just when they have the farmers market? EH: That's what I'm thinkin' yeah. LTS: Okay. Why do you think that the community of Edwardsville like 70 years later, still holds this butcher shop in such value? EH: History. LTS: The history of it? LTS: Yeah. Okay, and just generationally been here for years, that's cool. LTS: So I have to ask, right, so you said sometimes change is good, but the doors still are from the 40s. EH: Oh yeah. LTS: And so most of the building still is the same. EH: Yeah. LTS: That's cool EH: Yeah, there's been no--nothing major as far as - you might get a different piece of equipment or something like this, but nothing major has had to be changed this far as build this or build that. LTS: And the new owners don't want to change any of? EH: Ah, I think that there's right now - they're gonna try to go like a little bit more technology, and stuff like that, you know, computers, and stuff like that - as they get settled in and get going. LTS: How do you feel about that? EH: It's probably good. 10  LTS: Okay EH: You know LTS: It's very cool to come in here, you know, not being from here, growing up there was a butcher shop by my house so I remember my mom used to go and get um, fresh meats from but it closed in I dunno probably the 90s, so it's interesting to see something that's sustained and something that hasn't changed it's a great um, vibe, so it's really cool. EH: Yeah. Yeah. LTS: Thank you very much for your time. EH: Okay! LTS: I appreciate it! EH: Thank you! 11 
MadisonCounty;Carol and John Fritsche;1942;2018;Carol and John Fritsche -  1942 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Carol and John Fritsche Oral History Interview Nathan Head, Interviewer September 4, 2018 Nathan Head (NH): My name is Nathan Head and I am interviewing my grandparents, Carol and John Fritsche, who have lived or been in the area of Edwardsville since the 1940s. And are going to talk about their lives then and how Edwardsville has changed to today. So what are some of the things you enjoyed doing as a kid throughout the year? Carol Fritsche (CF): Well, since I was born and raised in Edwardsville and grew up here, um, I attended all the Edwardsville schools and, um, started out at the, what is, was called the Leclaire Academy which is now the Children's Museum. And we always enjoyed, um, our summers of course. We went to LeClaire Lake and fished, a lot of people swam. I didn't. But those were good memories of summer times. I lived on Dunlap Lake, which was I guess the early 1940s, was built. And I spent a lot of time on the lake with my dad and my mom and my sister. We did a lot of fishing, the gun club was right across the lake from us so we heard a lot of clay pigeons, etcetera going off. The summers were probably the best times for all children of course. You know with ice cream and swimming and fishing. During the winter time we spent a lot of time with sledding down hills and through the trees and we lived on Cottage Drive which was the small little drive on Dunlap Lake. It was, um, they were really wonderful memories of staying outside and building fires and having hot dogs and roasting marshmallows. A lot like the kids used to do, I don't think kids do that too much anymore. John Fritsche (JF): [Unintelligible] CF: Yeah, the home that we lived on Cottage Drive was one of the, well it was the very first home on Dunlap Lake. And it is still there. And it is a little cottage. And lots of memories. NH: What were some of the things that, like, you did outside of school as far as like during the fall or like the winter? CF: Well, during the fall of course we had a lot of leaves to rake. We raked our leaves, we had a great big lot and we had to rake the leaves and would build big, um, big piles of leaves and jump in them. And spread all the leaves out again and my dad would get upset with us but he enjoyed it as well. During the summer we always had a family reunion which was a big deal. We always had it at our house. My grandmother and my mother's twelve sisters and their husbands all my aunts and uncles and cousins would gather and bring all the best food that they were well-known for, my mother was well known for her fried chicken. My dad always started early. He would start early spring and start building picnic benches and picnic tables, taking care of the lawn and making sure it was just perfect for the big event. That was always one of the biggest deals that we had during the summer with, with all of our relatives. Some of our other relatives would come from St. Louis and my uncles from California would come and they played music, they played the violin, the cello, and the piano. That mostly was done inside the house but, um, those were really, really wonderful times when uncle Lee and uncle John and aunt Lena and aunt 1  Mable and everybody would come together and have a sing, music fest. We sort of, we enjoyed, we enjoyed those times. NH: So how has Edwardsville changed over the years since you were a kid? CF: Wow. Big changes. We have had so much growth in Edwardsville. You know when I was a kid, we were thinking you know like ten thousand people, nine thousand, eight thousand people. Um, and it may have even been five thousand. But the growth has really changed and I think I have to contribute a lot of it to the building of SIUE. It brought a lot of different folks into town, professors, and students from different areas. There's just been a huge change since SIUE has been here. Good changes. Not everybody thought they were good changes. But I feel personally that it has really benefited Edwardsville greatly. More houses, I mean the subdivisions have just bursted the building has bursted we have many more commercial establishments in Edwardsville than we had before. We had a couple place when I was a kid that you could go get a hot dog and that was about it. But you can go to many new restaurants downtown Edwardsville has really, um, changed it's to be a beautiful place to come and shop. Um, to come and shop to come and eat to come and walk. We have bike trails that we never had before, you know, I rode my bike as a kid along the lake. But now I can travel miles by the bike trail. Different trails all around. Um, big, big changes for our community. And they've all been very beneficial and helpful to all of our generations to follow. For my grandchildren, um, they have opportunities that, um, I never had. Just right here in our little community which isn't so little any more. NH: So how did, ah, Edwardsville, what was the city's feeling towards the changes going on and like the highways being constructed and the new college, what was the city's feeling around that? JF: Well I think the community as a whole embraced SIUE. But the local farmers, owners of the property, you know, they felt that it was an infringement upon their own personal rights. And so forth. And it just took several years of working together, you know a lot of panels for working together to make each entity understand you know the benefits of what education can be. This in turn brought transportation, we got interstate 270, wouldn't of had all that access you know to St. Louis, other parts of the county and so forth if we didn't have, you know, the interstates. So, ah, in the process what we lost in transportation, we used to have streetcars that would run right up through Main Street. Then go south and some of 'em would go to Granite City, St. Louis. Others went to Belleville, East St. Louis and so forth so there was a lot of integration in the fifties there and forties, thirties. NH: So Carol, you said that not everyone welcomed the new college and environments with open arms. Can you tell me a little bit more about what, uh, what happened with you personally, how did your family react, or? CF: My father was the building contractor and property to him was very important and when they came in and, to actually look over the property they got some beautiful property for SIU probably the best property you know in Edwardsville area. And people were really upset because they were going in and tearing out you know trees that were there for you know, I don't know how long, many, many, many years. And, um, they just seemed like they were all unhappy because they felt the environment was going to change dramatically to, you know, people running around and kids and young adults, having parties and having fun. So, that impact was sort of well obviously it was negative but when the, I think when 2  people started seeing what was actually happening with the new roads being built and um the, the buildings that were being built and how beautiful they were and how that really fit into the environment, um, I think it took a little while but people started you know changing. But the very beginnings of it were the farmers whose property was being taken. I think the most negative part were the farmers themselves who, you know, had all this property. It was beautiful property. I can recall, you know, the helicopters coming over and, um, people were actually shooting guns at the helicopters, trying to scare them off or whatever. But fortunately that did not happen and fortunately they continued on with the progress of completing the university and, um, I still see it as a huge asset for our whole community and for the surrounding areas. It gave me opportunity to go to school, to college and it's going to give our, I guess our grandchildren the opportunity to use the university. NH: Okay. Now John what was your perspective on the whole change in how did you see it? JF: Well my perspective was different in that I come from a small community northern Illinois, or central Illinois. And so it was, it was an awful lot of things that were happening. That, at SIUE. Just the concept in itself I moved to Edwardsville in early sixties. And started school then. I would attend school, take the time off to get increase my funds, and, uh, so it was an exciting time. I was, I worked for the Illinois Department of Transportation. We were actively working on interstate 255, or 270. And um, brought us closer from the northern, southern, and uh east and west. All the, you know, the community and as a whole. So that was good. Edwardsville's been an excellent community for me, my family, we had opportunities that we probably would not have ever had if we hadn't you know, afforded SIUE. So, ah, it's, ah, it's a dynamic community you know goes back to 1800. And, uh, it's going more so you know today. You know, there's a lot of history here in Edwardsville. It's thought to have the entire community support one another. It's very important. NH: So how has that, like, how has the community sort of changed in your perspective like as far as businesses go or kind of where the town has shifted? JF: Well, the town has shifted from north to south, just drive down Main Street and most of the buildings on Main Street today were built within the last ten years or less. Um, we stared out and I moved to Edwardsville we probably had four or five attorneys and now we probably got four or five hundred attorneys that are in Edwardsville. So, um, I lost my train of thought. NH: Alright, so John, how and really more so why did you get introduced and working for IDOT, the Illinois Department of Transportation? JF: Well, Nathan, the start of that particular story is when I used to build a lot of tree houses as a kid. Take all my lumber or whatever and build a tree house and maybe a double-story tree house. And as time went on building became more and more a part of me and I had initially thought of going into being an auditor and doing auditing on books and so forth. But that quickly changed as the time to make a final decision about what I wanted to do came roaring down the trail. Had the opportunity to work for the Department of Transportation, there's, Illinois is, has a fifth- largest transportation system, you know, in the world. So it's a, it's quite a, company to work for. I started, I worked for them for thirty-six, thirty- seven years. So it, ah, it had a major impact on a lot of the things that I've, my life, my family's life, the life of my family. 3  NH: When did you start working for them? JF: Started in 1962. Is when I started with them and I worked with them until 19, ah, 97. That was my thirty-seven or so years. We did a lot of projects involving the community, you know, how the transportation works with the communities and so forth, we give opportunities for minorities and females on highway construction, running the heavy equipment and so forth. We broke ground in places, ah, we had invitations to go out to the state of Ohio to show them what we do here in Metro East. [Phone ringing] It's really the opportunity with the department, working with outside sources were just tremendous. And I enjoyed that, that was a challenge. So we did, ah, different projects throughout the state of Illinois. But some of our best work was here with SIUE. The, I'm trying to think of the roadway... CF: Whiteside JF: Whiteside roadway. That was a major, major accomplishment. We did a lot of sidewalks and stuff between housing groups and so forth. So we did, I feel that we were extremely accountable for what we did and you know, the impact that we had on the school and impact on the department. People started wanting to assist more in projects. And, ah, we let them do that. So, ah, it was, it was quite an accomplishment. Enjoyable. NH: What, um, where did it take you, and like what did you, and necessarily do, for the company itself? JF: Well, ah, in my experience, it's, I was able to work with people, work with diverse groups of people, to make things happen and make, have them talk and understand what we're looking for and what they're looking for. It just, ah, it's a very complex set of issues. We work with the president of SIUE, Dr. Rendleman, we worked with the people out of Washington. So it's just, it put me into contacts with a lot of people, diverse groups of people that really was a worthwhile entity for me. A challenge. And I like challenges. NH: Did you ever go out to DC yourself, for the job? JF: Yeah, I did. Yeah, went out there, we met with some department heads, we were invited to go out there for that. And so we've been, one of the contractors invited us to go along with them, you know. So it was, it was a challenge. And, which is always, wakes us up. NH: Yeah. Yeah. What was it for, necessarily, that they had you go out to DC? JF: Well, we went out to Washington because there was a conflict between some agencies and it caused us problems in working with people and getting them on jobs and, it just, it wouldn't work. NH: Yeah, a lot of headache. JF: We tried to get these folks up there in Washington to understand but unfortunately, we weren't able to do that, so we continued doing what we were doing cause they told us that we, you know, they didn't want us to do it, but they didn't have the authority to shut us down. So we knew we were doing good for the people. And that's what it's all about. You know, creating an opportunities. 4  NH: Alright, well I appreciate you both giving your input. And maybe next time we can talk about something else, something else. 5 
MadisonCounty;Lisa Peck;1966;2016;Lisa Peck 1966 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Lisa Peck Oral History Interview Kelli West, Interviewer Highland, Illinois October 30, 2016 Kelli West (KW): Alright this is Kelli West interviewing Lisa Peck in Highland Illinois. Uh, interview over the Madison County oral history project. So Lisa tell me about your career path. Lisa Peck (LP): Um, well I got my bachelors in political science and a minor in history and there's not a whole lot you can do with that besides uh continue your education. So I decided to enroll in the public administrations program at SIU. I had liked the government and budget related questions- or um classes that I'd had in undergrad so I decided to enter that program and I was accepted. At the same time I got an internship at Madison County Community Development. And so I started there as an intern and worked as an intern for about a year. So about half way through the program they successfully participated in a grant application for the neighborhood stabilization program. We were rewarded 2.6 million dollars and they put me, eventually, as administrator over that program and about that time they created a position for me and offered me a full time job. So I worked there for several years. And I had economic development responsibilities for the county that I shared with a gentleman named John Harsoff who's recently passed away. And that neighborhood stabilization program. KW: So where did you go to school at? LP: SIU for both undergrad and grad school. KW: And you got your bachelors in political science? LP: Correct. KW: And then you moved on to public administration? LP: Yes. KW: What caused you to pursue your masters? LP: Um, just that there wasn't any real career path with readily available with just a bachelors and political science, or at least I didn't see one. Um, and I wasn't exactly sure what I wanted to do by, you know, I knew I did enjoy the local government courses but, you know, I didn't- I was still trying to figure out exactly what I wanted my career to be and through that process, through the masters in public administration that kind of honed in on local government and that's what I've been doing ever since. KW: And you got that grant opportunity while you were pursing your masters? Or- when did that come out? 1  LP: Yes the, uh, we wrote the neighborhood stabilization program grant while I was interning still. And then it took quite a bit of time to actually get the award. And then they offered me the full time position. I- there was somebody else who was administering it at first but she had too many job duties so they created the position and I had that. And then the economic development and I really enjoyed the economic development part of my job. KW: Why did you enjoy that part? LP: Because at the time on my block, um, or you know within a couple of blocks of where I lived almost every house had been touched by the economic downturn and almost every family had somebody who had been laid off. And the main focus when you boil it all down of economic development is creating jobs and increasing the tax base for the government in order to provide better services. So feeling like I was part of the solution, or at least helping, by trying to attract those jobs, it was- I found that to be gratifying. KW: What, what city did you live in during this project? LP: Collinsville. KW: Collinsville? LP: Yeah. KW: And did you live in Collinsville while you were getting your masters? LP: Yeah. KW: So. LP: And my undergrad actually. KW: And your undergrad? LP: Yeah. KW: What did you expect to do after you got your masters degree? I mean did you have a career planned out, like exactly what you wanted to do? LP: Uh, no. I've never been an exact planner and I don't follow prescript-ed outcomes very well, I don't follow recipes well. just kind of take it as it comes and look for opportunity and I was very fortunate at Madison County that gentleman that I worked for, his name was Walter Hunter, when I started there as an intern he said "well let's let you try a few things and see what you're good at and what you like" and that's an almost unheard of opportunity and I will be forever grateful to him for that. That allowed me to really, you know, delve into the economic development role. So. KW: So with that position at Madison County as a community developer- LP: The position's- was called planner. 2  KW: Planner? LP: Uh huh- there all sorts of odd, not necessarily descriptive job titles there. But yeah, after the internship I was hired on as a planner. KW: So what did that job entail exactly? LP: Um, well there was the neighborhood stabilization program which we went in and worked with non- profit developers and communities, several of them throughout Madison County, to provide housing and it was not a low income housing project actually, the income guide lines for this proj- program went up to a hundred and twenty percent of the area median income, so up to twenty percent more than what the median income of the area is. and uh, there was one housing project that was done for low income individuals and that was a rental project, where some folks who needed some assistance, with- struggling with issues, some of them substance abuse, some of them mental illness were able to have some housing and those services were provided to them. And then we built several new homes and a couple of the communities. And then sold those, in one community it was the first new construction permit that had been pulled in fifty years. And then we renovated houses in another community. It took some that were in very bad disrepair and were able to fix them up and have people living back in them again. So that was gratifying. And then with the economic development part of it, no day is ever the same in economic development. Sometimes you meet with developers who have a project. At the county level you're meeting with communities and seeing what assistance that you can provide to them to help them attract business to their community. And we had several programs that could be utilized, low interest loan program. We worked closely with Madison County employment and training, with representatives from the department of commerce and economic opportunity with the state, and the folks in the community. So we had some moderate successes considering the economic climate at the time. KW: Do you think that was- an economic development for low income was really needed in Madison County? Was that a big problem? LP: The, [coughs] pardon me, the housing portion, [coughs], typically in Madison County community development is geared towards low income individuals and they have many other housing programs also. And that is a big issue, and it is an issue in Madison County. If you're spending more than thirty percent on your rent or your mortgage payment, that's percentage that you don't really want to exceed. And there are many people who are spending more than that. So yes, I do think that there in- in a society such as ours we're always going to have people who are more successful than others, and it's kind of what you do to help those that aren't quite as successful and what opportunities you can provide to them that really say something about your society, in my opinion. KW: And do you believe your work as a planner helped benefit who weren't as in good favo- fav- fav- in good favor with the odds? LP: I do think that it did. You know, it's- I think the entire Madison County community development department helped. And I think it helped people. I truly think they did. And I think I was a part of that. And I think that I was able to contribute and we did, we were successful in bringing some jobs to some communities and assisting in some companies expansions were they hired additional people. And that, 3  that was gratifying, I mean there were certainly a fair amount of days that I could go home at the end of the day and say yeah, yeah that was a good day's work. so, um, and I think that I think that there's a misconception in certainly I think there are people in government who don't really care but there's also a service mentality I saw in a lot of individuals who work in government throughout my career and I'd like to think I'm one of those were it really is trying to figuring out how you can help, how you can give back, how you can make something work and you know, how you can make your little corner of the world a better place, and whatever method is available to you at that time. KW: Well after you worked as a development planner at Madison County you started working in Highland? LP: Well I went over to University City briefly for a year over there. Um, the commute, still living over in Madison County, and making that commute was not fun at all. And I was working a lot of late hours so I found out about the job in Highland and I applied for it. And I interviewed and they offered me the job. KW: And what- what job was that exactly? LP: Oh the first job- well when I started there as a the marketing and economic development coordinator KW: What does that job entail exactly? LP: I was supposed to promit- promote the city and then some of the same economic development responsibilities of trying to attract business and retain business. I still technically hold that title but since then, a year after I started there, I was promoted to community development director. And then I took on additional responsibilities and then a year after that I was promoted to assistant city manager. So I still have all three titles and I still work at all three jobs. But the community development we've been fortunate and able to implement some programs that other communities are not- don't have the resources to do. we had home buyer program that I created that provided down payment and closing cost assistance to individuals within a targeted geographic area in order to help them buy a home because one of the biggest problems for young people is coming up with that down payment, they would end up paying the same amount for the monthly house payment as they do for their rent and a lot of times, but with student loans and starting off in their careers and everything else it's hard to come up with that down payment amount and the closing cost amount. And the difference was with our program, ‘cause there are many programs like that, but with our program there were no income limitations. So it was more about stabilizing a certain geographic area, which included the historic part of town. We had seen a lot of the smaller single family homes turning into rentals and that was skewing the percentage from a healthy one to an unhealthy percentage of rental. so by putting this program in place we were able to turn thirty homes, keep them from becoming rentals, and indecently we also saw neighbors after, you know, someone would move in they would start sprucing up the house the neighbors would start sprucing up their house too. So we've got blocks that are looking better. We also found that the home prices have increased dramatically in part because individuals who are selling their homes could ask for a higher asking price because this program wasn't available anywhere else and they could get closer to their asking price, because again the program wasn't available anywhere else. And it was a down payment that's the true barrier. So we had individuals move into Highland from many other communities, even over from St. Louis, so that was- that was very gratifying. I'd go to the closing and there were an awful lot of the individuals, the majority of them by far 4  were people in their early to mid-twenties - probably mid-twenties, and a fair amount of them were single and they were buying homes and they were so excited. That was just really nice to see. KW: With having this influx of young people come into Highland because of this program did it make a big impact? LP: It's making an impact. It- the program lasted for about a year before we ran out of funding. It was still funded from the city, and so it's only been about a year and a half since the program's inception and yeah, I think it is bringing some new life and some new vitality. Highland has always been a vibrant community and its always had a certain entrepreneurial spirit to it, which is what makes it able to embrace ideas such as this, that you know, others would be like 'oh no we can't do that. We can't do anything that no one else has done'. It's that mindset of being forward thinking that uh, you know, I think is part of this success of Highland and certainly what has drawn me to the community. KW: Do you think Highland is almost setting an example for other places in Madison County to help? LP: Yes. There are so many ways that Highland's out in the forefront of things. And others, not even just in Madison County, but other communities who like to emulate what Highlands done. Highland has true fiber to the premises gigabit service. It's the first and might still be the only gigabit city in Illinois that provides gigabit service to both individuals and businesses. And that's something that the St. Louis area's been trying to get for a many years. Google fiber just skipped over them again not too long ago. And there a pockets of places over in St. Louis that have it. For an entire community and a community of ten thousand people, in a somewhat rural setting, to have had the foresight and forward thinking um, you know, ability to see that this was something that was going to be important, is, again, pretty impressive. KW: Do you think with the new innovations that Highlands has its kind of breaking this uh misconception of it being like, being like a rural small town, uh city where it does have advancements now? LP: We're trying like heck. Um, we've started some coding classes in the high school. We have a middle school robotics club, high school tech club, and our- have participated in the project Lead the Way curriculum which is STEM caricature for several years but with the addition with the coding classes that a skill set that's definitely need. And it's a path to a good career without necessarily having to go to college and having to incur that cost. So I think that Highland is kind of leading in kind of that tech sector. We've worked towards giving some data center incentive legislation that ended up havin- dying in committee, didn't have anything to do with Highland or with data center incentive legislation, but more with the overall political climate. But we hope to reintroduce that in the future. And the NGA, when they were looking at locating over by Scott Air-force Base and the location up in North County, said that one of the reasons why they didn't come to Illinois is because they could not find a skilled work force over in Illinois. So we've been working very hard at the local level, because that's all we can control, to make it impossible to say that statement ever again in the future. So that's kind of the goal. We do have some tech companies in Highland and we hope to be adding to those. And addressing workforce development needs, kind of on our own on the local level. KW: Oh. Has there been resistance from locals with this advancing technology aspect of Highland? 5  LP: Not with the technology aspect, everyone seems to kind of get that. There's a certain amount of people in Highland, as there are everywhere, who like things exactly the way they are and they don't want them to change. But in reality everything changes, if it doesn't change it dies. So the goal is to kind of steer and guide what that change is going to look like and by, you know, working towards attracting high comp- high tech companies and um, you know, meeting those work force development needs then we don't have the kind of smoke stack industry or the retail industry that we're reliant on for jobs here, as we all know we're in the service sector economy now, that those jobs don't pay well. And in order to raise a family you need some other, other avenues for employment. KW: When you come into Highland it's kind of the typical small town Illinois, uh, little village. With this, are you guys changing the the atmosphere of Highland with just these programs or is it something more? LP: I think there are changes in the atmosphere, I think there are changes in the ambiance in the community, there's a certain vibrancy if, you know, if Highland has one of those communities that has a square and a downtown area. And it's vibrant, it's- there's not a bunch of open store fronts and vacancies on- on that. Highland also has huge participation in civic organizations, the Chamber's very strong here- the Chamber of Commerce, they have a, well they have a festival every May, every weekend from May to October basically. They have have a Halloween Parade, not Halloween, I'm sorry, a Christmas parade that draws several thousand people. KW: Highland people or from other communities? LP: From other communities KW: Oh wow. LP: There's a lot of people from Highland that turn out but people from other communities come too. They have a lot of floats, a lot of parades don't have a lot floats anymore. But the- it's a pretty big deal. Um, and then we've had several new construction, single family home permits pulled this year. More than we have in the past few years. So I think that points to attracting new folks. We've had several expansions of businesses and new businesses in the past couple of years. All economic indicators point to health for Highland. KW: Was it on a decline before you guys had these programs or was it kind of just steady? LP: There was a decline, it's, uh, part of that was due to the economy and part of its due to being in the state of Illinois, it's very difficult to attract people. And industry to Illinois, with its fiscal issues, and at the moment political issues with the disagreements between the parties at the moment. But it's certainly, things have picked up in the in the last couple of years. There's been a significant amount of investment back into the community in both residential and businesses just by- I get the monthly permit totals and that has the construction projects within the community and, you know, it's the last couple years have been very good, very healthy. Sales tax revenues are up, all indicators of economic health are strong. And our last audit was just presented a few weeks ago and they did point that out. So that's definitely positive. And I don't know that a whole lot of other communities in the state or in Madison County would be in such a strong position. 6  KW: What makes you think that Highland's so unique in their position with that? Is it a combination of the residential and financial backing? Or- LP: It's the combination of their willingness to embrace new programs and new ideas. Um, getting the word out, which I've taken very seriously over the past couple of years about the great things that are going on in this community. And the- it's a nice community, the school districts good. Two most important things in a community are the perception of safety and the perception of the school district. And we are both safe and have good school districts here. We have people who are willing to support local businesses, we have individuals who are willing to start new businesses. We have program through the city that's an entrepreneurship program were we will set people up with mentors, if they're wanting to start a new business and help them to become successful. Just, again, that's a another way- another thing that Highland does that, not aware of any other community, that has a program such as that. And you know, it's kind of Highland out there at the forefront yet again. KW: You mentioned the- the impact of Illinois political at the local level. Has kind of the mishaps with Illinois' political system trickled down to really profoundly affect Highland? LP: Highland and every other community in Illinois. Um, you know, (sighs) when you're the punch line on the late night talk shows, which Illinois was, starting even back several years ago that's not a good thing. When your pension debt is the second or third worst in the nation and that's constantly, that message is constantly out there that's not a good thing. When the state does not have any money and does not have a budget and that's out there that's not a good thing. And then you've got states all around that are competing and even if they're not, you know, in that much better shape, or they're taxes aren't that much lower, or they don't have that much more going on, they're doing a better job of promoting themselves than Illinois is at the moment. So yes, um, to get manufacturing to come to Illinois. There's some reassuring that's definitely happening with manufacturing but it's going to Southern states. It's, it is not coming to Illinois for the most part anywhere south of the Chicago area. And that's only because of the assets that are available in the Chicago area. But it's really kind of sad and it definitely is- is detrimental. School funding based on property taxes have- that has two effects, it makes property taxes for- in the state of Illinois very high and it leaves the schools poorly funded. Both of those are not things that attract folks to your state. KW: So with that kind of looming over, you know, local government jobs do you feel like that's a motivating factor for Highland to, kind of, make the community better? LP: Yes, and Highland's always had- they refer to it as Highland the island. [laughs] You know, Highland is very conservative fiscally. And so they're not so reliant on state money or grant money as a lot of other communities might be. So they're able to withstand economic pressures better than most. Now at some point, you know, even Highland will feel those pressures and has, at various times. But yeah Highland is proud of its island status. KW: Can you tell me a little bit more about that- that Highland Island. I've never heard that LP: Uh, they're very proud of the fact that they're not out there reliant on everyone else. When I worked at Madison County Highland did not get grant money very often. Now Highland did not have a 7  demographic that suited most grants which are based on income and poverty. But (cough in background) they also, you know, were very proud to, uh, be responsible fiscally and financially. And not be reliant they- people in Highland do not like to be told what to do and they do not like to have to rely on anyone else. It's part of that entrepreneurial mind set I believe. KW: So the people of Highland kind of pride themselves on being, uh, fairly independent? LP: Very much so. KW: Hm. What have been some- or what has been the most enjoyable project you've worked on in Highland? LP: Hmm. I'm not sure. I definitely enjoyed that, you know, that home buyer program. Creating that and implanting it and seeing that through. We had business plan competition to profile the Gigabit. We had a 3D printer company who won that and came and setup shop in Highland. Um, that was very very stressful, we had 50,000 dollars in prizes and I'd never put on a business plan competition but we partnered with a small business development center at SIUE and Patrick McCain was very helpful. He was the executive director at the time. And he was very helpful with that project. We have a neighbors helping neighbors helping program that we've increased our focus on code enforcement, particularly in the older area of town. And for those individuals who aren't, who are elderly or disabled and not able to keep their property in up to code, there's a program to help assist with that. The problem is we haven't had a whole lot of utilization because of that same prideful mentality that, you know, that keeps them the folks here independent. So I can't, I don't know that I can just pick one. There's probably thirty or forty more things that aren't popping into my head at the moment. But every day is different, every day I, you know, go into work and I- the time passes very quickly. I enjoy what I'm doing. I feel like I work very hard and I try to be creative. But I enjoy it and I have the sense that I'm contributing here and so that's gratifying. KW: With your current position at Highland, I mean, you have three titles basically LP: I was going to say which one [laughter] KW: So I imagined that's pretty strenuous on your work life. I mean that's a heavy workload, right? LP: Uh, yeah it is, don't have a whole lot of other things going on at the moment. And that's one thing that I'm mindful that I am kind of sacrificing at the moment. But even when I'm not at work and I- I do not have a forty hour work week, I never have. But um, even when I'm not at work I spend a lot thinking about work and thinking about these programs and thinking about what can I come up with that would help contribute and make the community stronger. So, yeah, I mean I'm, um, I have a tendency to be a workaholic anyway. Good for employers, maybe not so good for me. KW: I mean do you enjoy being a workaholic though? LP: I don't know if anyone enjoys being a workaholic [laughter]. Um, it just sort of is how it is. And it's easy to find yourself were, I like to have a certain amount of things going on. And I like to have a certain amount of ideas percolating and, you know, but then it seems like all a sudden it can reach that point that were you are like wow. Alright, I gotta take a deep breath and just, you know, focus on one thing for a 8  little bit. I feel like I do an awful lot of juggling. You know, majorly I'm in a circus. But it just is a part of my personality and I am driven and as long as I feel like I'm contributing then it's worth it. You know, if I feel like I'm spinning my wheels then it gets very frustrating. KW: Do you feel like that workaholic tendencies is pretty common in local government? LP: Hmm. Some. I would say it's the minority. I, there are several other folks in Highland and that other places that I've been and others that I've observed but I would say it is not the majority. But certainly there are workaholics and those are the ones who have that kind of service mentality and who are driven to give back. KW: With being so dedicated to Highland do you feel like it's paying off seeing these programs get- get on their feet and giving health, going back into the community? LP: I do. If I didn't that would be more, almost more, for frustrating than I could take. But that mindset of being able to embrace ideas, being able to go into the City Manager's office and say hey I was thinking about this and, you know, kind of pitch an idea. And have that taken seriously and have you know some credence given to my ideas and latitude to implement them. Um, yeah, I mean I think that that makes it worthwhile. Without that it wouldn't be. KW: Why does that make it worthwhile to you? LP: I don't know. I think that's just a part of- a part of who I am, I think. I volunteered a lot over the course of my life, I've been active in a lot of organizations. And it's just- it just goes back to that feeling like you need to make the world a better place. And you know, that's huge so you break it down, well that's what I do with my projects too. You know, you have this big idea and then you break it down and you say okay what can I do to make my little corner of the world- what can I do to make my block better, what can I do to make my family and my household better then what can I do to make my block better and then what can I do to make my community better and then, you know, what can I do to make the county better? You can't- I haven't figured out how to make the state better. But you know, it's just that kind of mindset and normally I would never talk about any of this, it's just what's kind of in my head and in my heart. But, I'm hoping no one listens to it ever [laughter]. But, um, you know that's- to me that's just part of the deal, you know? You have to contribute, what's the point if you're not. KW: Do you think a lot of people in Highland or in Madison County have that type of mindset? LP: Think a lot of people in Highland do. There are so many service organizations here. And there's a feeling and realization that a lot of folks in Highland have done decently well for themselves. And that they need to give back. There's a lot of rallying around that I've seen in this community. Madison County as a whole, eh, some parts of it are, some parts aren't. Some parts have had civil discourse kind of has broken down. KW: Could you, could you expand on that a little bit where civil discourse has broken down? LP: A little bit [laughter] but I don't think I'll delve into this too deep. But there are communities in Madison County where the political have become so divisive that people are just ruthless from one side of 9  the isle to the other. And that should not be the case. There's room for differing opinions and there's room for, you know, contrasting ideas but there should be respect involved. And in some areas that respect is gone and, um, it's not, it is not contributing to health of the community at all. It's just creating more issues than those people realize, both in, you know, making divides between neighbors which weaken neighborhoods which in turn will weaken the community. To bad press, which is going to chase away, you know, businesses and residents who might think about coming there if what you're reading is all negative then why would you want to go there? People want to be a part of something that's good and vibrant and healthy. And, you know, if you Google Highland that's what you see. KW: Well do you have any one particular memory of your work experience in Highland that's your favorite? LP: Hmm. I don't know. Um, I don't know. I go back to, you know, a couple of those closings with a couple of those families. You know, there was- there were single people certainly but there were a young couple who were buying a house. And they were just so excited and, you know, to see that- the future, you know, that is the future of Highland. You have to be able to attract young people to your community. And, you know, their intent is to stay there raise their family in this community. And it just, I don't know, was very rewarding. KW: It's almost like seeing that stereotypical American Dream being able to come true in Highland. LP: Yeah, it is. It is, but it is also the promise of the next generation because there's a lot of communities where the young, particularly a lot of rural communities, where the young folks are leaving and they don't come back. And that's- that's not healthy for your town, you cannot continue down that path forever [laughs]. So Highland didn't necessarily have that, I mean there were a certain amount of young folks that left and never came back, but a certain amount did come back. But now it's new young folks coming to town, and you know, kind of starting their lives here. And that's- that's the future. KW: Do you think having new young- new young people come in here, not from a different community, helps Highland thrive? LP: I think it does. Um, again there are some Highland folk who disagree with me. But yeah, I mean, having new people, new blood, new ideas is, I think, it's an excellent thing. I think it's very healthy to have different perspectives. So yeah, somebody who came from Germantown, I think we had someone from Germantown, came to the community is going to have a different mindset on things than somebody, then the folks we had that came from Glen Carbon. The people from St. Louis are going to have differing ideas then the people from Troy. And I think that definitely strengthens the community. KW: Well, can you imagine yourself staying in local government for the rest of your career? LP: I think so. I definitely think so. Local government is where you have the most impact on day to day life for people. It's also- you're the one that they're going to get frustrated at first and you're the one who's going to hear about it. But you do have the most- you touch their lives, you know. The roads, the park system, the trash pickup, the ambulance service, the police protection, the- it's just everything. You know, you touch these people's lives on a daily basis. 10  KW: You mentioned that since you are, I mean it's such a close connection with the community and then you're job position. Have you been in line of fire before were citi- citizens have upset with you, or locals have? LP: I've had, um, some individuals who have been displeased with the actions of me or my department. I have code enforcement and building and zoning under me. Those departments don't ever really tell people good news. So it's a daily- I told [laughs] I tell them thank you all the time because no one else does. But it is truly a very thankless job, you're going out and telling people that, you know, there property is not up to code or that there was a problem or their grass is over eight inches high. Or you know sometimes there's failed inspections on a construction project. So yeah, I've- I've been in the line of fire and I've had my staff in the line of fire. And then I've had people who are upset about something totally unrelated to anything that we had done. And a lot of times if you just listen. People want to be heard, they want to know you heard them. They want to know that you understand. Sometimes there's things that I don't have any control over, I can't fix it, I didn't- you know, the city did not break it so we can't fix it. But if you transparent, you tell people, you know, the truth you tell them what you know, you tell them what you can do. You tell them the why. That usually goes- and you listen, that usually goes a long way. KW: Do you think that's the most important part of your job, is being there for local people and being able to listen? Communicate with them LP: Yeah, in one way or the other I think that it pretty much boils down to just that. Um, it's you know listening. I don't set policy, government workers don't set policy we implement it. So we have to know what it is that the citizens want which our direction is supposed to come from the elected officials. But yeah, you have to listen. You have to have your ear to the ground, you have to know what it is that people are looking for. KW: Um, is there anything we didn't talk about that you'd like to add? LP: I don't know, I feel like I've, uh, gone off on several tangents. KW: Nah, it was all super interesting, [laughter] don't worry. LP: And I don't know if there's anything really that I would add. Um, I think if people are interested and feel driven to give back working in local government is one of the ways that you can do that. I mean there's many others, you know, but teaching, non-profits, I mean a myriad of other ways also. But, you know, working in local government certainly I do believe is one of those. And I don't know if there's anything else to add. KW: Alright, well thank you for doing the interview and appreciate all your work in Highland, you know, helping the community thrive again because that helps all of Madison County. So just, uh, thanks again for being part of this interview. LP: You're welcome. 11 
MadisonCounty;Ralph Korte;1934;2018;Ralph Korte 1934 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Ralph Korte Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer Korte Construction, Alton, Illinois October 22, 2018 Editor’s Note: This transcript was edited by Ralph Korte and differs from the audio recording. Ralph Korte gave permission to post the interview on October 22, 2018 (which he noted is his wife Donna Korte’s birthday) Ralph Korte (RK): We were married 62... no, 59 years this year. Steve Hansen (SH): Wow. Congratulations. SH: Alright. So this is, today is the 22nd, I'm Steven Hansen. I'm talking with Ralph Korte, we're in Korte Construction offices in Highland, Illinois. I did read that, that was a really good... RK: Thank you SH: ...summary of your, of your life on that weblink and, I wonder if we can, uh, I was wondering what, how much of that we can, we can use for, for this RK: Use any piece of it SH: Okay RK: Any piece of it SH: Okay RK: If it works SH: What we're, what we're interested in, Ralph is this is just talking about what your life, you know, we're, um... because we think that, you know, 50 years, 100 years after you and I are long gone, historians and students and scholars will, will go to our website and they'll see all these, these interviews and sources and they'll be able to put together, they’ll have a really good window into what life was like in this area at the end of the twentieth century. So, so let's just start out, even though this is redundant RK: Yeah SH: ... to some of the stuff you've already done and, and just tell us a little bit about your, your life, you know, when you were born, and you, you grew up on a farm... 1  RK: Got it SH: ...so tell us about that. RK: Okay, I was born in 1934, and I numbered 9 of 14 children, 8 boys and 6 girls from a German Catholic family and back then, the more kids they had, the more kids they had to help milk the cows. I stress the dairy farm. Before I went to school in the mornings, even before I went to first grade, I had to milk my cows. I was milking cows at age 5. We rode to school, it was a Catholic grade school, taught by the Sisters of St. Francis and it was in the town of Pierron, Illinois. Pierron had a population of 500. It's on the county line between Madison and Bond County. The school was in Madison County, but we lived on the farm in Bond County. Our address was Rural Route, Pocahontas, Illinois. Growing up on the farm, we did not have electricity until I was in the second grade, but up until then we had to milk the cows by hand. Shortly after we got electricity we had milking machines. We didn’t have indoor plumbing in the house until we finally built a new home there in 1950. SH: How big, how big was the farm? RK: The farm was only 120 acres but we milked about 30 cows. So it was a big operation. In addition to the cows, we’d always raise about 200 pigs a year and butchering day was a big deal, we butchered 3 times a year for that large family and probably 4 pigs at a time so 12 pigs but the rest of them were shipped to the stock yards in East St. Louis. We also had about 200 chickens, so we'd collect and gather about a hundred eggs a day and we would sell the excess eggs. SH: So, so the egg reach was, was that for uh, growing for feed for the, for the dairy? RK: Feed for the dairy, and then... SH: That mostly pasture land? RK: Uh, yeah about 20 acres, about 10 acres of pasture but then the corn would go into silage for the cows in the winter and the hay we'd put up in the barn for the winter so a lot of it was to sustain the food for those 30 cows and 200 pigs and chickens. None of my older brothers and sisters had gone to high school, Pierron School only went to 8th grade. The nearest high school was in Highland, Illinois, which was another eight miles away, it was too far to walk. We would essentially walk to school, we'd ride to school with the milk truck but then we'd walk home the two miles on the roads. Only the youngest two of the 14 children went to high school. There weren’t any school busses or truant officers in the earlier years, and we were needed on the farm. Back then, nobody cared if you went to school, hence I have never been a day to high school. I look back at it, and there probably wouldn't be a Korte Construction if I would have gone to high school. Back then, whenever any of the neighbors needed a building, all the neighbors would pitch in and help, and at that time, there was a move afoot in the dairy industry to ship Grade A, Grade A inspected milk. If you shipped Grade A milk you got about five dollars a hundred, if you shipped Grade B milk, you only got about two dollars a hundred. The Grade A milk went into bottled milk, the Grade, B milk went into cheese and products like that. So it behooved you to ship Grade A inspected milk which was controlled by the health department in St. Louis because we were shipping to St. Louis dairies and you had to meet certain specifications. The cows had to be milked on concrete and there had to be a gutter. The gutter had to be so wide and then concrete behind and then one of the big 2  things was window light. There had to be so many square feet of window light per cow and the reason for that is it was the assumption, and I guess it was proved out, that the sunshine streaming in kills bacteria. They were very cognizant of keeping the bacteria down in the milk. So, it behooved all the farmers to upgrade their farms from milking on dirt to concrete and following these specifications so they would get more for their milk. My dad was handy with a hammer and a saw, and whenever one of the neighbors would be remodeling their barn for this, he would help them out. When I was out of 8th grade, he saw that I was handy with it and he took me along. So, instead of going to high school, when we weren't putting in crops, we were helping the neighbors remodel their barns. SH: So, so you grew up, and, and, during the, during the depression. RK: 1934 is when I was born SH: Okay, so, do you have any memories of the, of the Great Depression? Or . . . RK: Well, we didn't know... didn't know we were poor because we lived off the farm. SH: Yeah. And and, your father, was he exempt during the draft during World War II? RK: Right, no, my dad went in the army in World War I, but he just got in less than six months and the war was over and he got out. No, my dad was born in 1895 so he was about 20 years old in the First World War SH: Okay, alright. Okay, so, okay, getting the chronology here together. RK: Sure. SH: So do you have then any memories of World War II... RK: Oh, God yes... SH: ...as a boy? RK: I remember the day it started, we had no electricity at that time, no radio because no electricity, but our cousin had just stopped by that Sunday morning about noon, he had just dropped by, he had a car and he had a radio in his car. And I can remember standing outside his car and hearing the broadcast about Pearl Harbor. We got electricity about a year later, in 1942. SH: So did your, did your parents take a newspaper? Did you follow... RK: Oh, yes. SH: ...the progress of the war? RK: Yes we did have a Post-Dispatch that came to us daily via rural route delivery but I followed it and of course what I remember the most about it is the cereal boxes that we would buy. Cereal had pictures of airplanes on them that you could cut out and build your own cardboard plane model of the B-17 and the 3  B-24 and the P-38, oh I followed that with a great interest. SH: Yeah. RK: I was in first grade when the war broke out. SH: Yeah, so you were... RK: And I remembered a lot. We would collect scrap iron from all the ditches in the old days. Out on the farm, if there was a washout, you'd throw the junk into those ditches to stop erosion. Now, we gleaned all of that steel out of all those ditches and brought it in, into the school and there, put it on a big heap and some truck would come get it.  SH: Wow. RK: Scrap iron. SH: Do you remember, uh, any rationing during the war? RK: We were virtually exempt from that because we were on the farm. Gas was never rationed because of farming, it was an important thing. SH: Right. RK: ... and so we needed gas for the tractors and they didn't pay attention. Course we never did uh, cut you know, vacations or nothing and the only place we'd go is from our farm to the church. The little town of Pierron had a grain elevator so we took our grain only two and a half miles to the grain elevator where it went out by trains. No, we never felt the rationing because we virtually raised all our own food. SH: And, and did your, you say your folks took a newspapers so they had daily newspaper, did they take any other magazines or anything? RK: Oh, Yeah. Prairie  Farmer and Farm Journal, those were staples and they came once a month. And I voraciously read them, I was a voracious reader, and joked about it but, I was the highest in my grade 8 out of 8 years in grade school, but there were only 8 students in my grade.  SH: [laughter] RK: I never had any problem, then again, went on to say that I took a GED test... SH: Yes. RK: We can get into that later. SH: Yeah. Alright so, so you remember pretty vividly then, the war years and uh, and RK: Absolutely 4  SH: ...and the aftermath and... RK: Yes. SH: ...and that. RK: Everything about it. SH: Did you... RK: ...My older brother Vince, he was about ten years older than myself and he got deferred because Dad needed him on the farm, but then I do remember right at the tail end of the war he did get examined in Chicago. You have to take a train to Chicago for the draft, he was married at the time. About the time that happened he either didn't pass the exam or the war was over, but he did not serve. The birth order, there was Vince and then there were four girls in between before they had another one and those boys, then my older brothers, they were eligible for Korea. The next oldest brothers. SH: Yeah. RK: So they missed, but I remembered just like it was yesterday when it was victory and the bomb was dropped and it was a big celebration day. SH: Did you, did you go to like, into town or anything... RK: No, no. SH: ... like that? Just celebration on the farm and... RK: Yeah. Yeah... SH: How, how did you celebrate? RK: Well... SH: And by then did you have radio? RK: Yes, but there was no television yet. SH: Right. RK: No, but I recall everybody was happy. Everybody. SH: That the war was finally over. RK: Yes. SH: Yeah. Did it seem, did it seem, can you remember, did it seem like all along that we were gonna win if we just take time or, was there any doubt... 5  RK: I was in 6th grade, but I remember distinctly going to the Pierron School and the VE day, Victory in Europe, happened, and that was 1945. I still remember the Priest came into the school, it was about 10 a.m. and he came in to each classroom and said, "Take the day off". When the big war finally got over, school wasn't in session. SH: Wow. RK: I remember distinctly, I should have walked home like my sisters did, but my cousin, who lived in town said, "Why don't you stick around, let's go fishing." So we went fishing in a creek because, I wasn’t supposed to be home anyhow. I caught heck for not coming home to work! [laughter] But I was only 10 years old, we got the rest of the day off. SH: Tell me about the school. It was uh, it was a parish school... RK: Yes. SH: And, how big? RK: ...it was taught by the Sisters of St. Francis, there were only four rooms, two grades per nun. There were four teaching nuns plus one nun was the cook, so we had five nuns. SH: And two grades per room...  RK: Two grades per room. SH: ... in four rooms. So it went all the way up to 8th grade. RK: Yes. SH: And was there a kindergarten or start in first? RK: No, no kindergarten. Started with grade school. SH: Okay, and was it, uh, do you remember, was it strict? RK: Oh yes, I had very good teachers and... there was no nonsense about it. And discipline, too. SH: Okay, you said, you said that uh, your, your, all the neighbors would get together to... RK: Build buildings, yes. RK: If I would have gone to high school, I wouldn't have had that opportunity, and who knows what I would have become. I look back at it, and I've never been sorry a day that I didn't go to high school. Now that I look back at it, if I wouldn’t have gone in the military, I wouldn't have gotten a GED and then been eligible on the Korean GI Bill and getting a degree at night school at SIUE on the GI Bill. SH: And... you had, did you, you had a natural talent for... for building and constructing? 6  RK: Yes, I loved to build things. SH: You could, you could puzzle through the, how to put things... RK: Yes. I just loved it. SH: You just loved it. RK: I just had a knack for it and looking back at all my friends that went to high school, I just couldn't see how I would have sat still. Maybe I would have been a great chemist or some darn thing but, it just fit me. SH: And did you think that you would be, you would leave the farm and that that would be your livelihood? RK: No, I expected, and it was planned out for me that I was going to take over the farm, by my dad wasn’t ready for me to take over, due to the new Social Security inclusion for farmers. My oldest brother, he already had his own farm, and now, the Korean War came along and my brother George, he enlisted in the Air Force in 1950 and it appeared that he was going to stay in, and my brother Ray, who was four years older than George was drafted and was in the combat engineers and sent to Korea about 1952. After Ray was in Korea about four months, we didn't hear from him for over 30 days, and finally we wrote to our congressman Mel Price, somehow, they got through to him, and we found out he was now in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, in a mental hospital. He had a nervous breakdown in Korea, they flew him to Japan and from there he ended up in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, in a mental hospital, taking electric shock treatments. SH: Ooh RK: My dad and my sister and a friend of Ray's drove there and visited him at Valley Forge. My sister said Ray just looked like a zombie. SH: Yeah RK: After about four or five months of electric shock treatments, they shipped him to Jefferson Barracks hospital, and I remember visiting him on Sundays. He was there about six months and finally my Dad said, "He’s not getting any better, I want to get him home." And Dad had to sign a paper that he was responsible, and I still remember, I think I might have been there, I was 16 or 17, and the doctor there told my Dad, "You'll be sorry, you'll bring him back." Dad said. "I’ll take my chances." Ray was never the same, but he never went back and later on then I hired him as a truck driver servicing the Korte Company. A long story short, I was now the next oldest boy and Dad just assumed that I would take over the farm. Before I left for the Army, in the spring of '54, I designed and built a milking parlor and open housing and all that, took about six months, so it'd be ready when I got home. Once completed, I said okay “I'm ready to go, get it over with”. The draft was still there, so I volunteered for the draft, I went into the Army, October 28th, 1954, when I was about to turn 20. Looking back, it was fortuitous because the Korean War ended in July of 1953 and they cut off the GI Bill at the end of 1954, and just because I went in, I had just made the Korean GI Bill which meant they owed me a college education. 7  SH: And where'd you do your training? RK: Camp Chaffee, Arkansas, right outside of Fort Smith is where my eight weeks of basic training was. I got slated to go into the artillery and Camp Chaffee has a lot of mountains and it was a good place to shoot the 105 howitzers. They could throw a shell about six to eight miles. Then I had two weeks off in between, then went back to Camp Chaffee for another eight weeks of artillery training. Then about half of us went to Europe, and I was sent to Korea. I was shipped over to Korea, flew from Fort Smith to Seattle, Washington, but the interesting thing about that was that it was a charter, United States overseas airplane. It was chartered for us, and I guess they can hold about sixty. . It was the first time I was ever in an airplane, but we could not make it to Seattle, Washington, without refueling. We had to stop at Grand Island, Nebraska to refuel and then on to Seattle. I spent three days in Fort Lewis in Washington, processing to go overseas, and I then I was loaded on a ship, the USS General Mann, Port Seattle, and it took two weeks, to get to Korea. We did stop at Yokohama, Japan to pick up other supplies and another three days. I was on the ship about 17 days to get to Korea. SH: Well you must have been good at mathematics if you were able, if you were in the, the artillery to be... RK: Oh yes. SH: So that, that played well then with, with your... SH: ...construction and design... RK: Yeah, and life on the farm, it was an education. I was a voracious reader all the time. SH: You, your bio, biography says that when you were in the Army then is when you decided to get your GED diploma. RK: Yes SH: Now, excuse me, where were, in Korea were you stationed... RK: I spent the whole time (one year and four months) right at the DMZ near Panmunjom where the truce talk was held, and that building still stands today. SH: ... around different places? RK: Yes, let me get back to that GED. I had my orders that I knew I was going to Korea, and half of us went to Europe and half went to Korea. It was just where they needed us, and now, it was ten days before we would have transportation to get out. It was too far to go home (it was an eight to ten hour drive from Camp Chaffee Arkansas., I recall it was a rainy Saturday and I used to hang around the library, we had quite a few libraries on the post but there was one nearby, so I was sitting in the library that Saturday morning, and I saw on the bulletin board "take a GED test." And I was inquisitive. I thought it had something to do with high school, so I went to the desk and they said well we're giving the fives. Five different subjects here in the conference room this week and it'll be one class a night, 90 minutes for the 8  subject areas, and you can sign up for it. They said fill out this application. Well I went to my desk to fill it out. First question was, "How many years have you been to high school?" This was for drop outs. So, I go back up to the desk, said "I’ve never been a day to high school." They said, “Oh, we have a different program for you.” You can take the refresher course. One night a week for eight weeks study up all those subjects, those five subjects. I said I don't have time for that, I said I'm shipping out in ten days. I said “what would happen if I took the test and I flunked?” They said "nothing.” When you get your next duty station you can take the refresher course." They were very cavalier about it. I said well I'll take the test and I filled out a form. So that was on a Saturday  Monday night they were having standardized tests, probably still going on, it was 90 minutes, timed and supervised, and it was multiple choice, five different subjects, and I didn't think they were particularly hard but I didn't know how I did. I finished on a Friday and three days later I got the results, I had 86.5 percentile. I joke about, “so much for public school K- 12”. A good private eight grades, life on the farm, and being an avid reader helped me pass the tests. So, now I had that piece of paper with those five grades, stuck in my billfold that said I was certified smart! SH: [laughter] RK: I really didn't know I'd do anything with it, and again you never know. I tell my kids and grandkids, that you're a product of who you associate with. You hang around with bright, successful people, and some of it will rub off on you. The first day after I got settled in, I was sent up north with the infantry to monitor for communications up to the forward observer post back to the guns, and I’d be on the switchboard radio around the clock, we were six hours on and 12 off. 24/7. So I had a lot of time when I wasn't sleeping, I sought out the library. The library was a tent about four times as big as this room, and the only ones that hung around the library were college graduates and me. And there I got to know people. One of the guys and I stayed in touch, he's dead now, but he was a graduate lawyer, having graduated from Loyola University in Chicago, and while he was going to law school he was exempt from the draft. Well as soon as he graduated they nabbed him. So most of us were about twenty years old and he was 25, but he was older and wiser, he had the system figured out. They had a regimental newspaper that came out once a week and the guy had been running it went home, so my lawyer friend masqueraded that he was good at it, he told them that he was a reporter for the Chicago Tribune so he had that job. He found out that he could get paid as a college professor teaching Business Law 101, he knew he could teach but he needed six soldiers to be in the class or he wouldn't get paid extra for it. He had five guys lined up, but needed a sixth. By this time I'd known him for three or four weeks, he knew my story, he knew I had that piece of paper said I was certified smart. He said “Ralph, why don't you sit in on this”. He too didn't think I could cut it but as long as he had a student. Well, I could keep up with those guys. It was just common sense. Offer, consideration, acceptance. I was able to keep up, After Business Law 101, I went on to Business Law 102. So, we were taking that and the other five guys that I was going to class with said “Man Ralph, you gotta go to college when you get out, this stuff's so easy for you”. I said, I don't have to go to college, I'm going to be a farmer. I said, besides, I can't get into college, I've never been a day in high school. Fast forward, and then that story told about the five dollars. The day I left for the Army my Dad gave me five dollars. If I was going on a date on a Saturday night, I'd get $2. Going away for the Army, that morning, dad took me to Greenville to catch the Vandalia bus which would go to downtown St. Louis that stopped at Greenville. That's where the draft department was and they picked up at Greenville and there were eight boys that morning leaving from Bond County and we went to the induction center which is still there at 12th and Spruce, the federal building in St. Louis. We spent one night there, and after you pass your exams the next morning you went to Camp Chaffee, Arkansas. In the 9  Army they tell you when you get there what to do with your pay, they highly recommended you sign a class Q allotment and send 50 bucks a month to your wife or to your mom and dad. Well I wasn't married then, with a family of 14 I figured I'd send it home to mom and dad. The family was only making $85, so I sent 50 bucks a month home. I'd never see it again. The other option was a program called Soldiers Deposits that they’d exact the pay as much as you want and they’d pay you 4 percent, so I took a chance with that and when I got out of the Army and I had, uh, 1,300 bucks I think. So, when I got home I had 1,300 bucks. I was discharged on August 14th, 1956, and hitchhiked home from Chicago. When I got home, I said “Dad I'm ready take over the farm”. He said well there's been a change in plans. While I was gone, the government changed the law on social security for farmers in 1955. They saw the injustice that the only way you could be on social security was if you were on the payroll of something. Farmers were self-employed, they had no payroll, so now they changed the law that self-employed people, particularly farmers, could average the last four years of how much income tax they had paid and take that amount. That average of those four years and pay in that lump sum and then when they reach age 65 they can start collecting social security, even though they weren't on the payroll. Dad was 62 but he had to keep farming for three more years to get on the government dole. He said “you can work for me as a hired hand, I'll pay you”. I got home and wasn't particularly enthused about that but, neighbors heard I was home and, they wanted me to build buildings for them. So I went out and start building buildings for the farmers. One farmer, that I had worked with, who was ten years older, said “you know Ralph I sometimes wish I'd gone into construction instead of farming. He said “you could find plenty of work around the neighborhood, Ralph, building buildings, long as you work hard and don't charge too much”. But that stuck with me and after knocking around for a while, I started my construction business, thinking I'd do it for a couple years. I talked my cousin into joining me, we started working for $2.50 an hour. Work kept coming our way, and after about a year I thought, I could make it in this business. I gave up on the idea of farming and since my four younger brothers didn’t care to take over the farm either, they all came to work for me and Dad sold the farm to the neighbor. In the meantime, I was eligible for the Korean GI Bill and my only motive was to get even with Uncle Sam. SH: [laughter] How do you mean get even? RK: Well, I gave two years at 30 cents an hour. SH: [laughter] RK: I felt the government owed me, and SIUE was just opening. I was able to get in to night classes that we held at the Rock Junior High in East St. Louis, on the strength of my grades. I can give you just a little sidebar to that about the complication of it. I went down there about 1959. SH: 1959, I was 11 years old. RK: Okay. 1959 they were operating Rock Junior High at East St. Louis. The stipulation of the GI Bill was that you had to start your program within three years of your discharge. If you weren’t enrolled in an educational program within that three years you were shut out. It was the summer quarter, I had to be in school before August 15th. So, I went to Rock Junior High to get in. Register in June, for the summer quarter. The guy there he said, the test scores are good, but we can't accept hand carried grades. It’s SIUE's policy that it has to be an official document. 10  SH: [laughter] RK: The headquarters that were administering the program, I think it was the University of Wisconsin at Madison. There weren’t any fax machines or emails back then, and classes were starting in three days. So, he called down to the Veteran Affairs office which was only two blocks away in East St. Louis and he was told to send me down here. I went to see that guy, and he called back to the school to say these test scores are the 86.5 percentile. But SIUE said they couldn’t accept my hand carried grades. I had the same piece of paper I had in Korea. This guy, I'd love to find him again, he hangs up the phone from SIUE and he says I've gotten thrown out of more colleges than you'll get in to. SH: [laughter] RK: He called Belleville Junior College, now it's called Southwestern Illinois College, but at the time it was Belleville Junior College. It was on West Main in Belleville. He called them up, he said would you accept a young man with GED test scores? He read them, they said we sure would. He said what do you have available that is freshman level? It was rhetoric 101 and classes start Thursday (2 days from then) at 6:30. He said he'll be there. The SIUE gentlemen told me to go there and that would start my eligibility for the GI Bill, then we’ll get you transferred. SH: [laughter] RK: So that's how and why, if it wouldn't have been for that guy letting me in, I would not have been able to start night classes. Sitting there at night, making passing grades, I had it figured out that I was making about $2.45 an hour. Working on the jobs I was only making 2.50, and in Korea I was making 30 cents an hour. My only motive, my biggest motive, they owed me. SH: [laughter] RK: I got hooked on taking classes. All they offered at SIUE was business. If they would have had engineering, I would have taken that. In retrospect, the business was what I needed. I knew how to build buildings, but now management would be learned. They just kept hammering it in, planning, organizing, directing, controlling, and directing, delegating. And after about three years studying at night, all the sudden it occurred to me, regardless of how hard I'd work, as one man, a carpenter, in eight hours you could still only produce eight hours’ worth of work. But now if I hired eight carpenters, and supervised them, I could leverage my time. Those principles driven into me, expanded my thinking. SH: So, up until then, '59, you were just operating as an individual on an hourly basis. RK: Yes. I'd talked my cousin into joining me, we bought a used pickup truck, a 1946 International for $100.00, and a brand-new heavy duty Black and Decker saw for $79.00. I still thought I'd finally go back to farming after Dad retired, but work kept coming our way. And I decided I could make it. My cousin, who's four years older than me, decided to go back to farming after three years working together. I bought him out. I remember sitting at his kitchen table, he and his wife had an upstairs apartment. It was a Sunday morning and I bought him out. We added all the tools we had, and it amounted to $1600.00. I wrote him a check for $800.00. Now that company's doing $300 million worth of volume a year. Only in America could this have happened. 11  SH: Yeah. That's right. That's right. Now, uh, at one, at what point did you then turn, make it into a company instead of just being a, an individual... selling your labor? RK: Within a year I was pressured into joining a union, and I finally gave up and joined the carpenters’ union and they offered me a deal less than a year after I'd started, and we went from $2.50 an hour to $3.65 and that was in 1959 before I got married. In 1962 my cousin went back to farming and I was the sole Owner, and during this timeline he said hey Ralph you're raking in the bucks. I wouldn't have had the confidence if I hadn’t gone to night school and learned the business and financial side of construction. It gave me the inner confidence and I started meshing with architects and business people in Highland. The confidence that was engendered by my night school that I understood what business is about and of course then I started investing and stuff and later brought the Wall Street Journal into Highland. The story of how that came about is all in the company history book. It was 1966when I played a major role in bringing the Wall Street Journal business to Highland. I was only 32 years old, but I had a lot of confidence. SH: Ralph, were there, were there different, as you built the company into uh, into this success that it is, were there any particular key moments or key contracts that, that seemed to be... RK: Well the Wall Street Journal I did in 1966. I knew that was going to be a reality. I bought the 40 acres of land right across the street and I got an option on that and then when that happened, I bought that and that brought the Binkley Company, and that brought at least ten more businesses to town. The key thing, then, I knew I needed to hire a second-in-command, you know, talk about leveraging your time, so I graduated from SIUE in 1968, fifty years ago. I'd been looking for someone, and here a young man came into my office, I had been working out of my house, and now I was working in an office in downtown Highland. I had built an office building down there, so I moved my office in the basement. This young man was a local boy and he had graduated from U of I, you've probably heard of him, he lives in Edwardsville now. Vernon Eardley. He was a single ticket winner of the Illinois lottery in 1994 and won $41 million. SH: Only, only in the... RK: At the time, he was living as a newlywed, living in an apartment I'd built in Highland. He was working for the state of Illinois, he's ten years younger than me. They were building Interstate 70 through here at that time and he was a project engineer on the ten-mile section going from Highland to Greenville. He had a civil engineering degree out of the University of Illinois. He came in to my office sometime in 1966 to want his $50.00 deposit back, and he told me he was going back to the U of I to get a master's degree. I gave him his $50.00 deposit and I didn't know that I'd ever see him again. In June of 1969, he stopped in at my office, there in downtown Highland, and said he's going to be graduating August 15 with a master's degree in construction management from the University of Illinois and he said “I've been watching your company the last three or four years, it looks like you're going places. Have you ever thought of hiring a second-in-command?” I said sure. That's what I'd been thinking about in night school, I needed to hire good people and delegate. And we talked for 15 minutes and he said what would you be willing to pay? My brother Larry Korte, my carpenter foreman was really my second in command and his salary with benefits fully burdened was $7.00 per hour. I told Vern I would offer $14,000.00 per year. He replied that he would think it over and get back to me. He called me about two weeks later and made an 12  appointment with me for the following Saturday. At that meeting he said would accept my offer of $14,000 per year with a bonus plan for the three key employees Ralph Korte, Larry Korte and Vern Eardley. The plan he suggested was very simple and straightforward. We would take the annual true and accurate net profit of the Company and pay out 20% of the profit to the three key employees based on the following percentages. Ralph Korte -12 percent, Larry Korte - 6 Percent, Vern Eardley- 6 percent. Total 24 percent of net profit annually. We shook hands on it, and he came to work August 15, 1969. We have never had a written employment contract. The Company is still using that same formula of 24% of net profit but now there are more employees that share salary bonus pool. There is no doubt in my mind that Korte Construction would not be where it is today but for me hiring Vern Eardley. I would not have had the courage and foresight to hire him if not for my degree in Business from SIUE. I graduated in June of 1968 after 8 years of night school two nights a week. I hired Vern one year later. SH: Interesting. Interesting. Well, it's, it's good decision making. RK: You can say I'm an unabashed supporter for SIUE and higher education. No doubt about it, I would have a made it without it, but I wouldn't be doing $200 to $300 million a year, or had built in 42 of the 50 states. SH: What were some of the, of the, big contracts that your company did? RK: The most recent large job I visited last year. Donna and I went on a river cruise from Portland, Oregon up the Snake River and right there, we had just built a 800,000 square foot mail distribution center for the United States Postal Service. We have built these all over the country. This was the biggest  just under one hundred million dollars. It was a two-year project, and while we were there it was just finishing up, and my wife and I toured it. SH: Wow SH: All over. You said uh, 42 out of the 50 states RK: 42 so far, and Puerto Rico. We did a reserve training center in Puerto Rico about ten years ago. And we have built on many military bases in Hawaii and two military bases in Alaska. SH: Now you, you, you've stayed here your, your whole life and you've seen huge changes in, in our area, and uh, heavy industry and steel and refineries and along the river, and then the collapse of a lot of those industries. RK: Yes SH: ...um, so, talk to me about, about some of the changes you've seen and what strikes you as being really, um, significant, and dramatic. RK: Well, in our town, the first commercial building I did was Jakel Manufacturing and they have since sold out and they're no longer here, and the buildings that I built have been taken over by the school, for the administration of the school. Other local businesses that I built were Artex's Printing. They printed table clothes and other linens for the restaurant industry. Well the industry and the airlines quit buying 13  linen and that too is out of business. So, we've had three factories in Highland just disappear. Course I brought B-Line and now Eaton Industries here, Basler Electric’s still doing well. Alton Box which I also built still has a division here, but its ownership has changed, and they hire sixty people where they used to hire 200, so a change in technology results in less manpower needed. I have an office in St. Louis and we're based out of there. We have four offices, St. Louis MO, Highland IL, Norman OK, and Las Vegas NV. Other areas that have changed over the years for example are Edwardsville. It has been booming as far as warehouses and I've built five warehouses there and Korte is building a 20-million-dollar addition on to the Hershey's warehouse of one million one square feet that I built fifteen years ago. The Unilever building was also built by Korte and several other warehouses for Lanter in that same area. Good or bad, Amazon, that distribution model is wreaking havoc on the retail industry. SH: Mmhm RK: Another example in Edwardsville  I built the National Food Store which became Schnucks. Now Schnucks bought the Shop n' Save that went out of business. So they currently have two Schnucks stores right across the street from each other. I'm cautiously optimistic, I think, things are going good, I mean, the construction industry is the busiest I've seen it in ten years. SH: That's interesting RK: Now the construction industry can't find people to work. SH: Talk to me about, uh, your involvement in community affairs, uh, you, I know that, that, uh, Gary Niebur, Mayor Niebur, and, and others who'd come and and talk to you and consult with you about different ideas to, uh, grow downtown Edwardsville or expand, uh... RK: Yes. Mark Twain Bank at that time had merged and they approached me and my partner Gary Balke. They said we'd like a new bank, they'd bought the bank in Edwardsville, and they said we'd like a bigger bank, a new image and that's what started that downtown renovation. The first one was 1989 and then two or three years later was Mark Twain Two, which is leased out for law offices. We bid on the court house there and it was ironic, but they had ten alternatives and we were low bidder on the base bid, then they had extra money, and they started adding in the alternatives. They stopped at the sixth one, and if they would have gone to all nine, Korte would have been low. Oh well. SH: Didn't you, didn't you build the high school in Edwardsville? RK: Yes, I did, I forgot about that, Korte had to take over the contract. SH: Yes, that that that project collapsed, and you had to take it over, I remember that. RK: I still remember when the head of the school board (an attorney) called me up. He said Ralph would you come over and visit with them. I told my wife that I was going, and she said, why would you? The over-budget school project was in the paper for six months and she said why would you want to get involved in that? I said, “Well if the neighbor’s house is on fire, you'd want to go help, I want to go see if I can help. And I remember, I can't even remember who that superintendent was, but not the next day he had his attorney there and he said what would you do? And I said well let me work up something, I 14  thought I was being interviewed against somebody else. He said no, you don't understand, we want you to do it. We're not talking to anybody else. Well, we did it. SH: Was that Hightower? RK: No, it was before Ed Hightower. SH: Before Hightower. RK: The superintendent at the beginning of the project was Robert Stuart but the guy that ran the show was a chairman of the board and the school lawyer. RK: We took over the Edwardsville High School project in 1995 and finished in 1997. SH: What, what are some of the projects that you're most proud of? RK: Here in Highland, no doubt about it, the Wall Street Journal because here was a national company, it was just plain luck. I told that story didn't I, of how they happened to come here? SH: Tell it. Tell us. RK: [coughing] Well, I had bought this piece of land just because the Chamber of Commerce were talking about how we would bring industry in and I was the young kid on the Chamber of Commerce and I thought well where would they put this? No place around. I saw this piece of land out there where the Wall Street Journal is, it was platted in lots. And for one hundred years. The owner was Suppiger and I found out she was living in Collinsville. I called her up, and said would you like to sell, sure, I've been trying to sell, I said well I'll give you $250 a lot, I figured it out, it was probably about 600 an acre, which is what farmland was going for about then. So she said fine, I bought it from her and I had been sitting on it for about two years, and the city manager knew I had it, when two officers from the Wall Street Journal, stopped at the City Manager's office in August of 1966, and they said they were with the National Printing Company and they were looking for a site. The City manager knew I had that, he called me up, I arranged to meet with them the next morning. I was building a shopping center right downtown here at the time. I met them and they explained to me they were with the National Printing Company, that's all they told me, and I was riding in their car and, National Printing that could be copy books, it could be magazines, I couldn't think anything of it, they seemed very professional. We looked at that piece of land, and it was in corn, and they drove around and said well they didn't need a fancy building, just a concrete block building. I had a couple of them going on in town, so I showed them. They asked how long would it take to build a 20,000 square foot building. I said about two months. How much would it cost? I said oh about ten thousand. And as we drove around, these guys said, “Well how much would you want for a 30-day option?” I said well, 30 days that's not very long, make it $20.00. Sounds fine. So, I thought, these guys are pretty serious, we stopped and got a fish sandwich at a local restaurant here and these guys said we had a deal. And I thought I should have something signed, so I said do you want to stop by my lawyer and draw up an option? The guy driving the car said well I have a lawyer. He said do you have a typewriter? I was operating out of my house. I said, Yes, I have a typewriter. So we drove out to my house, and it was a very hot that day. Donna sat them down at the dining room table and Donna brought the typewriter out of my office. Along with carbon paper and he sat there and typed. It said for 15  one dollars and good and valuable consideration we option this here and it had to meet some bounds and description, etc. etc. etc. And then, he said I'm going to make this with him personally, and you. Then George Flynn signed it, I signed it, he reached into his billfold, he gave me a $20 bill. It was a Friday about 1:30 and they were in a hurry, they had a flight to catch out of Lambert. He said, I better give you my home phone number in case you need to get a hold of me. He wrote on there Pennington, New Jersey and his home phone, so I knew that he was golden. They left my house and that evening I'd finished eating dinner and I was back in my office and I was looking at that piece of paper and I was mystified. These guys really seemed very astute and professional, so, curiosity got the best of me. I called him. Person to person. Remember person to person calls? SH: Yes, I do. I do. RK: I knew he wasn't at home, he was in the air. I called and his teenage daughter answered. I asked personally for Mr. George Flynn, she said well he's not here. And then the operator kept the line open and I said is this the Mr. Flynn who is associated with the Weyerhauser Lumber Company? I just picked a big corporate name and a name I knew because I was buying laminated beams from them. She said “no, he's not with the Weyerhauser Lumber Company, and I said well what company is he with? She said well he's with the Wall Street Journal. I said thank you operator, I got the wrong number. They weren't gone from my house three hours... SH: [laughter] RK: Those guys, as they explained to me, that they were with a national printing company, and that they had sent a team out here, they wanted to be less than 30 minutes driving time of the downtown St. Louis Post Office. That was their criteria. And they had had a team of underlings go from St. Louis west, a month ago, and those guys struck out. The two guys that came to Highland were high up in the food chain, and these guys, as they told me had started going up Route 3 and got up as far as Alton, and as they approached Route 3 in Alton, the first six buildings they saw was the United Steel Workers office, the United Paper Workers headquarters, the United Glass Workers, and they said this is too union-oriented a town, so they found their way to Edwardsville, and they spent all the next day in Edwardsville, and all of the land that was available was owned by Albert Cassens. And they told me Mr. Cassens has an overinflated idea on what his land was worth. Then, George Flynn, who grew up on the Wabash River down here, a little town, had gone to U of I and he said I have a cousin that teaches school in a little town called Highland, Illinois, Francis Ragsdale, and she speaks so glowingly about the little town of Highland around there. So they looked on their map, they were in Edwardsville, and they see it's not far, so they came over and saw the City Manager at 4 pm that day, and it's because of that lady that the Wall Street Journal came to Highland. SH: [laughter] That's interesting. That is fascinating and, and it is interesting that that they uh, fate turns on little things sometimes, doesn't it? Wow. RK: So then, within 30 days they closed on the property. SH: Did they call, did they call you? RK: Yes, there was an article in the Wall Street Journal that they were going to be building a printing 16  plant in Highland, Illinois, and the Wall Street Journal, you know here in Highland you didn't get it until noon, but in Chicago it was eight o’clock in the morning, and there’s a little paragraph, they're building it in Highland, Illinois, and one of my business colleagues, his friend from Chicago called to congratulate him for that and, he said how in the hell, he didn't know anything about it. Once I had that option from the Wall Street Journal, I then approached the farmer that owned the land next to them, when I was pretty certain that we were going to do it. I got an option for the 40 acres next door and I couldn't cover it, so I went to my banker and said I'd like to get a loan on that if this goes through and he says these are $600 an acre! And I said well I've got an option I think they're going to go through with it with a company that's paying fifteen hundred! He said, “Oh, I'll cover you”. Once the story came out in the Wall Street Journal that they were building a printing plant in Highland, I had an excuse to call them. I called Mr. Flynn and he said Yeah Ralph, but I'd appreciate it if you'd keep it in confidence, because we've got a lot of international union things we want to solve before they read about it in the paper. Then he said, could you recommend an architect and, I said yes, here’s one, they took my architect and they didn't even ask about putting it out for bids. It was a given, they trust me. When I called him then, I called that home phone number, he wife said he's in New York, here's his phone number in New York. That number was for Dow Jones and Company, and then I said Mr. Flynn, they put me right through to him, he said we need to hurry, we only have 30 days, because their option was for 30 days. And this wasn't at the end of 30 days, this was a week into it and he said we have to hurry, because it was laid out in streets, sewers, and alleys and I had to get all of that vacated. It was almost too good to be true but it was just plain falling out of bed dumb luck. SH: [laughter] RK: And if Albert Cassens would have had a Ralph Korte in Edwardsville that building would have been in Edwardsville. SH: Well, it's not all damn luck I mean... RK: [laughter] SH: ... there's, there's a lot of uh, uh personal relationship and skill involved in there that that made that. RK: But again that was 1966, I was in my sixth year of college and again my business degree just built on my confidence. SH: Yeah. You've been a great friend of the, of the university over the, over the years and, and you really helped it grow. Um, and, and I just want, want you to know how much we all really appreciate that and... RK: Now, what was it, how long, what time did you arrive there? SH: Uh, I arrived in in in '84, and... RK: Where did you come from? SH: Uh, well I grew up in Kankakee, got my PhD from University of Illinois in Chicago, and worked at the Newberry Library in Chicago then, we went down and were at Georgia Southern University before 17  coming up here, in '84. RK: And what were your duties here? How did you become the interim chancellor at that time? SH: [laughter] Dumb luck. [laughter] Uh, I was, well let's see, I worked my way up to being graduate dean and associate provost for research and, I did that for about 12 years, I, I dis, I left that in 2012 and wanted to return to the faculty to teach, ‘cause I love history SH: ...and um, so I taught for a year and a half, that was how I was going to end my career then and, and then I retired in 2014. In 2015, Chancellor Furst-Bowe asked me if I would be interim dean of arts and sciences and I took over, I came back and did that for about nine months and in the meantime she then left, and Randy Dunn asked me to be interim chancellor then and uh, for, for the year, and I decided, yes, I would take that opportunity [laughter] RK: How long were you interim chancellor? Just... SH: J-just a year, and I, I toyed with the idea of, of going for the job, permanently, but I knew the university needed somebody that was going to give them five to seven years, it was a real commitment and, you know, I was, I was uh, 68 years old... and I, and I didn't want, I just...I just didn't think I had the energy 'cause it takes an awful lot of energy at that, to be the chancellor, but you've worked with some great chancellors, David Werner RK: Oh, yes SH: ... and Vaughn Vandegrift... RK: Yes Earl.Lazerson SH: ... Earl Lazerson. Yeah. RK: Earl and I built the soccer stadium out there, and I still remember Earl, well, shouldn’t record, but I guess you can wipe this out but, Earl, we were doing a fundraiser to raise money for the soccer stadium, and I gave a talk. We were in the ballroom, and as a rah rah rah I tried to elicit support. After my speech was over, as I walked down the stairs, Earl said, Ralph if I was ever in the battle, I'd want to be in the foxhole with you. SH: [laughter] RK: [laughter] And it was unusual coming from him because I don't think he had any military experience, by every indication, and I was just coming off the stage. Earl was a leader. SH: Yes. Yes. SH: ... and you did the leadership council with Earl, didn't you? RK: Yes 18  SH: You were help... RK: Yes SH: ...one of the founding... RK: Yes. I was... SH: ...uh, forces in the leadership council RK: ...There wouldn't be a leadership council if not for Earl Lazerson, Carl Mathias, and myself. Earl was a driver. It came about due a meeting with St. Louis Chamber of Commerce, at a groundbreaking ceremony, I believe it was Jim O'Flynn, that said to Carl Mathias and I at the groundbreaking of Precoat Metals in Granite City. Jim Flynn said “you know that RCJ in St. Louis would give fifty thousand dollars to start something in Illinois. A leadership council. I said the only way it would work would be in disparate communities of Alton to Belleville and Collinsville, and asked where would we headquarter? I said the only place that is neutral ground that everybody on the east side might embrace is if it was anchored at SIUE, and that was before SIUE had even annexed into the city of Edwardsville. I said I think everybody would look at that as neutral grounds. And then Carl and I went to Earl Lazerson and told him of the idea, and he says, well let me think about it. Because Earl didn't jump into stuff, and it was maybe 30 to 60 days, he called a meeting and collectively said who should be there, the first executive director was headquartered there and the office was there and Illinois Power paid the staff. SH: Was the first... RK: ...think of the young guy... SH: ...that, that first executive director. RK: ...He was assistant, but then after about a year then we hired someone. and that third floor, that was Mary Kane. SH: Mary Kane. RK: Yes SH: Yeah. Well the, the leadership council has done a lot for the area that... RK: Absolutely SH: ...they um, um... RK: Wouldn't be there. SH: ...the levees and, Scott Air Force Base... RK: ...wouldn't be there... 19  SH: ...list goes on RK: ...if I would not have been at that dedication of Precoat metals the Leadership Council and some of the future progress in the area would not have happened. Carl Mathias was head of Illinois Power in this region. But it's been a fun ride. SH: Yeah RK: But, hey, I want to thank you, still remember having breakfast with you there in Edwardsville... SH: [laughter] RK: ...and you said would you move half a million of that and I said well, if you get the blessing from the business school because I don't wanna be an Indian giver, and the dean was leaving... SH: Yeah RK: ...he says heck I don’t care, my heart was more with construction so it... SH: So have you been, did you go to the dedication of the addition? RK: Oh, yes SH: Yeah. That's great. RK: It's a great building. SH: Yeah, it's nice, isn't it? Yeah. Yeah. You all, you got us started by letting us move that five hundred thousand dollars. RK: [laughter] Yeah. [laughter] SH: You've done a lot. RK: Yep SH: Well, I thank you Ralph... 20 
MadisonCounty;Roland Harris;1927;2016;Roland Harris - 1927 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Roland Harris Oral History Interview Jeffrey Edison, Interviewer Highland, Illinois October 15, 2016 Editor’s Note: This transcript was revised by Roland Harris and the text varies slightly from the original audio recording. Jeffrey Edison (JE): This is Jeffrey Edison, and I am interviewing Roland Harris in Highland, Illinois at the Highland Home. So Mr. Harris, where are you from? Roland Harris (RH): I am from the little city of Alhambra, just fifteen miles north of here. JE: How long were you living in Alhambra? RH: Well, until I got married in 1947. My residency was there, but I was actually working in Edwardsville at the Schneider Funeral Home from April of 1946 until we got married on June 17th of 1947. I would go home on weekends or my days off. JE: What was it like growing up in Alhambra? RH: [laughs] Well, it was small town. Only about 350 population. I think that's about what it was when I was growing up, we had our own schoolhouse. A nice big schoolhouse that had been built in the middle 20s and was four rooms then they fixed out half the basement and started a high school in the basement of the building. The other half was where they actually practiced basketball, uh, when it was winter. Other than that we practiced on a clay court outside. We had softball, baseball, basketball, and tennis. Those were the four sports that the boys had and the girls had a of couple sports. I went through my junior year at Alhambra and then in 1942-‘43 I came here to Highland and went senior year here at Highland. So, it was a small town atmosphere, you knew everybody and everybody knew everything about everybody else. JE: So what, what did you do for fun while living there? RH: I played at all sports from the time I was in 6th grade I was on the basketball and softball teams. Went all the way through 3 years of high school there, did one year of boxing, but I found that have a nose that bleeds very easily, I would always wind up with a bloody nose and so that took care of my boxing career. One year was enough. We played at an old barn that was just next to our house that was called a livery stable. It had the two wagons that the rural mail carriers would use and the man had the horses that he rented to the rural mail carriers so they could go out when the roads were impassible with a car. They would still take the old wagon and go with it. I know the one gentleman that left Alhambra at 9:00 o’clock in the morning and got home at 9:00 that night. That was normally is a 3 hour run. So it took 1  him 12 hours to do it that time. I don't know any other stories about that, but the old wagons were good hiding places. We played “kick the picket” if there would be three of us. We would be two against one or you know however number and they'd go hide and you could hide in the buggies sometimes or hide in the hay loft or just any place in the old barn or even you could go around the barn. You could be on the outside of the barn as long as you didn't go across the alley or across our area. So, we spent a lot of time playing kick the picket and then pickets got harder to get and so then we started playing the “kick the tin can.” So then we got into playing softball or then wiffle ball came along. That we could even play in our alley. Because even if you hit a window, unless you really hit it hard we would break a window and then everyone would have to chip in and pay for a window glass and then have the man at the lumber yard repair it for us, but we pretty well made our own games. We used to put sand in an old canvas bag. Our mothers, sewed them up and made them into bases for our softball and we would carry them around, carry the four bases, set them in place and then would play. I started roller-skating when I was about 9 or 10 and then we had Route 140 going right through Alhambra and the sidewalks were pretty good, but Route 140 was really great and there wasn't a lot of traffic in those days and you go down the opposite side of the road. The actual side they drove on so you could watch the traffic and you could get off the road. So that was the big things. Then I started dancing, my mother and dad danced a lot at the little firemen's hall we had, it was called Harmony Hall and the harmoniers sang there originally and that’s what it was started for. Then it became a little dance hall. It wasn't very big, but they danced a lot and I used to have to sit on the chair and watch them, my brother and I, and well then other people were bringing their daughters and we started dancing. I was dancing when I was 10 years old. That became a Saturday evening affair. They usually have a sponsored one dance a month at the hall and then other people would have a wedding dance or anniversary dance or something. Everybody would be invited, you know, didn't make a difference who it was, you could all come and have a good time. Usually share some cake and punch. You could always find somebody who willing to do something, and we loved to go to the tower which was just about a mile north of Alhambra. It was where the Illinois Central Railroad and the New York Central, the one that came out of Edwardsville, later called the Nickel Plate, crossed. There was a tower there where the tower man had to pull his big levers to move the tracks so they would go across or the other way. That was a favorite hangout. Our neighbor on the other side of us, on the other side of the old barn was the man that was there from 4:00 to midnight. At first. Later he got to be the day man. So we would walk with him. He would walk that mile usually and we'd walk with him and stay until it was 5:00 pm, time to head for home, sometimes we'd ride our bicycles out. That was always a big thing to watch the trains come and go and watch what was in the train. Every once and a while you’d see a hobo hanging on one of the back of the cars or inside an open car and that was always a chance that hobo would get off at the Depot and walk to our house for a meal. Mom would always feed them on our back porch. The city jail was at the other end of our block in the back towards the north. The city jail was there and the hoboes would come, it had two jail cells and they had oil cloth covered cushions that you could place on top the metal and there was little pot bellied stove and the guys would come and cook their coffee. Go out and beg for their food and then go back and eat it there. We knew most of them by name. They would come in the spring and again in the fall. The spring they would be headed north and then the fall came they would be headed south. They got off the train because there wasn't much to eat on the train and go to the tower or the depot. I got very good friends and I never had a problem with any of them because they all come to my mom's and she'd fix them a plate and they'd say we'll take it back and eat it. They would sit on the porch while she was fixing it. There was always something extra to do and our good friend ran the filling station at the other end of the block. My dad was a barber. He had his little barber shop there. In those 2  days not many of the boys got hair cuts at the barber shop. Mom and pop cut their hair. A lot of the men did get their hair cut there, but several of the older men, the banker, the postmaster, and one of our friends who was a carpenter, they would get shaved three times a week. Shaves those days was 10 cents. Hair cuts was a quarter and so there wasn't too many hair cuts because the older guys didn't need very much hair cut. It wouldn't grow too fast. My dad said we're going to have to do something because this was during the late Depression days and so he started a little insurance agency. He got the Madison County Mutual Automobile Insurance agency for our area and that really helped us out. Then he got Hartford Insurance for home insurance and it made a big difference in our lives. I'll never forget in 1936 dad bought his first new car: '36 four door sedan. Gray with red wheels. Can you imagine grey with red wheels? Well, that's what it was. The spare tire was in the back. Hung on the back because there was a small trunk, instead of putting the tire in the trunk, which would take up almost all of the room, they put the spare tire on the back. That's what we drove up to New York in 1939 to go to the New York World's Fair. The biggest thing I've ever had happen to me when I was a kid was going to the World’s Fair. My dad had a friend here in Highland, who had retired, a barber, he came up and stayed at our place for two weeks. He and his wife had lived at our place and our house and ran the barber shop while we took this two week vacation. Which was the very first vacation my father had ever taken. It was in 1939 when we went to Washington D.C. to meet the family up there that lived in Alhambra originally and we went to New York City to the fair and then went to Niagara Falls and into Canada. We went up and came back in Toronto, Canada and then into Detroit and back home. Two weeks we did all that so we was movin'. We only spent a day and a half at the fair because it was fairly expensive. Everything was expensive for us. We certainly enjoyed it. I still have my souvenirs that I purchased all along the way. We'd buy a little something. I have a little box with all of the little souvenirs from the 1939 World's Fair. Does that answer your question pretty well? JE: So you mentioned that you started school in Alhambra, but then you finished at Highland. Why did you end up going to Highland? RH: Well, Alhambra only had a three high school. All the small towns: St. Jacob, Marine, Alhambra, Worden, New Douglas, Serento, Panama, Witt, and Irving. They were all three year high schools. We had a league. We called it MBM. Madison, Bond, and Macoupin counties, and we played basketball and baseball and softball. Most of those schools didn't have tennis, but our school did have it. We played tennis against some of the schools down here in south of Highland like Trenton and some of the smaller schools down there. My brother also came here and he's two years older. He came and I visited the school. In fact by that time, my Aunt was teaching the 5th grade here. My father's youngest sister was teaching the 5th grade here so it was a big incentive to see Aunt Vi. We enjoyed the school. It was good for us. Got us going and I liked math and my brother did too. He became an accountant. I went to 6 months of college and it's called Jefferson College. It was a division of Missouri University and it was in St. Louis. I got a job on the railroad when I graduated from high school that summer. I painted all the signals on the Illinois Central Railroad from Mott, which was south of Edwardsville to almost Mount Olive. I had my own gasoline driven handcar, that rode on the railroad track and in those days we had little areas where we could pull off of and we had to watch the signals to make sure there was no trains coming or going, and we could use that track to go to these different signals. Every signal had a place for the little handcar. It was small and you could lift it up like a wheelbarrow. It had handles on each end and pull it off on the side, onto this little track. I did that because I was only 17 when I graduated from high school. I wasn't 18 until July and by October the 15th I was in the service already. I was drafted and got in 3  World War II. I was first at Fort Sheridan in Chicago and then went to Fort Sill in Oklahoma. I was in the field artillery. The field artillery needed a lot of fellas who had math too because all the calibrations on the gun was done mathematically by fellows keeping it in your head, or on paper as you were using the 105 howitzer which was what I was in. I was an acting corporal during my first 16 weeks and then I was able to go cathry school. It was school to be what we called a non-commissioned officer and when I graduated from that after 16 weeks I became a corporal. Then I taught 105 howitzer and gymnastics. After 16 weeks as a corporal, the next 16 weeks of training for the recruits, I was sergeant. At the end of that 16 weeks, I took those fellas that were in my unit overseas with us. We went to Fort Ord California and then over to San Francisco. Got on a boat and we were waiting for a convoy so we sat off of Hawaii. We could see Hawaii off to the north, but we never did get there. We sat there for 5 days just going around in circles waiting for the convoy to take shape. Then we had 32 ships when we finally got all together. Went from there to New Caledonia which is an island between Australia and New Zealand. It makes a little triangle and we picked up the outfit we were going to be assigned to. We went as recruits and replacements and we were assigned to the 98th field artillery battalion, these men had been on Guadalcanal and we were replacing those that had been killed and wounded and training them on the new 105 howitzer. We left there after two months and went to Leyte in the Philippine Islands, Leyte Island. We landed in Leyte Gulf off of troop ship. We had a troop ship that had was built for 4,000 troops and instead of having 4,000 we had 8,000 troops, which meant we had to be up on deck or lower decks from 6:00 in the morning to 6:00 at night while somebody slept in our hammock down below. Then that evening we were down below from 6:00 pm to 6:00 am. I had learned to play bridge in the meantime when I was at Fort Ord. The First Sergeant said we are going to need you. I said well you got four. Well, we're going to need five because we're always going to be one in the chow line. That's exactly what happened. We laid on our bellies playing bridge under our trucks for shade. Whoever started breakfast line, he ate and got back and all four of us had eaten and it was his job to start for lunch. The four of us had eaten again. It was time for him to go to his evening meal and then we finished that. So there was always four playing bridge and you never played with the same partner because you always changed partner as you played. We played four hands and then we changed partner. You kept your own score because you were always playing somebody different. I had a little 20 page bridge book, fit in my shirt pocket. That's how big it was. Today the bridge book is 198 pages and it’s a regular paperback type book so that's how bridge has changed. There's so many new rules and we call conventions and things. And I have been teaching bridge here in Highland since 1970. 'Bout every two years I have a class, we call a beginner and an intermediate class. That's getting a little ahead of my story, but anyhow. I went in as a replacement and by the time we got there, the Japanese had pulled out of Leyte entirely. The ships couldn't get back in. There was about 2,000 Japanese soldiers still on Leyte. Around 980 of 'em actually brought out their white flags and became prisoners, but the other guys decided they weren't willing to do that. The Japanese had their own theories so they didn't. It was our job as field artillery to blast them out of these caves. We were over on the west side and we had landed on the east side. We were over by Ormoc, on the west side. There was some caves similar to the area which we still see around Collinsville. There's the bluffs they call them. That's all limestone, and that's what was there. There had been some little caves in the area. They created a big cave out of a small cave as they dug out from the inside. We got some shells right inside that cave which you couldn't see. The cave went down into the ground, but we were able to get the shell to go down into that hole and then we wiped out all of them. A lot of them by that time knew what was coming and we were moving. They could see us. We couldn't see them. They knew what was coming. A lot of them did surrender, but I don't know how many exactly we killed, but it 4  was a large number that was killed in that cave. That was the two weeks of action that we had. The rest of the time we were training L.S.T. [landing ship tanks] to go to Japan. I say the atomic bombs saved my life, then the atomic bomb was dropped, I was on my way to Manila. I had been, we had some casualties, we had one man killed in our outfit and I helped the medics with the 19 others that were wounded. My thought was when I was in school originally that I would become a funeral director and embalmer. Then in high school and in college I took aeronautical engineering. I thought I would be an aeronautical engineer. Well, that didn't happen because when I came home Curtis Wright and McDonald’s was laying off many of their engineers. They didn't need more, so I went back to being a funeral director, but let's get back to what I did after the atomic bomb was dropped. I went up to Manila and stationed at the number 1 station hospital in Manila right on the Rizal Avenue which was the main street in Manila. They put up three barracks buildings. We were living in the second floor and down below we were interviewing all the American prisoners who had been in Japan as they were bringing them back to the hospital. The first stop was Manila. They would fly them that far. Then they would come to the hospital and if they were able to walk or come in a wheelchair, they would come to us which was what I did for the first three weeks. I couldn’t sleep. The stories I heard, of the atrocities that they did to the American prisoners. Fortunately the gentleman that was with us, the first sergeant, had enough time in that he got to go home and I was able to take his place. By that time I was a staff sergeant so I took his place. I never was made the first sergeant, but I did first sergeant duty. I got to assign the fellas to do the jobs instead of actually doing the job and that was a different story entirely. I had my own jeep and every weekend, we would work just Monday thru Friday, and every weekend I could go take some of my buddies and we would go to different areas. We had buddies who were in other camps and the like and would get to go where they were and see their part of the country. We got up all the way to Subic Bay and Baguio and places that had airports. I didn't leave the Philippines until April 1st, 1946 because I was not married, the time in service, one month counted as a point and you had to have so many points before you get back and your time overseas counted as two points so it took a while for me to get enough points to get back to the United States. I had a girlfriend back here, Lorna Ritt, who I had been writing to and when I had my two furloughs, we had dates and I figured we would marry, I asked my mom and dad to bring Lorna along to meet us at Jefferson Barracks, Missouri where I was discharged on Easter Sunday of April the 21st 1946. They brought her along and on June the 17th, 1947 we got married and we'd been married 69 years. We'll be 70 years this coming June. It's been a whirlwind. I started working at the funeral home in Edwardsville on May the first, of 1946. Worked there 'til September of 1948 and then I came here to Highland and worked for Tibbett’s and Company which was a furniture store and a funeral home. In 1950, the gentleman who owned the business, Mr. Tibbetts, had a heart attack and I started managing the store for him, and then he let me start to buy. That year he let me buy 20% of the business and then by the end of the year I had 40% of the business and then I could buy 49% of the business. When he retired completely, I was able to buy 100% of the business. I kept the furniture store for a number of years and then I bought an old banker's big three story brick home. Started my funeral home over there and made a larger furniture store. I had to have a manager there, had to have a manager at the funeral home, and I was then putting out more money than I was making so I decided to stay in the funeral business. It's what I knew best and did that for the next 30 years. I retired from funeral business, a friend of mine who was our neighbor said, “Rolly, you should get into our public relations department at the bank where I work.” So I worked 14 more years in the public relations department at the First National Bank here in Highland. 5  I can't sit still as you know right now I'm starting a museum here at four rooms and hall of the original 1912 retirement home. We'll have time after a while to go up and see what's going on, but I collected what we call Highland memorabilia from 1950 I started collecting this memorabilia and when we moved here I moved 98 boxes of Highland memorabilia that I had in my basement at home. We sorted it all out and we got it down to 44 boxes. It's all in alphabetical order A, B, C, on down and all the little towns around us have a box. So we're starting to fill up the first room. We have four rooms upstairs in the old part of the home that was built in 1912. In 1912, when the home was built, it was 14 rooms downstairs with a men's bathroom on the south end of the building and the ladies bathroom at the north end of this big building, and a long hallway. And then the same thing up on the second floor. So it housed 28 people and each one had their own room, a closet, and a window, and a door going out into the hallway. That was about it. One bath tub, one basin, one stool in the men's room. Same thing in the ladies room. When I was asked to come on the board here, in 1956, be a member of the board. There were 10 people on the board and one of the first things I started to talk to them about was putting on some additions onto to this building, and we're in that first addition. The first addition went north out of the basement of the home. The quarters are on a hill and this is coming out of that hill. We would have had to put a really big, big area filled in here so instead we used it as the quarters themselves. We have two more wings we made out. One goes to the west and one southwest. So right now we have 28 rooms in use. We have 5 or 6 rooms that are not in use, but we have 3 people that are coming in so we'll be in pretty good shape again. We love it here. We've been here since December the 10th of last year. They took three single rooms here in this unit and made one big apartment out of it. They did this last year and when they started doing it, we had talked, we had been here two years before that, and in those days they just had a two room apartment. The wife and I figured it was just too small for us. So when they started making the two three rooms apartments out of these single rooms, we were told what they were doing and we came up right away and looked to see what they were doing. That was in October. By the time they got it all ready, we moved in on the 10th of December. We really love it here. Our meals are furnished, the food is great, we have good cooks, we have people here in the building 24 hours a day. They do our own cleaning of our room, they change our bed once a week. They do our washing and ironing. Washing and ironing. Yes, they do a great job. The people here that work here are just dedicated to the Highland senior citizens and they do a wonderful job for us. Couldn't be better. I didn't think I'd say that. We built our own house 23 years ago and we said that's where we are going to stay, but the wife broke her left ankle three times and the last time also tore the ligament and so standing is a thing she can't do. There's too much standing at home cooking, ironing, and washing so she does very well here now. What else do you need? JE: So you mentioned that you started the museum part of this home. RH: Yes. JE: What interests you about Highland history and, like, Madison County history? RH: Well, history was my second favorite class in, mathematics was the first and history was the second. Being in World War II like I was, we had so much interaction with the other people which was history and I started a Highland Historical Society in 1971 here in Highland and I was the first president. Six of us started it. Within a year we had 200 members. We tried to save the old Swiss residents farm was built just north of Highland in 1832-1833. It had needed a new roof and we got that on the east side. The west side we had it half on and we did that in the first year we had it, and we had the new roof on half the 6  opening was on the west side and on December 14th, 1971 there was a tornado here in Highland and it just took the east section and took it almost 200 feet. Almost up to the house of the farm. Took the west section of that roof and threw it about 30 feet to the west. Can you imagine? One went to the east. One section went to the west. Turned the barn a foot and a half on its foundation, so we couldn't save it anymore. And so we thought that ended the historical society, but it didn't. We got other projects going. We redid the chapel out at the cemetery. We were then given Latzer homestead. Louis Latzer was the founder of the Pet Milk Company that was here in Highland. It started here in Highland in 1885. The Pet Milk Company in 1977 gave us his home and farm 40 acres of ground. We have what we call Harvest Day still out there. We have steam engines come and old cars, old tractors, and we have it three days Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, the second weekend in September. We make enough money to take care of the buildings and with the income from that we're able to take care of this farm. Then we were also given the old stage coach stop which is an old brick building. We fixed it all up and that's a historical society museum. I gave a lot of things to them when they started and it is full. There is not room for anything else so that's the reason we started this museum here. I had these 98 boxes which are now 44 boxes. Which we're gone from, we're in the O's right now. We're going through the O's through Z's boxes because that's the room that's ready. It's the furthest one to the south so we're starting there. We'll have four rooms, plus the hallway which is the entire length of the building. The hall is going to be an art museum and then the north end of that building is going to be, we're calling the North farm room building. We started out asking for centennial farms, but we found out that there aren't that many centennial farms in the area. There's even a couple sesquicentennial farms in the area. We're asking anybody in the area that wants to put in a picture, if they'll frame them, we'll put them up. I have nine other people who've said they're going to bring things. I have 18 other people who have already brought things for us to put in there. SO we're going to be fairly close to saying, hold off until we get these all up to see if we're going to have more room. So it's a work in progress. We started this in April and we were are well in October and we're just starting to put memorabilia on the shelves. All the shelving that I had at home, I brought up here. The men who work here, are putting plexiglass in frames in front of these shelves now, and then with doors so we can get into them. So it's going to be really nice when we get it all done. My wife used to call it my Highland junk. Now she definitely calls it my Highland memorabilia. Lorna worked with the box company here in Highland for over 20 years. She was the first computer operator they had. She was on the computer the rest of the time. So, she has her own computer and her own iPad. Now we bought another little computer for the museum. She has 1400 and some odd things already entered on the computer, and tells who gave it, if somebody gave it, other than myself, because when I had the funeral home, I had big cabinets filled up there in the one room. And people started bringing memorabilia in. I had a booklet. I had over a hundred names in that book of people who had brought things in. So we're listing their name on the item that they brought in. So it's going to be a lot of grandchildren, who had never seen the items that grandma or grandpa gave or their dad and mom gave, and we're going to have it on display and it's going to show their number and their name on the item. So it's going to create a lot of activity. The schools, I know both of the history teachers at St. Paul and Highland and at the middle school. They're going to have their classes come whenever it's ready. It will be next year. Not this year anymore, but that's what we're planning on doing. One of my hobbies besides collecting all this Highland junk was, I took up art, yes oil painting in 1990 when I retired. I figured I needed a hobby, which I really didn't, but I took up art and I've painted little over a hundred pictures in the years. And now, I'm basically painting our son's homes on canvas and now I'm painting our grandchildren's home on canvas. I really enjoy that. I have several of my pictures are up here in the art 7  museum because I painted and I spent a lot of time out at Silver Lake painting scenes out there. I've got two of those in the museum up there. And also, the one of the old barn that we tried to save. What else you need to know? JE: I'm interested in, like, what are your favorite parts of history for Highland and this side of Madison County? What enjoy most learning about Highland? RH: Well, the Latzer Homestead is a big 12 room house frame sitting just a mile and a half outside of town. He was a farmer, he was a milker and so when they started with the idea of starting a milk factory here, he was all for it. He became one of the directors, one of ten directors. He had gone to McKendree College in Lebanon, one year, and took up chemistry. His father returned to Europe and didn't come back. He just went over to visit, but never returned. Louis had to quit college and come back and run the farm. He had a younger brother he was four years younger and so he was still in high school. And so, he came back to run the farm. He kept on milking. The original barn is still out there. The house, the original house sat right beside the barn. Which was the Swiss-German way of doing things. The house and barn were very close. With bad weather, you didn't have so far to go. They only had about, I would say about 14 or 15 feet from the barn to the house. So they didn't get very wet or they didn't get much snow to get to the barn. That original barn is still there. The original barn has a big hay loft and the big hay loft was used, for many things. I'll tell you the greatest what it was used for. It was used to house the miniature Pet Milk factory. There was a miniature of the Greenville, Illinois plant built in 1941. They built it all out of stainless steel and what they called graniteware which is a metal with porcelain over the top and that unit weighs 3 ton. That would be 6,000 pounds. It was 26 foot long and 8 foot high. It has motors and pumps and everything in it to make the thing work. That all was stored in that hay loft of that red barn. After 1987, Highland had its sesquicentennial, the Pet Milk Company stored the miniature in the red barn. They had it on display in 1987 at the exhibition hall here in Highland. Then when they took it down and put it back in 17 wooden crates, they had no place to go with it. We offered them, they could have the hay loft if they would distribute it along the hay loft over the whole hay loft. Not stack it, but put it one layer high. They did. Then Pet Milk was sold to a new owner that didn't really know anything about this being in the hay loft. So we wrote to the new owner, asked them what we should do with this miniature Pet Milk factory that we had. They said they knew nothing about it and we should write and tell them about it. They would give some ideas. So it was in crates, took pictures of the crates, sent it to them. They said, well you have it, you own it if you'll take it. We said we'll take care of it. So we took the old pole barn. Took 1/4 of the pole barn and made it the area of the Pet Milk factory. Two local men were very good mechanics, set it all up and got it all running, had to new belts and pulleys, and everything on it. They did all that. This year, was the 19th year that we had it up and running. So we'll be celebrating our 20th year of the miniature factory running. And uh, it's a sight to be, all 32nd gauge, like railroads called 30 second scale. Everything in. Even all the little men that were standing around doing the different things, we still have. They've had to be new clothes put on, but they took the old clothes and made clothes exactly the same or as close as we could get as the same type of material so it’s something to see. That's one of my jobs that Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, I and Bill Alexander give tours of the miniature museum. It's a half hour tour. Bill Alexander, one of the other men, and Jim Gifford who now is here at the building management. He was the other man who restored it. They start up the factory every year and have it running, Bill Alexander and myself we take turns. If I talk 20 minutes I need to rest a little bit so, we do that from 10 in the morning to 3 in the afternoon. So, it gets to be a big job. 8  JE: So, one more question for you. So, I read that you do some articles on the Highland News Leader. RH: Oh yes. JE: So what caught your interest in doing history articles for the Highland News Leader? RH: Well, that has a story all on its own. Julius Spindler who was the President of the Farmers and Merchants Bank during World War II, his secretary wrote letters, to all the servicemen who would write them a letter. He put in the paper, you write me a letter, tell me where you are, give me your address, and we'll send you a letter. Well then, the newspaper decided that that would be a good thing to put these letters in the News Leader, the paper I write for today. They would put a whole page of the paper for him to put his letters in. Well, that got to be good advertisement for the Farmers and Merchant's Bank, but also for the newspaper and great advertisement for the people who were overseas. Other people didn't even know they were overseas. All while the war was going on, he was getting these letters. And he was writing in a column to go with it. He would have a little column in the paper. It was something about Highland. He retires and moves out to California and he's Dale Carnegie teacher out there in California, and actually becomes the state of California chairman for Dale Carnegie. When he retires again, he comes back to Highland. We had played bridge with them when they came back. We were sitting there one evening playing bridge and he said, "Rollie, I got something for you. I said,” He said, "You're going to start writing a column in the paper. I talked to the News Leader and they're willing to do it. He said you gotta take up all these Highland stuff. I said, “Well, my great great great grandfather was here before the Swiss so I guess I'm really capable of taking on this job.” He said, “Yeah, your grandpa, great great grandpa, James Reynolds had a farm out here. The Swiss had their first meal with him.” I said, “Yup, that's right.” That's the way it came down to me from my aunt Alberta Harris Mabold who was the genealogist of our family. I said, “I've always been interested in that." He said, "You gotta start writing." So that's what I did. This is, I think, my 23rd or 24th year that I've been writing articles for the News Leader about Highland history. And I'm only up to World War I right now in all the writings. I started out in the early 1800s. 1804 when the first people came to the area, and then when my great, great, great grandfather came in 1818 when Illinois was made a state, he came to this area, but then he settled first around St. Jacob and then he bought this farm in what we call Saline Township. He had 160 acres which in those days was a tremendous big farm. Most the people had 40 acres and they had a hard time taking care of that, but he had two grown sons and two grown daughters. The sons and daughters all built homes around the area. They actually did the farming. He did the butchering and the things like that, but they did most of the farming. He, his wife, and one daughter fed the party of 15 Swiss who came to Highland October the 15th of 1831. They had their noon meal with Reynolds family. I always enjoyed history and genealogy and I had aunt Alberta and her husband, who were both from Marine, her husband was the postmaster there, got me interested in our family history. She had all the things on the Blakemen side and also the Reynolds side. The Blakemens came here from England and came right to Marine. They were the ones, he was a sea captain, and he was actually one of the three men who started Marine Settlement. They were mariners so they called the little town Marine. They started what was called Marine settlement in 1819. Then the town of Marine was started about a mile and a half north of that. It was a better area than the area they had. In 1818, Illinois became a state and that's when they could start selling land, but there was people who lived here before that. Well those people got the first chance to buy. So the Blakemans when they came and the other sea captains that came could only buy little pieces here and there so of like a patchwork quilt. The area that was around Marine had already been purchased and so even though it 9  was a little better they bought his area south of Marine. Marine cemetery that's on Marine-St. Jacob road is where he gave the Blakeman's, my great-great-great grandfather, three greats again, gave the land for the Union Church and cemetery which was next, south of his farm on the Marine St. Jacob road. I do have ties from 1819 to 1830, they settled here and Reynolds settled here in 1830. So, I guess I'm almost a Highland Native, you could say. JE: Well thank you very much for your time today. It was very thoughtful and I appreciate you talking to me. Thank you. RH: My pleasure. 10 
MadisonCounty;Ed Hightower;1949;2017;Ed Hightower 1949 - 2017  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Ed Hightower Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer Mannie Jackson Center for the Humanities Edwardsville, Illinois September 28, 2017 Steve Hansen (SH): I'm Steve Hansen and we're talking with Ed Hightower. Today is September the 28th 2017. Thanks, Ed. It almost makes it sound like a radio interview doesn't it? [chuckles.] Ah, you've had a major impact on life in Madison County  culturally economically, educationally, politically, and so I'd like to hear from you a little bit about your life first tell us about growing up and where you grew up, and some of the challenges you faced. Ed Hightower (EH): Well see I've been very fortunate I grew up in Southeast Missouri the Bootheel around Hayti, Missouri that's headed south toward Memphis, Tennessee right off Interstate 55. Worked in the cotton fields picked cotton, chopped cotton, it's hard to believe that after so many years individuals would think that I was born in that type of a culture. But...my... SH: Were your parent's farmers? I'm sorry to interrupt EH: Yes. My parents were farmers worked in the cotton fields and so on, there were 8 siblings, 6 boys 2 girls and I'm the second oldest of 8. My parents divorced when I was 14 years old. I'm sorry when I was 12 years old. And, it was a very devastating time for my family growing up, no father in the household, and in 1996, I'm sorry, 76, my parents my mom migrated to Alton, Illinois because of the booming industrial age there was Olin, glassworks, steel mill, you know, Alton was a major industrial town and so my mom went to work there and ah 1966, and we were very fortunate to have the type of income from my mom's work that allowed us to go on and get an education again, 8 children. SH: Now where did she work? Do you remember? EH: She worked at Olin. SH: At Olin? EH: At Olin. And in 1970, I graduated from Alton High School, of course, I was a pretty decent athlete, along with my 5 brothers and I went to SIUE on a basketball scholarship and of course wanted to go into teaching, was fortunate enough to graduate from SIU in 1974 with a bachelor's in education. Went back to my hometown of Alton, and was hired there and the rest is history. I began to move through the ranks of teacher, assistant principal, principal, then assistant superintendent of the Alton School District. In 1996, I was offered a contract to become the superintendent of the Edwardsville School District. SH: I'm sorry, what year again was that? 1  EH: In 1996. SH: 1996, okay. EH: And if I may add at SIUE I received my bachelor's, my masters, and specialist degrees all from SIUE. In 1997, I received my Doctorate of Education from Saint Louis University. I spent 19 years as Superintendent of the Edwardsville School District. Another avocation that I was fortunate enough to get involved in was NCAA Basketball. While attending SIUE from 1970- 1974, you know, being a poor kid, not having the resources that many of the other young people was blessed with, I started refereeing intramural basketball at SIUE in the old bubble gym. [chuckles] And I worked intramural basketball and was paid $1.25 per game. And people often ask me "Well gosh, Ed, you know, you were very fortunate to be one of the top referees in the country represented the United States at international competition, how did it all happen?" And I share with people if you can referee intramural basketball with some of those former athletes and some of those wannabes and get threatened [both laugh] then certainly then you can endure that it sets you up to move on and do whatever you want to do. But, upon graduating from SIU, in 1974, my wife and I were married and I needed to continue finding some form of income along with my teaching so I continued refereeing open center league basketball, so I got a pay raise I went from a $1.25 per game to $5.00 a game. And I would referee 4 games three times a week and I thought guys that was just wonderful. I then was fortunate enough to get my Illinois High School license to become a high school referee started refereeing high school basketball in 1976, and from that point, it all evolved. In 1981, I was added to the Big 10 staff and I spent 33 years in the Big 10 and 36 years refereeing NCAA college basketball. During that time, I worked 12 Final Fours, I was fortunate enough to represent the United States at international competitions such as The World Games in Buenos Aires, Argentina, I represented the United States at the Goodwill Games in Saint Petersburg, Russia, and then I was the runner-up at the Olympics Salt Lake City, Olympics and you know, who would have dreamt that a country boy working in the cotton fields back in the early 60s would evolve and grow up and have the type of career that I’ve been fortunate enough to be part of? And then from that point, I, someone saw something in me, and I when I was at SIU, I had one of my biggest supporters were Chancellor Earl Lazerson and Earl Lazerson took me under his wings put me on various committees as a student at SIU, and that helped to kind of move me into that area. Particularly my love for SIUE you know, guy shows on various committees, the foundation, and then it all evolved to becoming a Board of Trustee member for 12 years and at the same time I was on the Lewis and Clark Board of Trustees so giving something back to this area has always been what the fabric that I was made of  my mom taught all of we children that it's not what we received but what we're able to give back that makes all of the difference. And volunteerism, making a difference, giving opportunities to other people, she made it clear that that's how we work out our soul salvation, and if you can believe that, and that's been my life, so, I've been very fortunate. SH: Well, you've lived quite a remarkable life. If we could go back a little bit, tell me about some of the challenges you faced when you were Superintendent at Alton? EH: Well, when I was assistant superintendent in Alton as a young person growing up, again, the old saying that it's difficult at times to really advance in your hometown, it's difficult that's about a true of a statement as could be. But I was fortunate enough to have some great support from the community as my family had been part of the Alton community and again 8 children, 6 boys who were all athletes, my mom was very involved in the community and we were made to go to church, and get involved in the community, so, we were well respected and well received in the Alton community. 2  SH: Was Alton very segregated in those days? EH: Well no, Alton was integrated when I moved there okay, but again, things were starting to open up as far as African Americans having an opportunity to advance up through the ranks at that time. So I did not hit the real segregated movement when as I moved to Alton but I have to say to you when I was in the South, that's when I in the early 60s when I experienced it. I was one of the first group of students to be integrated into an all-white school. They closed our African American school, I was in 4th grade at that time and they moved us to about 20 miles about 15 miles from our home. And we were bussed there and certainly moving into an all-white school, it was difficult. I was a good student and I tell the story on a regular basis that one of the challenges was to be treated as an equal in a fair equitable way. I could remember so vividly when I was in 5th grade, I was a very good student by the way, and I wanted to be a patrol a safety patrol. And one of the things that you had to have was very good grades, no disciplinary issues, and I wanted that orange belt, you know? Remember those [inaudible chuckles] walk around. Well, all of a sudden, my teacher recommended me to the principal, there were probably about 10 of us, and I was the only African American recommended, and he did not select me to be a patrol. Okay. And, I'm in the classroom with about 4 other kids that were selected and there was no way that their grades were as good as mine. Well, I was devastated. I was devastated. And I went home and I told my mom, and my mom's position was simple. It would have been nice if you would have had an opportunity to be a patrol. But I don't send you to school to be a patrol. I send you to school to get an education. I don't want to hear how disappointed and upset you are. Life is full of disappointments and setbacks and it's all about you getting that education so that someday you will be able to get to a position where you can help other people. I mean it was as stern of a lecture as I could receive. And I think I just reiterated how she said it [chuckles] and that always stuck with me. There are going to be setbacks. You're not going to get what you always want in life, but the key thing is, you keep your eye on the prize or your eyes on the prize, don't lose your focus, and you keep working hard. And, I tell young people that - I've told young people that over the years and I and I tell - I've told my told my two daughters, my wife and I, Barbara, we will have been married this November 2nd, 43 years. We have two daughters, both successful, our oldest daughter, Julie, lives in Chicago, pharmaceutical salesperson, and then she has a social media site called "A Better Day With Julie" giving back to people, and making life better for them. Our youngest daughter, Jennifer, she's an associate Madison County Judge, and we've told them the same thing, and my wife comes from a big family as well. 17 children, graduate of Alton High School and graduate of SIUE. So we tell those stories that we have a lot in common, but more importantly, you know, my contributions to Madison County have been few, and they have been no more than what other individuals who wanted to see this area improve and grow give back to mankind. And that's what this is all about as I see what I've done, been a lot of people helped me along the way, and my goal has been to be in a position to help other people. SH: Well, you've done - you've helped a lot of people in our area. And you had a remarkable career. When you were Superintendent in Alton, what are some of the big issues...? EH: Assistant Superintendent in Alton  I was Assistant Superintendent in Alton, and Superintendent here in Edwardsville. SH: And when you came to Edwardsville, in 96? EH: 1996. 3  SH: Okay, what are some of the let's go back to Alton, when you were Assistant Superintendent there, what were some of the big issues you dealt with in the Alton School District. EH: Well I was the first African American, Assistant Superintendent in Alton, the title there was a couple of African Americans that were Assistant to the Superintendent, but I was the first African American Assistant Superintendent and you know, challenges there's always come into form of having a very clear focus of what you want to accomplish and my challenge was curriculum, making sure that when you have 35% poverty, 35% poverty level, that those young people are being treated equitably, and have excellent teachers and make sure that the resources are available to them. So those are some of the challenges, but more importantly when I became Superintendent of Edwardsville, in 1996, it was funny, I was the first African American Superintendent here in Edwardsville, and one of our pioneers of the Edwardsville community, Bob Wetzel, the Bank of Edwardsville, Bob Wetzel was Caucasian, was like a father figure to me, and Bob had taken me under his wings even before I moved to this area, and when Bob Wetzel called me and said "Ed, I would like to come over to Alton and talk to you, on both a personal and professional level." And I did not know what it was, he would not share with me on the phone what it was about, came over and he said: "Ed, we have an opening for our next superintendent. And I would like for you to consider our position." Well, at that time, I was headed to the state in 1996 to be the Assistant State Superintendent. SH: For Illinois State Board of Education? EH: For The Illinois State Board of Education in 1996 when I took the job here in Edwardsville, I had a contract the State Superintendent was Joe Spatnola, and Joe had offered me a contract to be his number 1 assistant for the whole state of Illinois. So when Bob came over met with me, he said "Ed, I'll make it quick, some of we business leaders would like for you to be our Superintendent. Would you give consideration to that?" So I looked at Bob, and I said: "Bob, is Edwardsville really ready for a black superintendent?" And only Bob Wetzel, only Bob Wetzel he didn't even pause he said: "No. Edwardsville is not ready for a black superintendent, but Ed Edwardsville is ready for a superintendent who happens to be a black leader." One of the most profound statements ever made to me, and he said "If you come to Edwardsville, the business leaders will get behind you, because we want to develop this community, we are at the crossroads." And then from that point, one of my closest friends, two of my closest friends were on the school board, Jim Special was president of the school board, and Sandra Hudson was also on the school board, they hired me and from that point we began to change the course and direction of the Edwardsville School District. We grew from 5,000 students to 7,600 by the time I left in 2015. We became one of the top school districts athletically, academically, with performing arts, in the state. I oversaw close to $160 million dollars in new construction. We changed the infrastructure, roads, we gave Lewis and Clark a presence here by partnering with Lewis and Clark to build the N.O. Nelson Campus, okay. Politically, I was tied in very strongly in Springfield and we were able to get a lot of resources to this area. And by being on the Board of Trustees with SIU, and having a great relationship with legislators in all, we were able to get things done for this area that would not have been done otherwise. You know, did everybody except me? No. As the so called first African American superintendent, no. There was a "wait and see," okay? But I have to say there was never to my face direct racism directed at me. And I will tell you why I would say that. I work long hours okay, I was in the community I was in Worden, all white community, I was in Hamel - an all-white community I made myself visible, accessible, and responsive to the needs of the citizens. And I was able to bring resources to this area so even my critics and there were critics, don't think for one second everybody loved Ed Hightower-- no, that's not and indirectly I would be naive to think that some racism didn't exist. But, the preponderance of people looked at me as a change agent, an individual who could get things done, and were willing to get 4  behind their leader for the good of this area. And, see that's gratification that I've received from all of this, and as I go around and talk to various communities about change in the culture, changing the direction this is what I say to them: "You have to work smart, you have to work harder, you have to be responsive, you have to be there when the lights are out." And I made it clear: 7 days a week, 24 hours a day you could call me, and you would get a response. SH: Well, you changed the culture and the direction of Edwardsville School District and also you were involved in changing the culture and direction of SIUE. We grew from a small regional commuter institution and into regionally a nationally recognized and you're on the Trustees for that and you helped changed the culture for there as well. 28:52 EH: We did and I was very fortunate, I was very very fortunate we had a great leader, we had a great leader in Glenn Poshard, great leader and Glen started on the board as a board of trustee, we had John Simmons and we had some other trustees that were outstanding as well but Roger Tedrick, Mark Hinrichs, Steve Wilkerton, we came on board and our goal was to take SIUE to the next level. And that was the key because where we're located, academically, SIUE has always been a great institution for higher learning from an academic point of view. But if we were going to attract students to SIUE, we needed to move from a commuter campus and make it a campus where students could feel the pride, the belonging, the respect, and make it more of a home for them where they could invest and reinvest in the university. That was our goal. And I tell you, I never work with a group of individuals, you just don't find a group of individuals, Steve, that walk in with the same goal. And it was not just SIUE, we did the same thing at Carbondale, we did the same thing, we fought like heck to get the pharmacy school here okay? We fought like heck when John Simmons made the major donation to the medical school. It's [inaudible] it was a unified board and then from that point, Doctor Vandergrift came on board, and we wrested we said it was critical that we hired the right person here. And from that point, we said okay we now have the campus moving forward, where students are starting to say: "I like this place." That's critical. "I want to be part of this place. I want to make this place my home. I want to reinvest." So now, what better way, we always had great performing arts, that was another key area. Then from that point, we said we have to start looking at our academic buildings, you know, if we're going to move to the next level, we have to start moving and construction to again build that pride. And, we fought ah you know some of the naysayers to move to Division 1. By moving to Division 1, we said: "We have now completed the circle." We now have campus residency  we now have nice buildings that are being retrofitted, and new buildings. Now if we add athletics, okay, the perception will be that we are a Division 1 University with research and all of the extras that go along that goes along with becoming a complete institution. And, so we – we talk about it now--we feel pretty good about some of the things that we've accomplished but it was not "a person." It certainly was Ed Hightower I was just part of what was happening in Madison County. SH: Well, with the growth with Edwardsville School District, the growth of the university all coincided with the growth of the region. Do you see, this, the whole area of Madison County has shifted from industry, like what your mother came to work in, from Olin and the steel companies, and it's now a different kind of economy. EH: Yeah. Let me talk about that just for a moment. 34:26 Bob Wetzel, he was a visionary, I asked Bob Wetzel and three other business leaders: "What do you want?" This was in 1995, okay. "What do you want?" it was in January when we started talking, in 1996, January of 1996, "What do you want Edwardsville to be?" That's the first thing. That is the first question: "What do you want the school district to be?" Let me 5  [be] clear when we define and it was clear, we are not going to be able to attract industry here, that was one  we're not going to be able to attract the large malls here. The Edwardsville School District covers 185 square miles. We at that time did not have the vibrant relationship with SIUE, as you recall, the school district did not. I have to give a lot of credit to Chancellor Belk, at that time, we sat and said: "We need to partner, if we grow and grow together, then we can support each other." Now, here's the key thing. When I asked the business leaders: "What do you want the community to be?" It was clear. "We want the community to be a bedroom community where people will say that we want to reside where our children here, in a safe vibrant and great community." "We want to have a relationship with SIUE, where our children will feel comfortable attending SIUE and not have to go thousands of miles away." Again, perception. Perception, it's the critical piece here. SH: You say Bob Wetzel is one of the key leaders who else? EH: John Fruit. SH: John Fruit. EH: Gary Niebur, Mayor Gary Niebur. Bob Plummer, Mr. Cassens, Alan Cassens. Dennis Terry those who are key architects right there, right there. SH: That's interesting. When did you decide or how was the decision made to build the new high school in Edwardsville and wasn't there some controversy around that? EH: Yes. Yes. When I came here in 1996 the high school building was finally under construction okay, there had just been all kinds of controversy, setbacks, with the high school, and overruns, cost overruns and the goal was that we would get that building squared away and came in worked with the board, from 1996, and we finished that building and we opened that building in 1997 I think it was--a year later, yep, a year later, and of course there was--there were, areas of the building that they had to take out of the construction package because of cost and cost overruns and so on and we were able to with the business community add items such as the all of the facilities, athletic facilities, the what is it called where we have the music in... performing arts the performing arts building. So we ended up raising a lot of different money. Hal Patton raised $80,000 dollars and in kind work for all the trees that are now growing up around that high school, okay, in around the district through the arboretum project that he has always been very true to his heart, so the key thing was, one of the issues that I ran into as superintendent there was a promise made that we would build a building, and then, we would have a referendum education referendum to support the building. Well, of course the relationship with the community and the school district was not good at that time, there was not the trust, not the support, so the building is completed but no money to operate it. So we went back to the drawing board and we began to look at ways to fund the building we made cuts and um the business community stepped up behind me and supported a lot of initiatives the first two years of that building, and then from that point, okay ... SH: So excuse me, was the referendum EH: It failed. It was defeated. There was overcrowdingness in that because again with 5,000 students kids who are in elevators, kids were in unsuitable spaces, it was just not a good situation for the school district. So, we developed a 5 year plan and this 5 year plan consisted of: 1- looking at overcrowdedness okay, and at that time, we had 1500 kids at the old high school which is now Lincoln, okay so the first thing we took on 6  was how do we go about getting a community to trust that we would do the right thing, make the right decisions, and that's where I mean spending hours, and days out in the community trying to convince individuals that we could get this done. And with this five-year plan we decided that we needed to focus first on a new middle school. That was the first. And that we would not have all of the issues, setbacks with labor that we had encountered with the high school and the first time it was tough. But we were able to get Liberty Middle School and by the way, we purchased 48 acres of land out Goshen Road there, and remember at that time, that was just the wilderness but we had we did the research to determine: "Where do we want to go?" Again, remember, the question goes back to: "What do you want the school you know to be?" "Where do you want to go?" Okay, and we were able to get a construction grant program through the state and I helped write the bill Jay Hoffman, Senator Bill Haynes good friends of mine worked with some of the superintendents up North to get this construction bill whereby the northern schools would benefit from it, and Jay Hoffman, Bill Hayne they were the advocates for that bill that helped build Liberty Middle School. We got that building built, from that point, construction, new houses started to develop around that building. Now, SH: Excuse me, was Governor's Parkway done? EH: No. I'll get to Governor's Parkway ... I'll get to Governor's Parkway in just a moment [Chuckle] Well, from that point, we had Liberty Middle School just about built, now we needed money to address Goshen Road there and the road right in front of Liberty. Okay, remember there were 48 acres and we paid $21,000 per acre and some of my critics they were screaming and hollering about the $21,000 an acre we paid for that land, but we were fortunate enough the leaders of the community the EMGH Foundation, this was a group of business leaders, they purchased the land and held it for me until we were ready to get the construction loan. From that point, if you look at how much that land would be worth today, you know, you're looking at probably about $75,000 an acre all in that area, So now, of the 48 acres we used about 24 acres of that we had enough land for 2 more elementary schools right there. As we, so after we completed our first five-year plan to address the middle school we needed to then focus on the elementary buildings. Goshen Elementary we put Goshen Elementary there, on the land. We then needed to put an elementary building in Glen Carbon again to keep the Glen Carbon citizens happy and to address growth out there. We needed to put a new building out in Worden to address out in the northern area, again, 185 square miles we needed to address, so, major tasks. So to build those three buildings and to renovate this was our second 5 year plan, and to sell that to the community was tough. It was $68 million dollars for those buildings. And what we wanted also to do was to renovate the old Glen Carbon School, to renovate Lincoln School, to do other renovation work to Columbus Elementary our most historic building, we were able to get all of it done for $68 million. Now, the first time we ran a referendum, again we had started to build trust in the community, we barely fell short about 1,000 votes. So we went back to the drawing board and that's when we decided that we needed to listen to the community we went back spent a lot of time listening and the referendum passed overwhelmingly. What we were able to finally address...address the building needs of this community. SH: Do you remember what year that was? EH: That would have been let me see, don't hold me exactly to it, but that would have probably and I've been gone 2 years, 5 years, about 9 years ago. Yeah, 9 years ago. Now how did we get to Governor's Parkway? Okay. Jay Hoffman was, Representative Hoffman, was the state representative. We met with Jay, and said "Look, we have the schools going out here, but we can't get kids to school." And at that time, the connector from SIU to 159 was complete. But, no money to finish Governor's Parkway out to 55. Met with 7  Jay, Representative Hoffman, said: "Hey we've got to have a way to get these kids to school. We need to connect Governor's Parkway and finish this connector." We didn't have the money for Glen Crossing. The village of Glen Carbon had completed the road construction, Glen Crossing, to 159 but they have stopped right there. Well, we were building the new school, Cassens Elementary School out there off 270 there, so we got the $24 million dollars for, from Jay Hoffman he was able to get it done through the state, to finish Governor's Parkway and approximately $3.5 million to finish Glen Crossing. From that point, you can see how things are starting to come together, the community, the school district, SIU, oh and by the way during that same time, we were fighting for our SIU science building, that $80 some million dollar building [chuckles] so, we're fortunate that again Jay Hoffman, Senator Hayne they are the two that we were able to meet with on a lot of occasions and it's all history, so when you look at where we were in 1996, and what we used to really push was this is what Madison County, Edwardsville is the county seat. It's the county seat. Everything should be pushed out from the county seat to other communities as well. So, this was the stimulus to push redevelopment, new development, out to other areas. SH: There's been a, when you look at over time, a shift ,or tell me if you think I'm right, that there's a shift from say where the political and economic powers in Madison County were maybe Alton and Granite City and that seems to have shifted and you were not just witness to that shift to Edwardsville / Glen Carbon, but you were part of that shift, you symbolized part of that shift coming from Alton, but also you helped develop that shift with your involvement with the Edwardsville Schools, Lewis and Clark, and SIUE. EH: You know the Enterprise Zone, I can remember when we started talking about the Enterprise Zone, Chairman Dunstan from Madison County, Gary Niebur Mayor Niebur, Bob Wetzel some of the powers to be, again, this was critical as well, as we started to talk about we were not going to get the main industry, a big industry here, the industrial age was pretty much done, but we had to redefine who we are--we well had to define, what we wanted Edwardsville and this area to be. That was all part of this shift as well. Again, the critical piece here is asking the right questions: 1. What do you want to be? What do you want this area to look like? What are the obstacles to getting it done and what are the advantages to staying true to what it is that you're trying to achieve? And that's what we've done in this area. We've stayed true. No criticism of my former town Alton, no criticism, I love Alton, but I don't think we made the shift in Alton, Granite City, in saying: "Wait a minute, the industrial age is moving away from us, are we ready to take the next step of defining--defining what we want to be?" When you look at all of the resources right on the Mississippi, going up the River Roads, Grafton and all you, look at the historical significance of Alton, we were consumed too long with the industrial, and I would say that Granite City: same way. If we don't take a hard look and do an examination of what it is that we want to be 5, 10 years, then we won't be ready to make that shift when the opportunity presents itself, and that's the critical piece here. SH: Excellent. Excellent. Tell us, talk to us a little bit about how you came to know Mannie Jackson and how the...how you decided to become involved with the center here? EH: Well, Mannie Jackson and I we knew each other--we got to know each other through sports it goes without saying, Mannie Jackson, great athlete, from Edwardsville and he has lived a very compelling life, you know, when you look at his life story, graduated from Edwardsville High School went on to University of Illinois played basketball and went into the corporate world, ended up purchasing the Harlem Globetrotters, we got to know each other because I was referee, I was on the national circuit, so was he, so we go to know each other, you know, I'm Superintendent of Edwardsville, he's from Edwardsville, and then the issue came probably about 11 years ago, now, the issue was what are we going to do about the old 8  Lincoln School, this building that we currently reside in--and of course Mannie attended Lincoln School here. Herman Shaw and I we talked to Mannie about preserving this building. I could not take this building on as Superintendent of the Edwardsville School District, there was no way my critics would not have allowed that--so, Mannie Jackson through a lot of persuasion by Herman Shaw, who is a resident of this area, President of the Lincoln School Alumni, persuaded Mannie to purchase the building. Mannie purchased the building and again, we had met with Jay Hoffman, Mannie and I to look at trying to retrofit this building through the state to preserve it. That's when 9/11 hit and of course the economy just absolutely tanked. And, from that point, we had to look at different alternative I was on the board at SIUE, I was on the board at Lewis and Clark Community College, Mannie had purchased the building and was holding the building until he determined what he wanted to do with it. I introduce Lewis and Clark to Dell Chapman to Mannie and we began to talk about how we could maybe make this, make good use of this building, and again, I was still on the Board of Trustees at Lewis and Clark at that time, we were able to get the $4.5 or so million dollars through working cash--I'm sorry through life safety--to preserve this building. Mannie then donated the building to Lewis and Clark and we named it the Mannie Jackson Foundation. To work from a humanities point of view around research, with the core values of respect, dignity, understanding, and forgiveness. Working with SIU now in a lot of different ways to further the research with the STEM initiative that we're working on and some other areas, to make this area a very strong humanities area that will reach not only Madison County, but across the country. So that's a quick summary of that and so when I retired as superintendent two years ago, I said I would come here for a couple of years to help get this jump started and so we're just about there, so we're looking forward to a new chapter, finishing this chapter soon and moving on. SH: When is some of the things that you hope that the Mannie Jackson Center is going to be used--be doing to fulfill these four values? EH: Well, you look at programs and we have currently have the conversation toward a brighter future for all Madison County Schools  high schools and middle schools are involved in the project they are--they identify an issue in their schools and they try and solve the issues that they've identified around our core values of respect, dignity and understanding and as it's all about the raising the level of conversation among young people. When you look at how polarized our country is today and such diversified society, you know, there isn't conversation in, you know Martin Luther King say you know "people just don't listen to each other anymore they don't understand each other because they don't talk to each other." You know, they don't talk to each other because they're afraid of each other. Well, if we don't raise the level of conversation, then we're going to continue to talk around each other. Research: Mr. Jackson would like to focus on the environmental issues facing the country not just water, food, and so on from a global point of view, and so those are some of the areas, the STEM: when you look at our STEM initiative, working with the SIU STEM department out there, with the recent hurricanes in Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico, you know you can see the importance of the humanities in understanding that there is an issue with the environment if we don't start addressing the issue of food, look at Puerto Rico, look at what's happening in Texas look what happened in Florida, you know, so all of this come together and two years ago when we opened the center we brought in General Colin Powell to help kick everything off and thanks to SIU and SIU has been a real true partner in some of the initiatives  last year we brought in Kareem Abdul Jabar  this year we are looking at bringing in Naomi Tutu, Bishop Tutu's daughter from South Africa, so you know again, those are some of the engagements that we are working on. SH: Ed, you've - let me shift kinda gears again - you have lived over the last half of the 20th century and the 9  first quarter of the 21st century and you've been involved in so many different aspects of the life of this county and shaped its history, its direction and to your very remarkable career, what are some of the things that stand out, looking back over the last 50 years, 40 years of your career, what stands out as some of the big things, the big events? EH: Steve, that's a question I get asked often. I can't say what event you know, people ask me in the sporting world what Final Four do I remember the most? Well, they're all memorable when you do 12 Final Fours there are circumstances, situations, there are people, what great player do I remember? Well, when you do 36 years I have to say there are a lot of great players. There's not a single area, but I can say it goes back to when I was young and my mom taught us that we need to be part of the solution rather than being the problem. And I would like to say that I think hopefully I've been and will continue to be part of the solution. The biggest impact on my life has been my family and particularly my mom and she's deceased now three years now, you know, how she instilled the core values about how you treat people, and giving back So I would never try to say it's about me, but I've been very fortunate and I have to tell you this story, you know, and I don't want this to sound sentimental. Eleven years ago, I contracted endocarditis a bacteria  a deadly bacteria and I almost died. And as I was lying in intensive care--intensive care and you know--I'm highly medicated, the bacteria my head was about to burst, okay, I was in so much excruciating pain, there are times and I grew up in a religious family, you know, I talked about how my mom reared us, as I'm lying there in intensive care and I'm highly medicated, out of it, I said a prayer to the good Lord and I said this, I said: "Lord, if I have provided the kind of support to other people, and I know that I haven't done everything right, but if I've helped people along the way, then spare my life. If I haven't then, you know, do what you need to do." And that was the simple prayer I made. If I've helped people, well I think, you know, I was spared, and as the doctors told my wife, told my family, and my mom, and others, we don't know if he's going to make it or not, and if he makes it, he could be a vegetable. Well, since that time, you know, I've been as vibrant and hyper and so on as ever. And that's it in a nutshell, helping people. SH: Well, you've done a tremendous amount and it's been a privilege to work with you at the university and to watch all the things that you've helped us accomplish and [phone vibrates] [mumbled voices] no I just wanted to say thank you, really for both my boys went through Edwardsville School Districts, and they got an excellent education, and both my boys have gotten degrees from SIUE. And as a result, and so you've done a heck of a lot for the community and it's great to be able to record all this for posterity so other people can understand the fruits of your labor and enjoy it, thank you. EH: Thank you, well, what I would like to do, Steve, I make no bones about it, I'm going do a book, another book, and it's going to be something of this order, talking about change agents and so on. SH: Well, great. EH: So, but I would like to do is get a copy of this and use this, any, who do you think is a good writer I'm going to get somebody to [tape cuts] 10 
MadisonCounty;Steve Hansen;1940;2018;Steve Hansen 1940 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Mary Kane Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer St. Louis Bread Co., Edwardsville, Illinois April 18, 2018 Editor’s Note: The following transcript was edited by Mary Kane and may vary slightly from the original interview audio recording. [Steve Hansen asked question that was not recorded] Mary Kane (MK): So many dramatic changes. And it's hard to know which century incurred the most changes. But I can't imagine that this last century wasn't one of the most significant because, as you said, there were several wars and you had a total change in the demography of this era... Steve Hansen (SH): Okay. You keep one and I keep one. MK: Oh, alright, let me sign the other one. SH: Alright just, for the record, today is the 18th of April 2018. We're sitting in a coffee shop in Edwardsville. Mary Kane is here to talk with me. I'm Steve Hansen and uh... um... we want to um, collect as much information as we can from you, Mary, and uh, have an easy conversation um... like I said, the students are going to transcribe this and send you a copy to edit and any way you want and it also you can add or you can delete. And then we will, once we have your approval, we will post this up on the archive and then it will be also searchable eventually. So someday say they want to know, say you mention Earl Lazerson’s name or Ralph Korte’s and somebody is wanting to do a biography on Ralph Korte and they'll, they can put in his name and the search will then take them to your interview. MK: Oh! SH: To your MK: Okay wow... that's pretty amazing SH: ... as well as other documents that we might have MK: Okay, I guess there's no comparable verbal and/or written interviews because there would be none of the digital information or none of the transcription from previous centuries available say for example. So, if I wanted to look up information on the 1800s does the University have anything like that? Or do you go to the Madison County Historic Society? SH: Uh, that’s a good question. It's... it's evolving... uh... the Library of Congress in Washington 1  D.C. has a lot digitized and you can do online searching. Our library at SIUE you can do some... umm... uh and I know that the genealogists are really kind of in the vanguard of a lot of this in digitizing newspapers, particularly birth to death notices... MK: Yes SH: and census records so you want to look up... uh... the Kane family and and they can be automated MK: That is amazing that you can do that. SH: Yeah MK: We went to the Madison County Historical Society about a year and a half ago, because of our son- in-law, Dan. His mother lived in Edwardsville when she was a little girl and his grandfather was involved in constructing the Shell's and the Conoco's, the big oil facilities that were in Wood River and he would drive back and forth to work. It was interesting to talk to Dan because he remembers her telling the family where they lived, what was across the street. Some of the houses and buildings are still there but some of course are gone. However, just to hear what they did back when they were building the refineries and how important they became to the region was fascinating. SH: I bet it was. I know the uh, Shell Refinery has a massive uh... um... library that they've started building on... on the... MK: Oh, is that right? SH: ...on the refinery MK: Good for them. SH: ...we have had access to some of that stuff MK: That's good SH: Yeah MK: They were a major player in this region. There is no question [laughter] about that SH: So MK: So, this pile of paper is for you. I'm giving it to you because it may help clarify what I say. To prepare for our interview, I went through copies of old newspaper articles and looked up the history. We are fortunate that there's a tremendous volume of information available. There are newspaper articles about projects completed in the last couple of years that I had forgotten about but which I think are really fascinating and some are excellent. They will relate information much better than I will be able to do so, quite honestly Steve. They talk about what went on, who were some of the principal “movers and shakers” and what they accomplished. That... that is a great article. I don't know if you've seen it but it is an excellent article, It highlights details that I was afraid I would forget [laughter] 2  SH: Oh well great, great MK: That's important and particularly it includes the names of people that really made a difference SH: This will be very helpful. Thank you. So why don't you just telling ... telling me a little bit about your background, where you grew up, educated MK: Well, I have a resume in that collection of papers I gave to you and I'm going to use it because over time I forget [laughter] what happened and when. I was born in the 1940'  my father was in the war and my mother was a nurse in the war. After they got married, he served with the VA Hospital system. We lived in Maryland for a long time and then he decided it was time to move, so, we came to Illinois. In that era, doctors were reaching out to other doctors to join their practices and rebuild their lives after the war. SH: Your father was a doctor? An MD? MK: He was an MD. During the war he was shipped overseas, and I was born while he was overseas. [unintelligible] so [laughter] anyway then we moved here. We moved into East St. Louis at the time. It was our first home and then subsequently moved into Belleville and I went to high school in Belleville. SH: You have any idea why they decided to move to East St. Louis? From Maryland? MK: No, not really SH: Oh MK: He was a radiologist and was looking around for where he could best use his skills. Both mom and dad were from the East Coast, New Jersey and Rhode Island. So I do not know why they moved to the Midwest [laughter]. He was with that practice until he retired so obviously it worked out well. Remember, at that time East St. Louis was a growing city with a large industrial complex in and around its borders so many people moved or stayed here for employment following their service. East St Louis even received national recognition as a City of the Year. I can still remember the large sign outside the City announcing its award as City of the Year. It was just a large city. SH: Vibrant... MK: Vibrant, that is a good word! I went to high school at Notre Dame. It is not there any longer and then to Tulane University for my undergraduate studies. SH: What, was it unusual for women to go to, uh, college...when did you go to college? MK: No, not at all. I graduated in 1967. SH: '67. Okay. SH: And...what, what were you thinking you were going to do? MK: Well, I really had no idea. At the time I knew I was obviously not a candidate to be a nurse or a 3  doctor, that was perfectly clear, so I looked around and then when I got to Tulane it was great because it was a very different environment than anything like a Catholic girls’ school. [laughter]. From there I got my Master's degree at the University of Arizona in Urban and Regional Planning. I was there for two years. It was perfect because I really enjoy being part of a community and enjoy working with people. Also, by that time I'd had a sense of how cities grow, what do they do and how important are those people who are elected and those who become involved in organizations committed to improving the future of their region SH: But yet, but yet you came back, came back here after you got your Master's... MK: Yes, because I could not get a job that would pay me what I thought I should be paid anywhere else. [laughter] Nobody wanted me! It was horrible! I got a job offer for $4,500 a year from California and I thought... no! [laughter] I'm not going to do that. I would say that was the one...downside of being a female in the profession. It was not until I started working for governmental entities that I was recognized as a professional who could do the job. The private sector wasn't as kind to women as it was to men in that era. I even had one of my private sector bosses tell me that really, I didn't need to earn much money because my husband Jerry had a job. SH: Yeah. MK: It's good to have those old-fashioned ideas eliminated. I was fortunate to become an employee of the Southwestern Illinois Metropolitan and Regional Planning Commission and then the year following a chance to participate in a summer program, that was called "Urban Administration and Management" at Yale University. That was perfect because both gave me a better opportunity to explore in detail government - what government does and how I could be a contributing part of it. I enjoyed knowing I could make a contribution to make government more effective. It was a troubled time both locally and nationally because it was the aftermath of the Vietnam War. I worked for St. Louis County, and the City of University City, Missouri which was special because they had a phenomenal city manager, Charles Henry. He was one of the first persons to implement a housing code within a community and his goal was to try to make sure NOT that people were excluded but, to the contrary, that all people were included. He did not believe it was fair that landlords would provide some people with shoddy, inferior quality housing because they could. He is probably one of the early spokes persons who recognized governments had an obligation to help develop standards so that all people had decent housing. And so, for me that focus has been particularly relevant. Today, I serve on the Illinois Housing Development Authority Board, and that's our mission: to provide quality, affordable housing for all people throughout the State. At the time, University City seemed like a long journey from our home in Illinois, so my husband and I decided to move to Madison County although both of us were from St. Clair because we both were fortunate to have good jobs. SH: Keep [unintelligible] moving this closer to you MK: He went to work for Specialized Services and it was a great opportunity for him because they specialized in providing services to handicapped and disabled young people. He worked there for a long time and subsequently started ACT, and became very involved in designing and creating the Madison County Transit system as he recognized there were no local buses, no transportation, for the disabled 4  individuals SH: [loud noises in background, unintelligible] transportation a particular interest uh, late Senator Simon, Paul Simon? MK That is a good question and I cannot answer that. Jerry would have to answer that for you. I am not sure as there were many community leaders, both political and business persons involved in creating MetroLink. SH: I thought you, I thought Paul Simon was a strong advocate for the Metro Line, the light, the light rail system, that come over to East St. Louis and then up to Edwardsville and Alton. MK: I would say that wasn't so much Simon as Durbin. SH: Durbin, huh? MK: I believe it was. But again, I would verify that because I think one of the key individuals at the time we finally built the MetroLink system was Jerry Costello. He was a County Chairman and later a Congressman from St. Clair County and really supported it. He saw the benefit of joining the two states, specifically  and also, the opportunity to help develop St. Clair County. He also was involved in the creation of the Mid-America Airport to support and keep the Air Force military base in O’Fallon. As of today, a rail system has never been built in Madison County, only St. Clair. A vote was initially turned down in Madison County and there has never been a re-vote. Madison County is unique in that unlike St. Clair County, there is no single transportation corridor in the County but several larger medium size cities and over time the Madison County Transit System buses have become the most effective at moving residents within and to communities and to St. Louis. This is why the buses now are so critical, because they service not only the entire County region but all the persons going to and from St Clair County and St. Louis for work, and who live in in Madison County. SH: Well, let's get the focus back on you. MK: Oh. SH: So, after uh, you went to work over in University City, take us through the rest of your career and... MK: Ok, after I left University City, I worked for a planning and engineering consulting firm in St. Louis for a couple of years. I then went to a group called SIMAPC, the Southwestern Illinois Metropolitan and Regional Planning Commission. It was created in 1963 by the local political and business leaders in the region as the federal government began actively promoting regional comprehensive planning. It was involved in water and sewer and roads and housing and all the services that you think of are a part of a metropolitan region. They were being funded in large part by the federal government, so these regional planning commissions existed throughout the country. SH: So did this, did this initiative come out of LBJ's Great Society or Richard Nixon's presidency? Or was this under Jimmy Carter or Gerald Ford? 5  MK: This is the 1970-71 era, you tell me the answer to that question [laughter] SH: Yeah MK: It was a federal initiative, there's no question about that. And somebody perceived it correctly as there was a lot of support, apparently, because there was a lot of money available for implementation. The goal was to bring people together who were committed to bettering the region, not only the planners but also the community leaders. SH: So how would something like SIMAPC get formed? Were, were the municipalities and the county governments uh, was this more than just one county? MK: Oh, yes. It was doable because, remember the efforts were being partially funded by the Federal Government. SIMAPC was certainly more than one county. It was Madison and St. Clair Counties and then as time went on, it added more counties in the region. I believe there are seven now. The county boards would be asked to appoint people to serve on the board of the regional planning commission to bring their perspective about what actions could be taken to improve the region economically, upgrade existing infrastructure, etc... Ideas and perspectives would come from all of the SIMAPC board members after they met with their respective County board members. The role of the staff was to support the wishes of the Commission and help bring about the realization of their ideas and projects. That included putting together a thought process and a comprehensive plan and/or trying to get federal grants that would enable those things to happen. As I said, the Planning Commission is still in place. The East/West Gateway Coordinating Council is another active successor and it comprises all of the counties of the metropolitan region in both Illinois and Missouri. SH: So then, so the planning commission would focus on infrastructure? Or and economic or primarily economic development? MK: Both, infrastructure and economic development. These two elements are often totally integrated. You typically cannot achieve one without the presence of the other. SH: hand in hand. MK: Very much so. How do we make this region better, today? Transportation was always a factor. And at that time, it was interstates and primary roadways. Internal transportation such as buses and light rail were not high priorities, nor was air. There was minimal consideration of rail and barges. You are talking about the late 60’s, early 70s, so, you are talking about roads and interstates connecting each other and providing upgraded transportation access. There was a great amount of regional planning that was being done. The theory was if you built the roads you would then end up connecting communities and providing opportunities for communities, business and people. I believe the whole concept of comprehensive planning came from that era of time. SH: So you were part of the paid staff then? MK: I was. Yes. I worked there until 1975 [laughter]. I then had a chance to move to Madison County to assist them establish their Community Development Block Grant program. And that was in the 70s, mid 6  70s. This was another federal program where moneys were given to counties primarily in large regional and metro areas, to do community development planning. This program had a much broader scope than infrastructure. It‘s focus was the entire community. The people, the housing, the transportation, the recreation, all of the elements you think about in planning a desirable community. Madison County was awarded a community development block grant, which was great! Fortunately, I had had a chance to get to know the county chairman, Nelson Hagnauer, while I was working’ at SIMAPC and, another gentleman by the name of Matthew Melucci who worked for Nelson Hagnauer as the Director of Administration for the County. Chairman Hagnauer asked if I'd like to be the Community Development Director and I said yes! That was when I became Community Development Director and really got involved with Madison County. Establishing a Community Development Program with or without me was a very good move on the on the part of the County because it was a big decision - do we want to do this? We will have to make some commitments, but it would really bring a lot of value to our County and benefit the people of our County. So, that was what they did. And so, from then on, and even up until today, the federal government has continued to provide supportive funds to do community development block grant programs. Whether that's housing, or whether that's infrastructure, or whether that's, social services, the target is to improve the quality of life of the residents of the County. SH: So, it was the funding was annual or was it a multi-year grant from the feds? MK: It was kind of a multi-year in the sense that unless you really did something that was inappropriate and out of line, you had the opportunity to receive funds annually SH: Okay, and uh, did it have a specific focus, uh, um, when you were the director? Did you, did you emphasize or prioritize housing over transportation or... how did you... MK: The specific focus was on the people you served. So, it wasn't just a product that was important, it was how are you going to help people, particularly people who are perhaps not as well off, who need more support and assistance, whose neighborhoods need more support and assistance. Thus, the focus became what can we do, particularly to help those communities, as well as the other communities within the County’s jurisdiction. As an example, a lot of emphasis was placed on trying to enhance the physical and social structures in Venice, or Madison - two communities that were by federal definition lower income and who really would benefit from the enhancements that were made to their housing stock, roads and schools. All of the County’s jurisdictions were assisted by the County’s programs. There was a focus on the people, there was a focus on housing, a great deal of focus on economic development, with the theory being you can't build the community unless there's something there to make it attractive. SH: Jobs. MK: Yes, jobs is right. That almost always became the critical element. SH: What did you, did you then, as the director of this agency, did you disperse money to uh, to communities, uh... 7  MK: I did talk to the communities and their political leaders to obtain a better understanding of their problems and needs. More important, the County established a committee of County Board members who would meet with our staff on a regular basis to discuss these concerns that they had or problems that the Board members were aware of. We would ask the communities to submit applications that specified the needs and their requests and then once or twice a year allocate funds based on a need basis. SH: [crosstalk] Did you ever re-grant dollars? MK: As I explained, it was up to the County Board, as the County was the jurisdiction that received the original federal grant, so it was their responsibility and their obligation to redirect the money and they, the community development department staff to identify areas and projects that met the needs of the program. The best aspect of this program was that it enabled the County to assist residents and communities with a number of critical needs and not just one. It included housing, transportation and water, sewer, recreation and educational facilities  benefits that all communities needed and/or benefited from. SH: Okay, you must have really gotten to know Madison County inside and out MK: Yes. I did. I do know the county well [laughter]. It was great because the people of the County were and are wonderful people and there was a real interest of the County Board under Chairman Nelson Hagnauer. The County was committed to improving its jurisdiction and it did make it a little easier when you had federal dollars coming’ in to help and provide assistance options throughout the County. SH: What kind of... give us a couple examples of some of the projects that that you funded or got started that, that seem particularly... MK: Particularly successful. SH: ...successful. MK: I would say most of the projects in fairness were not too exciting, but they were essential. For example, installation of water and sewer projects were critical because those utilities make a big difference to residents. SH: Yeah MK: ...in terms of the quality of life... SH: Right. MK: ...for people within the community. Transportation was always important also. That could include road construction and improvement, reallocation of bus service routes, etc. I guess however the one that, I most favored was housing. Monies could be used to help persons rehabilitate their houses as well as to build new units. You had an opportunity to do those three, and then you could reach out to address a fourth category and probably the most important was jobs. Most often however you had to undertake the others before you could bring persons in to say look, look what we've done with this area  come and 8  bring your jobs here  we have people who want to work, we can help you with an industrial or commercial facility, we can help you build a complex that will service you. There's no way for me to separate any one single project. I can remember some areas that were, I would say, pretty tough, and needed a lot of help and a lot of hand holding and enhancement. But they were part of the county, and the grants really made a difference to the people who lived there. As I think of the cities, in addition to water and sewer improvements and upgrades there were projects still in place now, including an industrial park in Granite City that has been very successful and have created opportunities for people in the area to come and work there. SH: Okay, so, how did politics play into the distribution of, of the SH: ...the funding. MK: Strongly. The pressure from those who asked, "What can be done to help our neighborhood, community  I want MY people to benefit, these are my people” was always present. As it is today, it hadn't changed much, and so you couldn't take all of your money and say "Wow, the preponderance of low- and moderate-income people are HERE at this city, so let's not worry about any other city, because their people don't need anything, really." Well, politically, that was not acceptable. It just didn't work. So, you had to make some decisions about how do you really help? You had to set and then meet certain established guidelines, to determine how do you help these people that probably NEED extra special dollar assistance at the time. Because they weren't as large, or they didn't have other good things going for them. Thus, the political process was a very critical part of the program. That's why it was great to have a strong County Chairman who believed in the program and who made sure that, yes everybody benefited but not to the harm of some who needed more. We did projects in eastern Madison County, Highland and St. Jacob as well as, Eagle Park, Madison, Venice, South Roxanna, all of those areas. Unfortunately, the Community Development Block Grant program is no longer a high priority with the Federal Government and is in the process of disappearing, and that's unfortunate because it was a good program. SH: Yeah MK: And, it brought a lot of federal dollars into our region. SH: Was there, was there strict accounting of how the money was spent? So you're pretty sure that money wasn't, um, frivolously spend or [unintelligible] or lining someone's pocket? MK: Put it this way – I am not aware of the activities in every city and/or every county in this country and the answer therefore is no. I have been told that some of our neighboring entities, cities and counties, had little problems here and there following the rules but I would say our region was, Madison County was, successful in abiding by the rules and monitoring he activities. As I said, we had a strong county chairman and government and because we had a strong county government. They were committed to make sure that everybody participated but that the participation was fair. SH: And from there you then moved on from, from the community development director, you... what did you do then? 9  MK: Matt Melucci, who had been the Director Administration and who had been with the County for a long time did two things. He left the County, the Director of Administration position, to become at that time the Director of East West Gateway Coordinating Council, which is a regional council representing counties and cities in Missouri and Illinois. It still exists today and is very active. It is responsible for making sure federally funded projects, particularly transportation projects are... spread throughout the region. EWGCC receives money from the federal government, not unlike community development, but on a much broader scale and then they work with all the governments, all of the counties and all of the major cities in the region to benefit the region. After Matt left it created a vacancy and so I happened to be in the right place at the very right time and so the County Chairman reached out and said: would you like to serve as the Director of Administration? And I said absolutely! SH: Was this still Hagnauer? MK: Yes, it was still Nelson Hagnauer. He was county chairman for many years and that was a good situation because it added tremendous stability to the County, to the county government, the decision- making process. He was there for a long time, he had a good reputation and he made a big difference in the quality of county government. SH: What's the job of the county administrator? MK: The job of the county administrator is to do the typical jobs of an associate executive. That person helps with budgeting, personnel, daily management, and interacts with persons from outside the County. They help with future planning, labor relations and union negotiations, supporting certain offices and assisting staff and department heads to determine what is the future of the county in terms of a comprehensive goal and direction. Mostly, my work was internal and often involved labor management relations. The County had several unions. They had a union at the sheriff’s department, they had the county highway department union, the employees themselves were all unionized, so negotiations had to be had and people had to be hired. The way the County is set up, there's two divisions within the county. There are the elected officials, people you help to choose when you go to the polls and you select a county treasurer, a country clerk, a county state's attorney, etc. That's one whole group, but there is another group of people that are hired by the county board committees who oversee that department and they are under the control of the country board. They typically support the day to day administration, purchasing, planning and development in the county, and other activities. People who work with the certification of water/sewer systems, who work with the drainage and flooding issues, who are under the direction of the County Highway Engineer, all of the people who do the work of the County that is not specifically under the direction of the elected officials. The job of the administrator is to work with those people as their “department head”. There are counties all over the country which typically represent very large areas like Madison and St. Clair do, so as a result there's also always discussions on what is the future of this county? What are the projects and the activities we going to do? Economic development becomes a primary activity: how do we make this county best serve its residents. SH: This was, this is like the... part of your resume, your 1981-1985 MK: ‘85, right. 10  SH: Can you recall what some of the major issues were that that occupied your attention in that in the county board? MK: Obviously budgeting, always occupied me and affected all County offices. The County is supported primarily by tax revenue  property taxes for the most part, as they support most of the county government activities. People do not want their property taxes to increase, so your goal is to try to be as efficient as possible while at the time getting things done. How do you get the sheriff's department to be a really effective sheriff's department, ‘because that was under the county government, but at the same time not to spend a lot of money? Those kinds of issues were always in the forefront, quite honestly. Budgeting, how do you build a new jail? We built a new jail while I was there. That was one of the more difficult activities because the county had a very old jail. It was very old and was in very dilapidated condition. Well, we had to tear it down, and guess what, people were not happy with us. There were a lot of people who said that the old jail had value  we should never tear it down. It was a jail. How do you honor a jail? But we did with a plaque. There were people who really did not want to build a new jail, but to leave the existing one in place. Those were the kinds of issues I dealt with frequently. There were always problems working with other government and sub-units of the County. For example, there's a Metro East Sanitary District which includes Madison/St Clair County and its job really is twofold. It is a sanitary district with miles of sanitary sewer pipes and whatever is necessary to make sure that the cities in that area had, good sanitary services. Also, the Metro East Sanitary District initiated building the first levees. You also represented the County at meetings and discussions that affected the people and geography of the County as they were all part of the county. Also, there was a lot of money that went into water problems in the County on the western side. You have Horseshoe Lake, Long Lake and the Mississippi and the entire bottom lands basically had water issues, so there was a constant: how do you deal with the water issues down there, because that was part of the county, and its responsibility. The other big issue was just employees. Many legitimately wanted to advance themselves, so the unions were a very active group within the county. Legitimately so. But, you're on the other side. We did not have that amount of money to spend only on employees. How do you work through that, so everybody ends up happy? It did not always work out, but we tried. So that was what it was. It was truly what I would call a traditional administrative job. And there were people who worked at the county that were responsible for purchasing and procurement. All those people were under the direction of the county administrator. SH: So is the county administrator is... civil service position? Or is it appointed? MK: It was an appointed position. SH: Right. MK: Yes. We even had to assume responsibility for a short time for a cemetery that had gone bankrupt  they had donated all their property to the county. [laughter] And at the time the county also owned and operated a shelter care home, I don’t know if you remember that. SH: Yes. MK The Madison County shelter care home was the responsibility of Madison County government. So, the entire staff, the people that came there, the quality of the facility, became the county’s responsibility. 11  SH: And why did you leave that position? MK: I received a job offer with the Leadership Council. You can only be so good at a job for so long I believe[laughter] and then you make a few enemies now and then. Fortunately, I still had the Chairman behind me and he was very supportive but, people don’t always like the decisions you make. You do your best, but inevitably, you decide it might be time to move to a new position. I moved on to the Leadership Council. The Chairman of Madison County, Nelson Hagnauer was a part of that original formation group just as the Chairman of, St. Clair County was. Both of those gentlemen were involved with the Leadership Council. SH: So talk about the formation of the Leadership council. MK: Oh my, that was an extremely well thought out but lengthy process. I'm going to say it started around 1981. I was at the County when the effort to create the Council actually started. [recording stops] SH: Okay, we're back. And working... so let's back up MK: Okay SH: And, uh, talk about this, talk a little bit about um, the formation of the leadership council. You were talking about Earl Lazerson. Earl Lazerson from SIUE and... Jim Mathias? MK: No, Carl Mathias. SH: Carl Mathias MK: Carl was from Illinois Power. Carl had a friend by the name of Jim O’Flynn who was from the Regional Commerce and Growth Association (RCGA). It serves the Missouri side much as a regional chamber of commerce and has for years. What happened was that Carl Mathias and Dr. Earl Lazerson and a few other business executives and political leaders got together and had started to talk because Dr. Lazerson had a sense there could be another economic slowdown in the region and neither he nor any of the others wanted that recession to hit the region again. Dr Lazerson was at the university and the university was starting’ to grow and become quite an important asset for the entire region. Carl of course, did not want a recession nor did Jim O’Flynn to hit again because it had negatively impacted the St. Louis Metro Region including the service area of Illinois Power. During the recession and the downturn Illinois Power had to let go of many people. I believe that that was their initial motivation, but not their only reason to start talking and planning. SH: It's fascinating that they had the foresight as did you in seeing the...the downturn of the industry MK: I had no foresight, but it happened when I was around, so I’ll accept credit for the foresight. But they understood that they had to do something to make sure a recession did not negatively affect our region again. They wanted to protect this region because this is where they were located. They started to identify other persons who were presidents and/ or CEO’s of major businesses’ including the refineries 12  such as Shell and Conoco Phillips. They also identified recognized leaders in the region such as labor union business agents, bankers, and others. I think of Ralph Korte who was not yet then but becoming a major construction contractor He was a strong supporter of the University. Illinois Power was already here. The university was in the process of developing but Dr. Lazerson wasn’t then president. Nevertheless, he was still involved in planning the future of the school and the region. When Earl and Carl got together, those gentlemen, to their credit, realized that they had they had to do something, and so what they did Jim O’Flynn really facilitated. He said, I have money, my group has money, we'll give you $50,000 if you go ahead and get this idea off the ground, because we really think there should be a counter party in Metro East, comparable to the RCGA, so we can have somebody to talk to, somebody to work with. Earl and Carl then considered their options and they said okay, and this is where Dr. Lazerson had such foresight. He realized and Carl agreed then that in order to be successful [microphone disrupted]they needed to be really focused on a small group initially to grow, but a small group that would include business, obviously, because business success was going to be critical  education, because obviously that was a key component, government because nothing was going to happen unless the two counties became involved, but where they really stepped up, they also said labor. Labor- management relations hadn't always been particularly friendly in our region. But they said yes, those were the people we need to work together with for the economic interest of the region. And so, that really was the core of the Leadership Council SH: So what did it mean to work for the economic interest? You said you said that they were not involved or... [unintelligible] that they couldn’t reach any kind of consensus for planning. So what was the purpose of the leadership council? MK: Well because they wanted to develop a consensus for the future. The rationale behind bringing people together including those from several backgrounds, but not everybody initially was not typical. For example, there was some discussion about let’s reach out, to maybe 100 + persons, maybe more? And then we will together once a month and talk about things for the benefit of the region. That was not the original direction that the Leadership Council took. It’s direction was to get the key players in this region together including people who could make a difference so that if things problematic happened, they could be resolved because the right people would be sitting at the table, and they will understand because we have been talking about it, and that’s why I say initially it was really a very small group. It started out with 10, 15, 20, and that was the core group that got together and said what can we do? How can we prepare? And the goal was to bring people to the table who hadn't been to the table. I’m talking labor particularly. Because think about that time. The refineries were active, Granite City Steel was active, all of those companies when they came back and were stronger, had strong labor unions and so there was real need to say we all need to get together and it’s going to benefit all of us if we can move forward together. If you look at this article. you realize , Dr. Lazerson saw this as a situation where not only could we get our region together, to speak with one voice - labor, government, education, business - but also we would have a voice for the Metro East region in Springfield because up until that time nobody paid too much attention to downstate Illinois. I mean, think about Springfield, we had representatives surely, but the reality was that there wasn’t a lot of money or projects being promoted for what I would call Southwestern Illinois. It's become Metro East now but at that time I’m not even sure it had the name of Metro East SH: And did the Leadership Council take... uh, stands on specific issues, uh, for and advocate for like, 13  for, the levee system, for... flood control or... [cough] MK: Yes. SH: Uh, Scott Air Force Base MK: Yes. Scott Air Force Base. The retention and growth of the whole military complex was essential. If that effort had not happened, it is doubtful that there would be a Mid-America Airport in our region today. In other words, the projects that we've seen become super important to our region and be successful, the Council was very involved in advocating for  but also they were creating relationships so that people who actually said look we have a problem here, they could all sit down together and talk and communicate and work out a plan to resolve that problem. And that made such a big difference in terms of moving forward. The labors unions didn’t have to fight the business leaders and the business labors didn’t have to argue with the labor leaders, because they could sit and talk to one another and say, okay, let’s work this out. And then of course you had the university saying, wait, we can play a role here, we can really help, we're a neutral group. We can make a difference for everybody, we'll be glad to assist. and the university did. They offered up office space, dollars, staff, that was a tremendous offering! It made a very big difference in the success of the Leadership Council, because had there not been that support... it wouldn’t have lasted. Yes, it was wonderful that the RCGA stepped up and said yes, we'll put some money in. At that point in time not everybody was prepared to pay dues, they were a small group of people, so where do you get the money to go ahead and provide support for these people? Where are we going to meet? How are we going to make sure everybody knows what the issues are? At that time the university stepped in. Had they not stepped in I don’t believe the leadership Council would have survived. SH: Good. You're the first director. MK: ...I was the first directly paid Director. There was an interim director in 1983 as Illinois Power offered up one of its people to assist. His name was Greg Nieman. Subsequently in ‘85 the board decided they would like very much to hire their own person, so I was the first selected staff person. SH: And where was your office? MK: In the university. It was in Earl Lazerson’s office. SH: It was in the... chancellor's... MK: In the university... SH: ...suite. MK: That's correct. He was not chancellor then he was president. SH: President. That's right, that's right. MK: It was in the President’s office, that's correct. Yes. 14  SH: Uh, those days in the university, uh, I remember, uh, President Lazerson pushed hard on economic development... MK: Yes, he did. SH: He was very concerned and interested in that and wanted and believed that the university had a role to play. MK: He did, and he made sure that the he was involved and that everybody else got as excited and willing to participate as he was. I think he saw that if the university was truly to become, how do I say it, a major player, that this region had to become more of a major player in both the St Louis Metro area and the State. As an example, if the university had been built in an isolated area where there were not a lot of jobs or opportunities, or people moving into the region, then the university would not have been as successful. So, his vision, I think, was not only enhancement of the university, it was for the betterment of the region. And as I said earlier, because there was a recollection of how bad the previous recession had impacted our area  it was Dr. Lazerson, Ralph Korte, Carl Mathias and several of the major labor leaders including such men as Dean Turner, Ron Shevlin that wanted to make sure that it would never happen again. They all played a major role. These men were strong leaders and there were disagreements between them, but they were committed. Also, many of the industrial leaders immediately stepped up. Monsanto Company in Sauget, Shell Oil in Wood River, many of the major industries ultimately became participants. SH: Do you think the cooperation and the formation of this group... was somewhat unique? MK: Very unique. Because, you know why? The primary uniqueness was the inclusion of labor. Earl and Carl had the intelligence and the foresight to reach out and say it’s not going do any good if a group of business leaders get together and talk about what are we going do and darn those unions. That was not going work because they were a pretty essential part of everything done. So, they reached out to organized labor, which wasn’t common back in the early 80s. The unions were strong, much stronger maybe even than they are today, and they had the ability to. make or break a industry. Their involvement in bringing them to the table was - was foresight-truly real foresight. And it was hard at first, because they hadn't ever really worked together, so that was a first. in terms of their commitment to work together. And there were times, it was tough [laughter]. I can remember a labor leader from East St Louis who was in charge of one of the local laborers’ union, Ron Shevlin. He was very strong minded, understandably, for his people. He was however, ultimately, one of the best supporters we had. He demonstrated that leadership and determination when a group of people from the Leadership Council labor-management committee would go to Springfield, and say “we have our act together!” “We need this or we need that, or what about helping us with this project?” A lot of dollars were subsequently committed by the State. It was because this group was able to say “we are united in this situation. We all have the same belief, we all want it to happen.” SH: Interesting that with, with the... Madison County was involved within the rust belt and the decline of the heavy industries that occurred all through the north... MK: [unintelligible] 15  SH: ...part of the Midwest and that that a group got together to pass, to formulate a positive response or to help map out new directions, um... MK: A plan, never to let that happen again. I don’t remember a lot of the quotes regarding the collapse of the industries, but if you talk to several of the original members they spoke about how it was very hard on lots of people, and that you had cities that started to deteriorate  you had property tax revenues going’ down so the governments were affected, you had... all kinds of bad situations. I'm not going to pick on East St. Louis but that was then one of the cities that was most adversely impacted. It has never really recovered from the tremendous loss... SH: Mm-hmm. MK: As time passed the core group expanded their circle to others that needed to be a part of the decision making, and then introduced them to the labor leaders and to the others because, people from throughout the region didn’t really know each other as well as they do today. They did not know the St. Louis individuals, as they didn’t really interact with them because there were not... reasons to do so. So, if you think of all these big, heavy hitters coming together it made a difference. SH: It did make a difference. MK: Oh, I believe it made a big difference [laughter] SH: And from the Leadership Council you then you moved on to SWIDA - southwestern... MK: I did. SH: ...Illinois Development Authority MK: Right. That's correct. Yes. SH: And what did you do there? MK: SWIDA was an organization that had several unique powers including the option to issue bonds which were backed by the State of Illinois to enable development to occur in Madison and St. Clair Counties. As the first Executive Director, I helped guide the issuance of over $150 million in economic development bonds, the establishment of a multi-bank Community Development Corporation providing loans to small businesses and the acquisition of land for the MetroLink Light rail in East St. Louis. One of the goals of the organization was to provide money for projects requiring financing on a regional basis. The State not only created a Southwestern Illinois Development Authority but recognizing it’s value created multiple development authorities throughout the State. SWIDA was unique as it had the moral obligation of the State of Illinois and that made a very big difference because the moral obligation of the State essentially stated that in the event this bond issue fails, because of an inability to pay, the State of Illinois will step up and cover the debt owed. That's significant! SH: Yeah. Yeah. And where were some of the project that you... 16  SH: worked on at SWIDA? MK: Most of the projects, I'm trying to think about this, most of the projects were industrial projects. They were designed to try to help the industries undertake projects that they really needed but maybe didn’t have the cash on hand to make happen. SH: So, they go back to kind of infrastructure kinds of... MK: Infrastructure that was needed  support for industrial projects that were needed. SH: Like, like what for example? MK: The ones that I can remember the most included the expansion and upgrade of Monsanto in Sauget for approximately $13 million in 1989  support for Shell Oil in Wood River for $3 million in 1991  and assistance to Laclede Steel for $25 million in Alton in 1990 There were also a number of infrastructure projects such as the upgrade of the Tri-City Regional Port District in Granite City in 1989  as well as the undertaking of social welfare projects including assistance to St. Elizabeth Medical Center, Anderson Hospital and Illinois Center for Autism between 1989 and 1994. Over time, SWIDA started focusing on more economic development projects. I guess one of the most important projects was when SWIDA got involved in the MetroLink construction. SWIDA got involved directly in the MetroLink project helping the East St. Louis segment become a reality. That was a pretty critical step forward for MetroLink because, it had to get it into St. Clair County, and much later, to complete the line through to MidAmerica Airport and Southwestern Illinois Community College. It came into East St. Louis and through St. Clair County. Now, today SWIDA is still very active under the guidance of Jim Nations, their Chairman, and Mike Lundy, Executive Director doing a lot of housing projects. – They are assisting in the construction of low- and moderate-income housing for the region  completing senior housing in communities such as East Alton Highland, Granite City, Swansea and Belleville. SH: Okay. SH: Now, so you've been, over the last... MK: [microphone interference - unintelligible] SH: [microphone interference - unintelligible] years [Both laugh] SH: Since the 70s... particularly since the 80s...you've been intimately involved in significant changes in the construct of significant economic and demographic changes. Can you talk a little bit about that? Can you talk about what are... what are some of the things...what are some of the changes that have occurred? MK: Hmm... that's difficult. It seems that almost everything has changed. This region...was a pretty sleepy part of the state of Illinois. In fairness, it's not as if we were receiving a lot of attention from Springfield, particularly when competing with Chicago and their metropolitan region. We were never really considered a part of the St. Louis Metro region historically because the state line is at the Mississippi River. Perhaps two of the most significant things are: number 1, the fact that the State of Illinois became aware that there truly is a southern Illinois region and that it has economic value and 17  brings value to this State, and number 2 two, the metropolitan region of St. Louis has determined that after many of its banks and businesses started doing business in Illinois: that the Metro East is an integral part of the Metro area. This happened after a major movement by the Leadership Council, which is continuing today, to reach across the river and say we have to do some projects together, So, that was a big change, the biggest single change. I remember. First, we had people come over and start to work in the Illinois region. Several them were the consulting people and the engineers, but then the banks - the banks crossed the river. And all of a sudden, the banks became a part of southern Illinois. So, if you look around, banking investment is...the same in Illinois now as it is in or was in Missouri. Almost, all the banks that service St Louis have money invested in Illinois too, so they care about its success. SH: So what, what do you think, what do you think is the change? Why did the banks all the sudden say [unintelligible] let's invest in Madison County? MK: Right. I think they saw things happening. And they wouldn't have seen things happening if those people in the original Leadership Council and their successors today, not just the business leaders, but he total hadn't reached out and said this region’s changing. It has a lot more going’ for it than you understand. That's my belief and I will always believe that. I believe the Leadership Council brought together leaders from education, because of the University and Dr. Lazerson being there  received large business investments because they had the principal leaders of business involved in this region and they had cooperative labor unions. And that, that together was significant. And then on top that they added government. And those four entities became... involved with each other, and so supported each other, and started to say collectively we all need to work together to make this region successful. And I believe that's how it happened. SH: The whole, the whole economy shifted... MK: Shifted. SH: ...in, in the last half of the 20th century from heavy industry to something else. And... MK: We haven't given up heavy industry SH: No, we haven't given up [unintelligible] MK: [laughter] Fortunately [laughter] SH: ...it's not the dominant. MK: It's not the dominant any more, no. SH: And the population shifted as well. Uh, I think that...that the census shows big growth for a while and the uh, in the population, and also the different kinds of people who moved and came. MK: But I think that, I believe that, that shift is the result of the University’s presence and leadership. If you look there are several developments in Madison St. Clair and Monroe Counties that have made a difference but, singularly, the most significant development in Madison County has been the University 18  because, look at the combination of peoples that it brought into the region. Students from all over the US and the world, including local students who stayed. A Leadership Council Board member for example, lived here, John Fruit got his degree here, and stayed in the region making a contribution. He was a major banker. Ralph Korte did the same and he was a major contractor and businessman. The University brought in the students, brought in professors from all over the country to be here, to live here, with their families and then to stay here, because why not? So, I see the University as special and when I look at St. Clair County, they've had a lot of major developments also. Scott Air Force Base and the addition of Mid-America Airport - wow! It’ presence has had a tremendous influence. Both Madison and St Clair Counties and to a lesser extent Monroe County, and all of the region has benefitted, I think from, from that increase and change in population. SH: What... what is some of the... the issues, you think, that Madison County's facing now? MK: Hmm... I think probably, right now we are in transition as a majority of the elected officials are newly elected and are Republicans and they are trying to develop what they perceive is. A more efficient government structure given the many roles and responsibilities counties in Illinois have today. It is a big job, but the County has... a lot going for it, having settled the issue of the levees. All three of the counties, Madison, St. Clair and Monroe became a part of the coalition that, was involved in doing the levee restoration  that was critical. But, county government now has... many responsibilities and not much money nor support from the State. [laughter]. The State of Illinois doesn't have much money, and the State of Illinois is not a highly regarded state economically among our fifty states unfortunately right now. I think the County's problems are going to be like many of the problems the State has. It is going be difficult for the County to shine... right now, with the State of Illinois having the problems that it has financially. That's... that's a personal opinion, but, money is critical for our school districts, its critical for the construction and upgrade of our infrastructure, it's critical to be able to incent business to locate in Illinois, critical for everything the state of Illinois does, and unfortunately that money isn't available for the projects that would benefit this county, this region, this whole state. SH: You know, it's, it's often been said that uh, Madison County, uh, was... had a democratic party machine from, I don't know when until when but... MK: Long time. All the time I was at the County democrats were the primary office holders. SH: But you were, you were thick in the middle of that. MK: Right. SH: Now, how did that, how did that work? How did that quote machine... MK: I did not think of the County leaders as part of a machine. Almost everybody supported the direction the County was going’! So...that was good! And there were people who assumed leadership roles, who other people respected, so there was a willingness to work with them and support their ideas, and they simultaneously were willing to reach out to those people from a different political perspective because they knew them, they worked with them. And so, there was a consensus on how we move forward. Right now, there's growing pains as we shift into a little bit of a different structure. And, that's okay, ultimately that's the way things go. It just takes time when, new people come in as they have new 19  ideas. It is important to make sure those ideas, when for the benefit of the County, are supported as they go forward. They are coming in at a difficult time when the State is unable to provide them the economic support they need. MK: I feel badly because this is not, it's not just Madison and St. Clair or Monroe County. It's the entire state. SH: Yeah MK: I am not sure how you correct the economic situation that the State has gotten into. I truly don't. I'm glad I'm not up there. [Both laugh] I do believe we have options however and it will take bold leadership and a willingness to work together for the betterment of the State and its people, politics aside to figure it out. It will however get figured out. The good news is, and this is what I believe about the Leadership Council: here we are, approximately 30 years later but it is still going strong. It's a different organization now then it was. In the initial phases it was designed to create something that didn’t exist  now it's goal under the leadership of a very successful Executive Director, Ronda Sauget, is to retain, maintain, and build upon what already exists. That's a different agenda. But they're doing a very good job. As I mentioned, the number of persons who support the Leadership Council is a. hundred plus people and they are from several Southwestern Illinois counties not just Madison and St. Clair. They meet monthly, they talk about how we can improve this region, how do we make it stronger, and that is good. It really is a great thing. And a lot of this involves not the same people from the 1980s but many of the same organizations. SH: So, so the institutions that the, you were involved in everything from the county, the county board... uh... the uh, the NGOs, uh, like SWIDA and um, leadership council all MK: Remember SWIDA was created by the state [laughter]. SH: But is SWIDA a state agency? MK: No. SH: Okay. MK: It is not a state agent. It is a regional planning body, but it must abide by many of the State’s rules and regulations... SH: Okay. MK: It doesn't get money from the state. Not at all. It must finance its own way - in other words, its obligation is to help develop this region and in so doing, also raise the money necessary to be able to support itself. SH: So, for, just for, from your personal perspective then, um, the change, the breadth of change that you've seen since the 70s to... where we are, the second decade in the 21st century. How would you, how would you... characterize that grand sweep of... 20  MK: Good. [laughter] Look at all of the people that are here that would have never been here. That to me is significant because obviously you want the region economically to be viable, and it’s not going to be viable unless there are people and business as those entities create economic viability. So, from my perspective, that has really helped to make a major difference and, it has improved the State’s s opinion of our region. The state is investing money in southwestern Illinois when they had not invested much before. It's committed to the expansion of. Scott Air Force Base, and Mid-America airport. Look at Madison County’s bicycle trail system, over 180 miles of bicycle trails. Who would think that that is relevant, but people come from all over the country to visit here and bike and see the region and say "wow! this is pretty impressive!" When we get on the bike trails, the number of people we meet from out of the region is... phenomenal. [laughter] SH: Yeah. Right. MK: And it is good, because they come, and they often stay overnight, and they spend money so then the cities have money to support them, it benefits the cities in terms of the tourism facilities and the tourism goals. Southwestern Illinois is just a very different, more dynamic region than it was 20 years ago. There's a lot more people willing to work together on behalf of the region. I don’t, I don’t believe that that existed back in the mid-1970s. It was very... I don't know what the right word is, but there wasn't that collective "We care" that seems to be part of the region now, there just really seems to be a lot of people who collectively care, and I think that's good news. [laughter] SH: Now, it is. I think that's great. This is, this has just been great stuff, Mary. And uh, and uh, the documents you've given me are terrific. MK: They are very good. Read through them. The article that was written with respect to the original Leadership Council, I thought was excellent, because it included quotes from the people who were involved. Carl Mathias and Dr. Lazerson and, all of those persons mentioned who were very much, a part of the effort. SH: Right. MK: One of the articles mentioned the intense competition between Washington University and SIUE as to where should the Olympic Festival Track event be located. It was part of the Olympic Festival celebrated in the St Louis Metro area. And obviously, in fairness, Washington University had a leg up, because they were part of the original Olympic celebration. SIUE was designated to hold the Festival event for several different reasons, but mostly because the University and a lot of the local leaders, Ralph Korte, put up the money necessary to make the track happen. It has been an asset to the region, hosting Special Olympics and other special events but mostly to SIUE. But that's not a bad thing. SH: [unintelligible] do you think, uh, um, it's a good thing that, that...Jay Hoffman, state representative Jay Hoffman is introduced... MK: Do I? Yes. SH: ... Separate the... 21  MK: Sure, I've thought that for a long time SH: The system? Yeah? MK: I do. I think this region is the perfect example of a region that has recognized that to be successful it must help itself. This regions’ people going back to the 70s saw what they could become again, after the recession. And so, they decided they had to do something to prevent a relapse, and they did. I don't think that’s happening now in deep southern Illinois. I don’t think that’s happened in Carbondale. And because it hasn't...the population is declining, and there has been a negative impact on the success of the university down there...That is not the case, here however. The university is growing, the region is continuing to grow, there is a positive attitude regarding the future...We are lucky we have a St. Louis Metro across the river, but it's really made a difference that we can stand on our own two feet. SH: Yeah. MK: I think it's really made a difference. SH: I do too. SH: Yeah. Well again, thank you so much, this is, is... MK: Well you're welcome! SH: ...really great stuff. MK: I apologize for forgetting many of the details, as I told you. [laughter] It is hard to remember, it was a long time ago, and there were so many good things that occurred. You know, there are other people, too, that hopefully you can talk to. I didn't mention Bob Koepke and I should have. Bob isn't with us any longer but, he was a part of the university at the time. I am sure he left many records... SH: Yeah. MK: ...and of course Dr. Lazerson gave him the opportunity to, undertake some development activities with respect to the local communities and that was a really good thing that helped a lot because, he could reach out to them and say hey the university cares about you, we would like to see you do this, how can we help? [mic interference] ... that kind of activity. A lot of foresight that happened back in the 80s that has led to where we are today. SH: I have been trying to get Jerry to agree to talk with me. I know he's really busy, but other than Jerry, who else do you think we, I should talk with? MK: Wow, I wish Bob Wydra had not passed a few years ago away because he would have been one that I would strongly suggest. Bob was the director of the Tri-City Regional Port District SH: Port authority. MK: But there's a young man, Dennis Wilmsmeyer, who is director now and is doing an extraordinary 22  job... SH: Yes! MK: ...If you haven’t talked to Dennis, I would reach out to him for two reasons - number one, his father was Melvin Wilmsmeyer. Mel was a banker on this side of the river. He was one of those people like John Fruit that was involved in the early stages of the leadership council once we reached out to the banks. They were critical. Dennis, [unintelligible] not only has the sense of his dad, but also has been there under Bob ever since the port has started to grow. I don't know if you've been down there recently. It is amazing. SH: Is it? MK: Just, what they have done and the impact that they have had on the facility. Oh my gosh, it's unreal! I mean, at one point in time, it was just an old army storage facility. You should see it now, it's different. Thus, there's this whole new focus on river development and how do we use it. And what an effective method of transportation it is economically. The other thing, and I don't know who to tell you to talk to... [cough]. I’d have to ask. is... the people from Amazon for example, who choose to locate their warehouses in Madison County., It's not as if we would reject the warehouses  we'd like more. [laughter]. But at the end of the day, this is a major business that's come into the region. It has developed the warehouses, built the buildings, worked with the labor- management people in this region, and they've been amazingly successful. So, who is the best person to talk to? Let me ask Jerry, because he knows, he works with those firms all the time, because the busses run to serve Amazon employees. SH: Mm-hmm. MK: Transportation is just critical. SH: Yeah. MK: So, you know, St. Louis, St. Clair County have Metro, but here in Madison County we have a major transportation program that allows everybody to get around, get to places they need and is affordable. SH: Yeah. Thanks Mary. MK: Oh, you're welcome. Good luck! SH: This has been great. MK: [laughter] It was interesting, I enjoyed it. SH: Good. 23 
MadisonCounty;Jack Daugherty;1968;2018;Jack Daugherty 1968 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Jack Daugherty Oral History Interview Paul Brazier, Interviewer July 12, 2018 Paul Brazier (PB): This is Paul Brazier, it is July 12th, 2018. I am here with Jack Daugherty a Competitive Cyclist. We are doing an oral history for Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia Digital Archive of Madison County. We're going to talk about being competitive cyclists in the Metro East area. Hi Jack, how are you doing today? Jack Daugherty (JD): I got not too much to complain about, I guess, I'm doing pretty good. PB: Nice, nice. Uh, first thing, I guess, we're going to talk about the greatest bike rice in the world's going on right now, the Tour de France? Um, have you been following it? JD: I've been following it. Not super closely, but I am following it. PB: Good. Who would you like to see win this year? JD: You know, I don't have any particular favorites. I would like to see someone from France win. Uh, but I don't have any particular favorites at all. I, I am opposed to a few riders, but I, uh, I don't have any specific favorites. I just enjoy watching the race unfold. PB: Nice. That was going to lead me right into my next question. I said, is there anybody that you would like to see maybe not do so well this year? JD: Yeah, I would like to see Chris Froome fail. I would like, he's, uh, I suspect, I'm not a fan of Chris Froome, I'm not a fan of his style of racing, I'm not a fan of the recent delegations of pharmaceutical misuse on his behalf. I think racers who race like him make the sport boring. PB: Nice. Alright. Um, now, back to you. How did you get interested in competitive cycling? JD: That's kind of a hard question to answer. Uh, because I've been doing it so long, I almost can't remember a time when I wasn't doing it. I would think probably that the time I became aware of competitive cycling was when my parents took me to see the movie Breaking Away back in the '70s. And for some reason, the footage of the bike races and, uh, the story of bike racing was, uh, really captivating for me. And it was something I wanted to become interested, more interested in. Of course, living in Edwardsville in the '70s, there was not a whole lot of, uh, whole lot of options to explore bike racing. PB: Great. Um, and you talked about the '70s, how old would you have been then? JD: I think that I probably saw Breaking Away when I was eleven years old. Because then I became really, kind of, interested in road bikes, uh, road racing at that time. Every, all of my friends had BMX bikes, and I was always the one kid on the, on the ten-speed with the curvy bars. 1  PB: Right. Um, what types of racing have you done? JD: So, through terms of just bicycle racing, I think I've "done" everything that you can do. I've done road racing  road racing involves a lot of sub-disciplines, that's criteriums, that is actual, that is road races, that is time trials, uh. Road races are more accurately described as longer over the road races, they usually are point-to-point, or they can have long circuits, five to ten, sometimes even twenty miles in length. Criteriums, which are also a type of road race, are usually closed circuit, the mileage, the course is usually a mile or less involving a lot of turns. It's usually in an urban area. It's usually a higher speed and dicier affair. Time trials, uh, are not pack races. And by "not pack races," I mean it's, uh, individuals riding by themselves trying to cover a set course in the, in the fastest amount of time. PB: Great. Um... JD: So, you, but that's, that's the road racing. I've done a lot of track racing. Track racing is, uh, takes place in what's called a velodrome. People will not recognize that word, necessarily, but a velodrome is a banked oval. Of bike racing events, in the past it used to be Olympic events, that would be the one event that would get TV coverage. Um, the track racing involves bicycles that don't have brakes and you only have one gear on a drive train that is "track drive," which means that if your rear wheel is rolling, your pedals are moving too. You cannot coast on a track bike. PB: Those are a lot of fun to ride. Those have kind of come into vogue in the last few years, with, uh, they talk about the hipsters, they've kind of taken that track bike setup and used that. JD: Yeah, I, and I have mixed feelings about that. The fixed gears are fun to ride, uh, but if you don't know what you're doing, you can get hurt. And they're harder to control, and they're harder to stop, and if you don't know what you're doing, you're not just a danger to yourself, you're a danger to others. So I'm not, I have very mixed feelings about the, the, um, fixed gear development amongst people that maybe don't really know what they're doing. Other bike racing I've done, is done mountain biking. I think most everybody is familiar with mountain biking. Mountain biking really has become kind of a misnomer, because most mountain biking does not take place on a mountain. Uh, mountain biking is really more, I would say, it's more all-terrain, uh, cycling. Uh, those are bikes usually with fatter tires, knobby tires, and those are races and rides that take place on wooded trails, on the grass, typically not paved. The other racing I've done is cyclocross, which is a precursor, really, to mountain biking. Cyclocross is also done off-road, but it's also done a little bit on pavement. Cyclocross is basically an off-road criterium. The bikes are set up like road bikes, they have the curvy handlebars and they have the skinny tires, but you race over short courses with obstacles. Uh, the obstacles are set up so that you have to dismount and carry the bike over them. So, cyclocross is kind of a mixture of, of cycling and running. And I've done those. PB: Nice. Um, what was your first competitive race you took place in, and where did that happen? JD: So, the first competitive race that I remember was in Bloomington, Illinois, I was in college. And it was a citizen's category. And citizen's category meant, back then, that you didn't have a license. I lined up for the race, back then there was, uh, we didn't have clip-in pedals, we used toe clips with leather straps. And, uh, not even sure if the hard-shell helmet rule was in effect yet. But what I remember mostly about 2  that race is that, uh, I was so amped up and so nervous at the beginning of the race, I fell over at the starting line because I couldn't get into my pedals. PB: That's, that's funny, I think that's happened to pretty much all of us if you've ever used any type of clips or any, even, the clipless pedals. Um, you were talking about your earlier days of racing and such. Did you have any mentors in those early days? JD: So, the main mentors I had, uh, a lot of them were in Normal, Illinois, and Bloomington, Illinois. There was a gentleman named Mike Osment, who was a surgeon in Bloomington-Normal at the time. He was very nice to me and taught me a lot. Tommy Thompkins, another guy that was there. Another gentleman named Phil Menard. And the person that made most of it possible was a gentleman named Chris Koos, who owned a bike shop in Normal, Illinois called the Vitesse Bicycle Shop. Chris is now the mayor of Normal. PB: Nice. Um, and that was back in the, you said, in the '80s, when you were doing that? JD: This would be in the '80s. PB: Okay. And so, take, talk a little bit about how training was back then, when you were training to race. JD: So, training then just, you just rode your bike. There was, there was a new training technique called "intervals." Intervals are very commonplace now, but not everyone did it then. A lot of, uh, training was just going as long as you could for as long as you could, whereas intervals is doing, uh, excessive, very hard efforts for more measured amounts of times. But, uh, most of the training back when I started was just riding your bike. PB: Nice. Um, as we talk about your racing career, can you elaborate on some of the highlights of your career? Any, uh, accolades that you've received, or awards, or anything that really stands out, um, that was a big accomplishment during the time that you were racing? JD: I, uh...I've won a few races, that was fun. Um, I got invited to the Olympic trials in 1995, uh, on the track. That was probably the, one of the more, one of the bigger milestones. But in terms of ongoing accolades, you know, I can't really think of anything off the top of my head. I mean, I was, I was a pretty good racer, but I was, never was professional, I never went to the Olympics, I just, you know, raced a lot. PB: Nice. Um, can you talk a little bit about the time that you did go to the Olympic trials? JD: The Olympic trials was an exciting time. It was in Indianapolis. It went, you know, it was kind of a big deal to get invited, you had to be a category one racer. Uh, and at that time, there weren't many, very many category one racers, I was a category one at the time. Still am, actually, which is kind of remarkable. It was, uh, I trained. At the time, I was training, I was actually also in my first year, um, of my law practice, I was a prosecutor at the time. So, I was, uh, splitting time between training and being a lawyer. Went out to the Olympic trials hoping to do well, and I, I did well relative to my, uh, my past performances, I had some very good races, but I was racing against the very best cyclists in a very big country. And I got my butt whooped. So, it was a, it was a, it was a good experience, and it put my relative abilities in perspective. 3  PB: Uh, can you tell us about any of the, the racers that you were raced against that went on and raced at the Olympics? And if they, uh, had any success when they went? JD: Sure. Uh, Robbie Ventura was there, he was a well-known professional for quite a while. Fred Rodriguez was there, he raced professionally in Europe. Kevin Livingston, I believe, raced in some of the races  he raced professionally in Europe. Mike McCarthy was there, he ended up racing professionally in Europe and he was also the professional pursuit champion, uh, on the track. Event...uh, he was a world champion. Uh, Kent Bostick was there. Kent Bostick was a perennial national champion, uh, and longtime pro. I'm trying to think of who else was there. It was, it was a large number of very, very heavy hitters. And they, uh, they heavy hit upside my head. PB: Well, at least you got that experience under your belt. And that's uh, that has to be something that you'll remember for the rest of your life, for sure. Okay, um, let's go ahead and move on. Let's talk about, um, some of your local racing. I know you talked about starting out, you were in Bloomington-Normal area, Springfield area. Um, some of the stuff that you've, some of the races that you've done in the St. Louis metropolitan area. JD: Well, for, uh, for a long period of time, if there was a race, I did it. I mean, there have been different races all over, uh, St. Louis metropolitan area, in almost every neighborhood, in almost every, uh, community. Of course, Edwardsville has a race, Belleville has had races, Lebanon has had races, uh, Alton has had races, Godfrey has had races, all over St. Louis. Kirkwood, the cities Lafayette Square, there's, it's almost impossible for me to list all of them, but, uh, for a period of a couple of decades, if there was a race in the St. Louis area, I almost certainly did it. PB: Nice. Um, you'd mentioned Edwardsville, and, um, the last few years Edwardsville Rotary has sponsored a race, a day of racing, um, here in the city. Um, describe the difference between a regular road race and the type of race that they put on here in Edwardsville, the criterium? JD: So the, the Edwardsville Criterium, is a, as I described previously, a criterium is a relatively short course race with a lot of turns. The Edwardsville Criterium, in particular, has a lot of turns. The course has a reputation regionally as being a very, very technical course. It is, it puts a premium on bike handling and fitness. I mean, that's what I have to say about the Edwardsville Criterium and the Edwardsville course. The Edwardsville Criterium, generally, you know, it's, I'm very glad that we have it. I, there is a bittersweet aspect to the, that race because I very much wish that that race was happening when I was a younger man and I could make a, uh, a better showing for myself in the races. PB: I think you and me both, I had done that race myself, and it is very, very taxing physically and also with your bike handling skills. Um, do you have any plans on racing this year? In the Criterium? JD: No. No, I won't be racing this year. Uh, I'm putting most of my energy into my law practice. And, um, criterium racing comes with it a certain amount of risk, and risks of crashing, and at this point, I am not willing to take the risks of crashing. PB: Got it. Um, okay, so going to kind of backtrack a little bit. You were, um, you talked a lot about track racing and, and such. And um, I saw a post on the Internet not too long ago about the velodrome in St. 4  Louis, and they're looking at reopening it, possibly this fall? What kind of information do you have on that? And any of the history, anything you'd like to share about that particular velodrome? JD: So, the Penrose Park Velodrome has been around since, I think, the early '60s late '50s. It was actually built, uh, by, by the German and Polish folks that were living in the Penrose neighborhood at the time. And it was built to replace a velodrome that was in Forest Park. The, Forest Park lost the velodrome when they built the I-64 highway through the middle of it. Uh, so, they were without a velodrome. And the velodrome was moved to Penrose Park. It's a bit of a misnomer to say that they're reopening it, because they've actually been racing in Penrose Park for the last several years, and I've been racing there occasionally myself. What they're doing now is they're resurfacing it. For the last thirty years that I've been riding on the Penrose Velodrome, it's been barely rideable, it's been in very bad condition. It's not, was not a velodrome that was suitable to host, uh, big regional races, uh, because the surface was so uneven, it was so cracked, and so, uh, in such disrepair. We raced on it, but it was, it was kind of, uh, unpleasant. So what's happening now is they are tearing it down bare bones, they are putting a new surface on it, it's going to be smooth, it's going to be rideable, the only, uh, real downfall is it is a, it's going to be one-fifth of a mile, which is an English measurement. All modern velodromes use the metric system, which is going to most likely make this velodrome, really, an unlikely candidate to ever host national or state championship races, but it's still going to be nice to have a nice, smooth surface to train or race on locally. PB: Sounds like it's going to be a really nice facility. It's too bad that, uh, the distance, uh, is going to make it, uh, not necessarily a national destination. Um, what direction do you see local cycling, racing, taking the next five years or so? JD: So, that's really hard to say. Uh, there are, there aren't a lot of young people getting involved in bike racing. I think that if you looked at the United States, uh, the, the organizing group is called USAC, and I think if you looked at the USAC's membership, you would see a bulk of the, uh, racing membership is probably over thirty. And that does not really bode well for the growth of the sport. So, I, the growth of the sport in this region, I don't really know. I mean, for bike racing. Bike riding, that's a different thing. But, uh, bike racing...because of the expense to get involved in it, bike, racing bikes are not cheap. Uh, I think that there's a precious few number of parents that are willing to make that kind of investment in equipment. You know, the expense of just the bicycle dwarfs that of hockey and baseball. And I think that really makes it somewhat of a non-starter for young people. And I think that's, that's too bad. PB: And, uh, kind of on a personal note for yourself, where do you see your cycling in the next five to ten years? Things that you're going to be doing, or trying anything new? Or anything... JD: You know, cycling for me in the future is going to be riding for fun. I might do some, some, you know, with the track being redeveloped, I might take up training more on the track, and I might take, you know, do some racing on the track. I, I don't see myself spending a whole lot of time doing any, uh, road racing or criterium racing in my future. I'm fifty years old, I got nothing, really, to prove, and I don't really have the time or the energy to devote myself exclusively to bike racing. You know, bike racing is a fun thing to do, uh, it is, uh, if it's not paying your bills, it's not really, it's not really a practical thing to devote all your energy to. I know plenty of people that do, but that's just crazy to me. 5  PB: Okay. And you talked a little bit about the direction of cycling, and you can see that cycling itself might not necessarily be declining, but the racing part is. Um, to kind of go along with that, what are your thoughts on the MCT Trails, the Madison County Transit Trails, that are here in the, uh, area? JD: So the MCT Trails are really a delightful use of, uh, public property and public easements. Um, and they seem to have sparked a huge growth, uh, in the interest in cycling. Not racing, necessarily, but there are certainly significantly more cyclists that I see on a daily basis than I ever saw before, and they're almost always on the bike trails. Because I like cycling, and I like running, and I like being outside, I tend to be on these bike trails, so I see a lot more cyclists. And it's, you know, people are riding what I would describe as performance bicycles. They're dressed up in their lycra, you know, giving it an effort, but they clearly aren't racers. But they're certainly interested in fitness and some of the more, uh, healthful benefits of cycling. PB: Okay, I've got one final question for you. And take a second to think about it. If there was one cyclist, it could be somebody current, uh, it can be somebody that was, that raced or cycled in the past, that you would like to race against or train with, who would that be? And why? JD: Well, that's a tough one to answer because there's been so many characters that I've known, well that I've known of, that I've read about over the years. I mean, I always liked Sean Kelly, uh, the Irish cyclist that was so winning in the '80s and the early '90s. Of course everyone likes Eddy Merckx, Eddy Merckx, uh, probably the winningest cyclist of all time. Uh, but, um, he's not that interesting of a character to me beyond the fact that he was a winning cyclist and he built a very fine brand of bicycles himself. I think probably the person most interesting was a cyclist named Gino Bartali, uh, he was an Italian cyclist, and he raced, you know, during, during the time of, uh, World War Two. And Gino Bartali collaborated and worked with liberating, uh, Jews that were trapped in Europe. He, it's really a fascinating story, there's a book written about him, there's a movie about him. Gino Bartali was a winning cyclist, he won the Tour de France, he won the Tour of Italy, but he was also, he was a spy. And he worked for the good guys during World War Two, and that makes him a, uh, an interesting character. If you spend time cycling, you want to ride with someone who's interesting. Sometimes riding with the meathead fitness people is not exactly, um, interesting. So if I had to pick one cyclist that I could train with or ride with, it would be Gino Bartali. PB: That's a great choice. Okay, I would like to thank you, Jack, for taking your time today to talk with me about your cycling experiences. This has been Paul Brazier interviewing Jack Daugherty about his bicycle racing experiences for the Madison County Historical Online Encyclopedia Digital Archive of Madison County. 6 
MadisonCounty;Philip Rarick;1940;2019;Philip Rarick  1940 - 2019  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Philip Rarick Oral History Interview Steve Hansen, Interviewer Callis, Papa, & Szewczyk, P.C., Granite City, Illinois September 19, 2019 Editor’s Note: This transcript was lightly edited by Philip Rarick. It may differ slightly from the original audio recording. Steve Hansen (SH): Judge what we'll do is ah send you a copy of the tran- a written transcript. Philip Rarick (PR): Uh-huh. SH: And let you then uh review it and correct it and uh... PR: Sure, okay. SH: Change anything you wish that might be a little...that you wish you hadn't said... PR: Okay. SH: ...or something that you might want to include that you forgot. PR: inclu...Okay. SH: You'll take one of those and I'll take the other one. PR: Certainly. SH: Thank you, sir. [Pauses – paper rustling] So today is September...twentie...nineteenth? Nineteenth. PR: Uh...Nineteen. SH: Nineteenth and we're in the law offices of uh Judge Philip Rarick and retired Supreme Court justice, Illinois Supreme Court Justice. I am Steve Hansen and we're um talking today generally with the Judge about his life and career and um the history of Madison County. You witnessed...at least.... PR: Uh yes I did. I saw some changes, yes. SH: A lot of dynamic changes over the time... PR: Yes, indeed. SH: And you grew up in Troy? 1  PR: No, I was born in Troy in 1940. Ah my dad was a machinist working in East St. Louis and when World War II broke out, there was gash...gasoline rationing was a big thing and there was carpooling out of Collinsville for the folks who worked where my dad worked. And, we moved to Collinsville uh when I was...uh two years old and that's where I was raised. I...ultimately moved back near Troy. I lived on uh...a little farm south of Troy since...1973. SH: So your dad then was a machinist... PR: Machinist in East St. Louis. SH: ...in East St. Louis and uh...did he...was it in...was he working in the armaments? PR: Yes, in a defense...defense firm as they were called back then. It was known as Walworth Valve. They made all sorts of valves. I mean they did other things but the primary product was valves that were used...uh essentially, I think, in the Navy. Ah it was actually, I said, East St. Louis but it was truly at Washington Park a suburb of East St. Louis. SH: So you grew up in in Collinsville um and what was that like? What are some of your memories of...of your childhood? PR: Well, we lived on the west end of Collinsville which is the older...older part of Collinsville. Ah now the west end has been long ago subdivided. That wasn't so when I was a child. Ah the paved street ended a couple blocks from our house and there was a big wooded area that ran all the way down to [Illinois Route] 157 which, of course, now is all subdivided and they have all of ah the development there in the bottom area which was all farms when I grew up. In fact, I worked on farms there as a as a youngster. But the Gateway Center and all of that was horseradish and ah corn...more of a truck-patch sort-of thing and sweet corn and tomatoes allthat as opposed to like the agriculture and uh... out where I live now. But uh coal mining was still the big industry. There was the ketchup factory. The ketchup bottle survived. I mean I can still remember the smell of ketchup growing up and then there was the...a lot of some of the women worked in a garment factory there on West Main Street not too far from my house. Martha Manning and we commonly called it the dress factory. But coal was the big industry. Uh it was...um I remember the coal trucks going up and down Main Street...it seemed to be all hours of day and night and most of it going to St. Louis. But...ah everyone in my neighborhood and most neighborhoods heated with coal still. Ironically, I was just reading an article here about President Trump's attempts to revive the coal industry. But at any rate, it was certainly the dominant thing in...and all the men in my family were coal miners. I was the first to... (05:03) SH: Except for your father? Or... PR: Well my father, I think, started and got out early. But his father, all of my uncles and everyone...all of the men were coal miners. In fact, I was the first to graduate from...first in my family...first male in my family to graduate from high school. My grandfather started in the coal industry at age twelve. SH: Wow. In this area? PR: Glen Carbon. His father started at age nine and I wish I would've...somewhere I have an uh article 2  outlining that. SH: And um um...but you...did your father and your mother kind of shape you so that you didn't even think about going into coal. PR: Oh, no. Yes that's right. No, they didn't. My grandfather, of course, ah in particular, certainly didn't want me in the mine. No. I mean that was...that was pretty well...I was destined to avoid that by all accounts, yes. SH: Okay. And because of hazards or...? PR: Well, hazards...working conditions way back were deplorable. By the time I came along, the United Mine Workers were a force and they had improved working conditions greatly. And so, I mean, it wasn't...it was still dangerous, dirty work...unhealthy. But uh you know, by then you know it was still a good wage. When my grandfather started, uh you still had the company store. You know, you bought your...the equipment all came was bought from the company. You were paid, not an hourly wage, but a production. How many of those buggies you loaded with coal depended on how much money you got at the end of the week. SH: Sixteen tons, huh? PR: Yeah. [Steve laughs] That's right. SH: Yeah. And so you said you were the first male to graduate high school. PR: Yes. My mother finished high school, yes. SH: And how did they create expectations for you to go to college? Or how did you end up there? PR: Well...I ended up there because I was fortunate that SIU came along...they [cough] had the East St. Louis center as I told you. That's where...most of the St. Clair County people I was Collinsville's right on the border. I could've gone to Alton. They had the... they called it residence ah ah ...I can't remember what they were...they had a name for it but anyway uh it was held in the old East St. Louis high school. East St. Louis had built a new high school and that's the Alton facility was held at the old Shurtleff College...Uh I think it's on College Avenue appropriately named College Avenue there if my memory serves me. But uh I was able to go there. I had to work I worked over here at the steel mill uh a big part of the time that I went to school. Uh the steel mill over here runs 24/7 and uh only the old-timers had the day jobs so I had the midnight shift or the afternoon shift ah a big part of the time I went to college. Ah I was laid off periodically and had a lot of jobs in between uh but um back in those days I could pretty well count on working every other weekend because the mill paid twice weekly, I mean monthly. And pay day they anticipated a bunch of [laughs] work people calling off, you know, and their pay check and they didn’t [Steve laughs] weren't gonna work and I was on the list there and uh I was called all the...in very frequently. I never turned it down, never once turned down. (09:23) SH: And when did you graduate? 3  PR: Ah well, I want to...I started in [1958] back in those days though, you could start law school after three years. You didn't have to have a degree. So I had um by [1961] I...when I started law school I hadn't yet graduated from SIU but I either went back and took a cou...I was real close I think I went back and took another course or two in the summer and graduated later. About the time not...I graduated from law school in [1966] I think I graduated from SIUE in [1965] because I went back one of those summers and took some courses to finish my degree. SH: How did you become interested in the law? PR: [Laughs] Ahh well, you know, I've often thought about that. When I went to college, I had no idea what I wanted to do in undergraduate school. I had a notion I might want to become a veterinarian. I took um ah biology and some chemistry and some science courses and it soon was apparent to me that...that I wasn't cut out for that. Ah I liked the social science courses, the political science courses, and the business courses. And, uh I took a course called Business Law and loved it. Um I took a criminal a juvenile delinquency and a criminal and I liked both of those plus I made A's in all of them. So, I thought this is maybe what I should be doing. [laughter] And that's the only way I can explain it. I didn't know anyone who was a lawyer. I didn't have any relatives who were lawyers. I'd never been in a courthouse. I'd never been in a law office. But that...that's probably what led me into law school. SH: That's interesting. You found your passion then? PR: Well, I did. And you know not long ago I speak periodically at new judges' seminars and Justice Karmeier had me speak at the admission ceremony here last year in Collinsville where the new lawyers are admitted to the BAR. And, I remember telling them I’d...I'd been a lawyer fifty years at that point in time or fifty-one years maybe. And I told them as I look back over those fifty years, never once did I think I'd ever made the wrong...excuse me [coughs] raspy throat this morning. Never once did I ever think I'd made even my worst day I don't think I ever thought I'd made the wrong decision. (12:07) SH: Well that's great. That's great. And how did you become involved in politics? Was your family political? PR: Yes, yes. I grew up with it. I grew up at the kitchen table listening to my grandfather and my father who... ah grandpa was the Collinsville Township Democratic Committeemen's um ah Chairman. The Chairman of the Democratic Committeemen in Collinsville Township. At one point in time, it was before I was born, my grandpa was chairman, his father was a committeeman and my father were a committeeman. There were three of them serving as precinct committeemen. So, anyway, I came by it naturally. I listened to it when I was a little boy growing up. I went house to house with grandpa passing out literature, putting up signs, ah and so it was just a natural. SH: So they were all New Dealers... PR: Yeah, absolutely. SH: Right. Abso... Okay. And so it was natural then when you got into law and you got your law degree then you also then were already interested in politics? 4  PR: Oh abs- not question. Yes, absolutely. Yeah. I was active in... in a lot of political matters and we'll get to this eventually but in 1964 when I was in law school, there was the...the you will talk about the Blue Ballot and the changing of court system to a statewide system. I was a Collinsville Township delegate to the convention that nominated three judges who were running for the appellate court which the new uh ah...I'll explain that a little later in detail. But no, I mean it... it was predestined for me to become a political animal. (14:09) SH: So take me then through your career from when did you graduate from law... PR: I graduated in 1966 and I began working shortly well right after graduation for a law firm in East St. Louis, Illinois. It was a ah what's known as a casualty insurance defense firm. Our clients were ah not people coming in off the street. We represented insurance companies who were representing people who were being sued. And, ah I was there a year and a half. Also ah during that year and a half, I set up a little office in Collinsville. That I worked evenings and back in those days we worked Saturday mornings at the law firm and so I had evenings and ah office hours there on Saturday afternoon. But, East St. Louis was a much different place back in those days. The big law firms in the Metro East were centered there. There was one firm in Alton that had five or six lawyers but the big firms were in St. Clair County. Most of them were in East St. Louis and had been for years and years and years. But, you know, so much industry over the years down there. Ah the firm I worked with had, I think, eight or nine lawyers and down the street was another that had eight or nine and there were several that ah the only one here was the one I mentioned in Alton had five or six lawyers. By today's standards, something like seventy eighty lawyers but I worked there for a year and a half I realized I wanted to get back on my own plus Collinsville Township had called me and wanted me to become their attorney and I was offered an Assistant State's Attorney job in Madison County. So I had my little law practice and uh I could see that I could get by and would probably be my advantage to get out of there and uh get on my own up here in Collinsville which, you know, was my home. And that's what I did. Ah I was there for maybe on my own for a year and a half when Moses Harrison called me, he and Dwight Taylor had a law office in Collinsville. Ah Moses became my mentor over the years. I followed him to the Circuit Court and then to the Appellate Court and then to the SupremeCourt. Ah they had a general practice and they needed a trial lawyer and that's what I had been with my law firm there. Ya know I didn't do commercial work or anything like that. I did basically trial work. And so I went with them and I stayed with them uh until uh let's see 1975 I left there and something happened along the way. Dwight Taylor, who was my partner, was a victim of a car bombing. It was written up. You can go back and you know the detail, or what detail was known about it we still aren't real certain of what happened. We think we know he became involved with a lady and it was matter of the heart, I suppose you could describe it. But, at any rate, our that firm dissolved and Judge Harrison and I continued on and we brought in a lawyer named Bob Cadigan and... and uh when Moses went to the bench it was Bob Cadigan and I continued on till I went on the bench in 1975. But I was city attorney and township attorney and an Assistant State's Attorney and I was attorney for Jarvis Township which uh is the township where I live now. So I had a lot of municipal law experience uh in addition to what I was doing. I started off doing mostly personal injury and trial work. And then after Moses left I got into doing more probate and that sort of thing and [cough] Bob came in and took over the other part. (18:37) SH: Your appointment for city attorney for Collinsville, was that a uh appointed position? 5  PR: It is, yes. Or it was. Appointed by the mayor. Uh in the commission form of government that we had then, the mayor appointed the city attorney and the other attorney which was known as the corporation consul. The corporation consul advised the city council, went to the meetings. The city attorney did all of the courtrooms work and that's what I did. SH: Okay then you did the courtroom work weren't doing the... PR: I did not. SH: ...advising on policy for legislation? PR: I did not, no, no, no. None of that. SH: Okay. Alright. Good. So after, then from Collinsville you you went to the bench? PR: Okay, 1975 I was appointed as what was called then an associate judge. Still is. And that's what we'll need to get to eventually because when I started practicing law, the Blue Ballot Amendment from 1964 was just just getting going. And that unified the court system in the state of Illinois. When I was a youngster growing up, we had uh the circuit court in Edwardsville. You had ah a probate court. A separate, elected judge. Each county, if they were big enough. Ah Madison County had a probate judge. They also had what was known as the county judge and he was by far the most important politically because he controlled all kinds of jobs. That you had a city court if you were here in Granite City and in Alton. Then you had Justice of the Peace, Police Magistrates, and you had all that just here in Madison County. Now Chicago had like a hundred different courts and eventually, you know, it wasn't very workable. In 1964, they all became unified. All of the court people. When I saythat, the judges, ah the probation people, and all that ah became state employees not county employees. Now the clerk is a different matter. That's still a county office. But it was a unified system and in those days we initially, we had circuit judges, associate judges, and magistrates. And the magistrates, have heard small claims, traffic, misdemeanor, and that... that sort of thing. Ah the associate judges, initially were, the city the old city judges who had been elevated to the bench and circuit bench. But when they died or retired, that office was eliminated. Then eventually came the change where the magistrates became what was known as associate judges. The salary increased substantially. They were assigned larger matter, you know, more significant cases I guess is a better way of putting it. And when I went on the bench in 1975, that was the arrangement that we had. Prior to that though, I mean, I can remember as a youngster ah you had the Police Magistrate that's when and these were township employees, not city or county. Ah that was the Justice of the Peace for the civil, the minor civil cases. People, the shopkeeper who didn't get paid, ah little automobile accident, fender bender, or something. And the Police Magistrate did the minor - the kids who got in trouble, ah altercation in a bar, you know, or something like that. But all of that went away and became un-, you know, much better of course in the unified system that we have today. Ah and that's when, in 1965, that's what I was telling you, I was selected as a delegate to we had a convention held over in Belleville because they sent up the appellate court there were three to be three judges in thirty-seven counties. That's the Fifth District. The state was divided into districts. Five different districts. And ah we nominated three judges- it was a Democratic convention and we nominated three judges to run for the appellate court in the coming-up election the election which was coming up. So, I mean that then then we got into the unified system which, youknow, as I say was a big improvement. Somewhere around here, if 6  you think it'd be helpful, I've got a history and you can get it on the website. DuPage County has a big article about it and... (23:33) SH: Okay. PR: ...how it used to be going way back when and all of the different courts. I I'm pretty sure I'm telling you correctly, Chicago had over a hundred different courts. You know... justices of the peace, maybe two hundred I'm not sure if about the number but it was massive. Most of whom were either city employees, county employees, or township employees. Very few state employees. Originally, and if you look at Edwardsville there in the courthouse, the third floor had two big courtrooms and those were Circuit Judge Courtrooms. And the Circuit was really big. Meaning it went Madison County way down to Chester, I think, that was before the what I just described to you uh and there were two Circuit Judges. And on the second floor, on the one side was the probate court. The other courtroom was the County Judge who presided over all sorts of municipal kinda things and governmental things. But he was the important person because he controlled all kinds of jobs: appointments to sanitary districts, ah drainage districts, I can't think of all of the appointments he had. Similar to what the County Chairman has today, you know, I mean that was all done by the County Judge back in the day. (25:13) SH: Let me take you on a on a side trip here. Let's leave your career for a moment... PR: Okay. SH: ...and talk to me about ah about the political structure and the power of the political party um organizations. Because you said you were you started as precinct or your parents? PR: Yeah. Right. SH: Your father and grandfather... PR: Yes. Right. SH: ...were precinct captains... PR: Right. SH: ...and committeemen and they the structure doesn't seem quite so tight today or...? PR: Oh no, no, no. Not at all. No, not at all. When the neighborhood I lived in, for instance, if somebody new moved in the neighborhood, my grandfather would be the first person there welcome him. "I'm Phil Rarick,” my grandfather would say, “I'm the Democratic precinct committeeman. Anything I can do for you, you let me know, right here is where I live. Come see me. By the way, election time would it be alright we put a sign in your yard?" I mean it was very, very cohesive back then. I mean, that was just our precinct, you know. Because he was chairman, he ran the whole the whole township: Collinsville and Maryville. But ah no, I mean, it was much tighter uh...I don't know how to... SH: Or central-controlled? 7  PR: Less central-controlled. More the committeemen back in those days knew everybody. They could pretty well tell how many votes they were going to get, they pretty well knew, not for sure but a pretty good idea, how you voted, if you voted, and they knew if you voted. I guarantee you they knew that. Ah if you needed a ride to get there, they provided that ride. If you had problems, you got laid off, got hurt in the mine, or something, they made sure that, you know, you had your family had food. It was, it was a lot different. SH: The Madison County Democratic Party had somewhat of a reputation. I don't know how it compared to St. Clair County or Cook County... PR: No. SH: ...but it had a bit of a reputation as being a political machine? PR: It did. Yes, it did. SH: Can you describe how that worked? PR: Central control did exist. Ah but it, it would be the county chairman. The Madison County Democratic Chairman would know he had every chairman from all of the thirty-six townships. You know, they met on a regular basis. They had, you know, their marching orders, you know, "here's what we need to do." Ah they cooperated with each other, ah they shared information. Um ah most important, what I remember, the big difference was the committeemen got out into their precinct and really worked the precinct, you know, no emails or no "where's a letter you Mr. Committeeman you sign it and send it." No, actual, physical, face-to-face contact on a regular basis that's the big, that's what I see. I mean that's the big difference I see today and that is what- that plus the jobs. I mean, that was the big thing, of course. But... SH: Patronage jobs. PR: Patronage jobs, yes. SH: And what do you think, how do you, why do you think the Madison County, doesn't matter which party, but why do you think the does those the machine still exist anymore, the structure? PR: Well, the structure is certainly changed. I'm not so sure, I mean, we've gone, Madison County has gone from a blue-collar, industrial-type economy to...something, you know, big changes. A lot of demographic changes in the county. Ah one time when I worked there, four thousand men worked over here at this mill right down the street here. They are back to work now, but they got eight or nine hundred maybe. Uh same thing of the oil refineries. The industrial core just started in Alton and it ran oil right down the river here down through St. Clair County. St. Clair County was the same. Ah I think those were changes in the economic conditions and what I'm going to call the demographic theme changed a bit. Um I don't know. I'm not sure I can pinpoint things other than that. We have a lot more people now who are college graduates than we had back in those days. But, I mean, I think it’s changed on both sides. Now where I grew up in Collinsville, Collinsville was as Democratic as could be. Um I mean there was Precinct Twelve, I think it was the newer subdivision. That was a Republican subdivision. Um very few, I 8  could probably count on my hands and my feet how many Republicans lived where I lived [Philip laughs]. But, you know, it was justice. Of course, you know, other areas in, for instance, when I was chief judge, I had, we'd go to the Chicago meetings and my counterpart DuPage county. Carl Henninger, wonderful guy, and we were good, very good friends. No, no Republican judges, at all, were in my county. No Democratic judges were in DuPage, no. SH: DuPage. [Steve Laughs] PR: We were the, you know, the reverse of each other. SH: Now you've seen then this this huge shift in in people and in the economy in Madison and St. Clair County from heavy industrial... PR: Right. SH: ...to something else. PR: Yeah. SH: And what do you think are the combination of factors that have led to those big shifts in the economy and, and in people? PR: You know, I’m not equipped to answer that. Um my youngest brother is a PhD at up at Purdue. He's retiring this year. But he was, his specialty was international economics, you know, and he always said to me, "You've never understood economics and you never will." And I, he was, I...I think he was right about that [Steve laughs]. I’m not... I just don't know. I mean, I saw the big change. Madison County was industrial here, agricultural to the east. Ah when I first moved back to Troy there south of Troy, um that precinct was overwhelmingly Democrat. It's just the opposite now. But the subdivision came in behind me and other than the first house, the guy who works for the city, one, two, three either are in the military at Scott Field or work there or retired from there ah and that's true of a lot of those people living there. And it's not just that. There is that demographic change, you know, people moved in from other areas. I vividly remember, you know, this being all the way down just heavy, heavy industry and it was always rural. But the rural area, unlike today, was much more Democrat than Republican. (33:52) SH: Interesting. Let's get back to you then. PR: Okay. SH: You ah went to the bench in 1975? PR: Right. SH: Okay. So then what, how does your... PR: Well I was an associate judge there. SH: Okay. 9  PR: And ah after a couple years I was appointed by the chief judges as chief associate judge, and I held that judge until 1980 when I ran for Circuit Judge and I was elected in 1980 and in 1985 I was elected as Chief Circuit Judge. Um I uh, early on, associate judges were not permitted to do criminal felony matters unless the chief judge made a request to the Supreme Court that they be certified. That was the word that was used then to handle criminal felony matters and early on, I was certified to do that which accounted for a big part of my career being in the criminal court, criminal bench. As a circuit judge I was doing ah mostly criminal. I was presiding judge of the criminal felony division for a number of years. I did also some civil from time to time as was needed but the bulk of my career on the Circuit Court was either as Chief Judge or as Presiding Judge in criminal felony cases. SH: And were there are there cases that stand out in your mind? (35:20) PR: From the Circuit Court days? Yes, I mean there's a few. Um I...I had one that was particularly troublesome for me. Um i'm not going to mention any names, but a school teacher from Alton who was accused of, what was called in those days as indecent liberties with a child or sexual abuse of a child. And I presided over his trial as a jury trial and he was convicted. And I didn't, he had been out on bond throughout the whole trial from the time he was charged he had made bail initially and was never in jail. And they asked me to hold him in jail after the conviction and to my knowledge there had been no indication of any problems during his prior to his sentencing. You know, during the time he was on bail and prior to sentence. So I didn't hold I let him remain on bail. Over the weekend, his home burned down and his wife died. He was shortly thereafter charged with arson. And of course you can imagine what happened. Then I end up with the murder, the first-degree murder case seeking a death penalty. And of all things they waived the jury. So I'm saddled now with a capital case um and it was very well presented and very well defended. I mean, expert witnesses from New York and from here and from there and, um ah you know, you're trying to establish the cause of a fire by circumstantial evidence. And I had I struggled, we went through it for weeks going through. And the trial, I mean, I don't remember how many days that was. Eighteen or nineteen days of testimony, maybe. Something like that. It was almost three weeks, I think, of testimony. And I had took weeks thereafter, I went through. Of course, you don't have the luxury of not doing your other docket. You know, you've got to try and go through all of this and review all of it in addition to what you are doing. So it took quite a while. Eventually I found him, found the defendant guilty. I did not impose a sentence of death. I found him guilty of one of the counts, that was aggravated arson. And there was an oddity in the law that didn't provide for a death penalty. It does today because of that case, you know, they just didn't realize that they hadn't included it back in those days as part of the capital murder scheme. But at any rate, I mean, that one stands out always in my memory. SH: What, what, what were some of the challenges you faced as being a judge of the Circuit Court? What are some of the difficulties...? PR: Well, you know, it it sort of depends being a civil... Some judges have only done civil matters. Now in Madison County that means normally "L" cases. The associate judges do the family court, the juvenile court, the probate court and all of those things. The Circuit Judges typically do either criminal or felony, or they do the major civil which is uh injury cases primarily. Now, of course, we have for years we've had this asbestos docket here in Madison County. A judge, one judge, Judge Stobbs, that's all he does is the asbestos docket. But, ah to answer your question there, I think it depends on what is your assignment. Ah in the criminal court, I mean we didn't have the big numbers that they have today, but there were only two 10  of us. I was the Presiding Judge and I had another Circuit Judge who I assigned cases, you know, I did the administrative stuff and the trials, but I only had one helper so to speak. Now they've got three or four. But, the the docket, the numbers, the cases [coughs] Excuse me. And then it was very busy ah docket. Uh It took... I guess it was maybe more intense also. And when I say intense, I mean, you know, you're dealing with people's lives and liberty and emotions are higher and that sort of thing. And I found, you've got to become a pretty good listener too. I mean ah, in the civil cases, the juries make practically all of the decisions. That's not so in the criminal because you have all kinds of pretrial matters. What evidence are we going to permit in here? Ah are we going to let that confession, is that truly a confession or was that ah taken in violation of his of the defendant’s rights. You have all of that pretrial stuff before you ever get to the trial. Now you have some of that, of course, in the civil but not to the same degree. But I mean that would be the answer I would present to you because, I think, it does depend on what is your assignment. SH: What makes a good judge? PR: Well, I'm not, [Laughter] I don't know. I have my own idea. I mean, I think the most important thing is is a sense of fairness and treating and, of course, obviously following the law. But ah again, you know, you've got to be a pretty good listener. Patience, maybe, is another thing that you need. A lot of people are going to be appearing in front of you and they're going to want to talk and talk and ya know some of it is relevant and some of it isn't. If you don't listen, they walk out thinking, "That guy didn't even listen you know... he didn't care about me." There's some things like that and when you talk in the criminal court, you're not going to be able to converse with those defendants as you would in the university having a conversation back and forth across. They wouldn't have any idea what you're talking about in large measure. So, maybe those are the things that, obviously, uh follow the law. I mean, I think it's just a matter of trying to strike a balance and being, being fair and treating everyone the same. SH: What happened then after your, after the Circuit Court? PR: In 1988, I ran for the Appellate Court. That is the court that sits in Mt. Vernon. It was a banner year because the Appellate Court the legislature authorized two new judges down there because their docket had increased so much. And there was a Supreme Court judge being elected. So there were five of us on the ballot that year. Uh anyway, that's the south. The 37th southern county starts up there and about twenty miles south of Springfield and runs down tothe end to Kentucky and then from border to border across the state. And I was there uh fourteen years. A lot of that time, I served on a specialized division called the Industrial Division of the Appellate Court. And that's a specialized court that hears only workers' compensation cases. One judge from each of the five districts is appointed by the Supreme Court and we go, we went in those days, we went around the five districts hearing workers' compensation cases that came out of that district or that area. So, I mean, I heard cases there, regular cases in Mt. Vernon. But I also had the workers comp- compensation docket. So I was doing, I enjoyed it because I enjoyed workers' compensation law but it was extra duty. Ah you know, I'd end up hearing twenty cases in Chicago, for instance, and then I'd go down and hear ten or twelve cases ah in Mt. Vernon. Those were oral argument in addition to all the paperwork that you did. So it was busy, busy, busy. (44:30) SH: So, excuse my ignorance, but you said fourteen years on the appellate. Did you face voter retention? PR: Yes, yes, it's a ten-year term. I was initially elected in 1988. Retained in 1998. 11  SH: And that required sixty percent? PR: Sixty percent, yes. Out of all those 37, you know, that's a lot of travelling time. You know, there's a lot of geography. Ah I remember in [1988] we tried to keep track of how many miles we had driven and we came close to one hundred thousand. I mean, we're in automobile. Pretty much wore out the automobile. But you had somewhere you had to go every night to a political meeting or a civic group. Weekends you had county fairs and parades and I don't know. It was a second full full-time job. SH: Help me explain how you managed then the conflict between being a judge and then also the politics of being a judge and the pressure from the political party on being... PR: And invariably being asked questions that you're not permitted to answer. "Judge Rarick, how do you feel about, what's your opinion on abortion?" Appellate judges don't hear that sort of thing to start with. I mean, I have my own thought about it but as a judge I must follow the law. I can't, you know, some some of my colleagues would just simply say, "That's a question I can't answer." "What do you think about the death penalty?" Well, you know, judge, ah there's a moratorium on it. I mean, you know, you follow the law but they want...invariably you're going to be asked questions that, you know, you just can't answer an without violating the standards to which we're held. But, you did have the political thing. Ah you know, "Will you support John Smith? He's running for whatever he's running for over there." "Well, we're on the same ticket, yeah." There was.... one of the answers back then we had the straight ballot. You could put an "X" there at the top. "We encourage you all to vote. Your county is whatever number it is. Vote that way you get us all." We had...we had... some of the county chairman had different ideas about things. So you had to do a little tap dance a little bit, I guess. [Steve laughs] SH: Okay, they ahh... who can you think of that has been particularly colorful attorneys that came before you or that pulled different kinds of courtroom antics? PR: Well you know...there were some. And more so back in the early days. I mean, they had one was considered himself he spoke as if he were coming out of maybe the early nineteenth century ah we had some characters. You know, most of them as I sit and think about it were from the Alton area. [Steve laughs] But ah there were certainly some colorful attorneys. Ah the one attorney, I mentioned to you the case about the capital murder case. Well I had the same and he was one of the colorful attorneys. He was a old-time criminal lawyer ah who kind of put on an air of "I'm not sure I understand you." The other side makes an objection. Objection sustained. "Thank you." He would say "thank you." He would thank me for sustaining the objection and then he would say "How should I ask that question, judge?" I said, "Well I can't." And this is right in front of the jury. "I can't tell you how to answer that question." I remember the indecent liberties trial. In his opening statement, he would say trying to explain to the jury his theory of the prosecution what it was all about. And he said, "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, this thing this case reminds me of what happened years and years ago up in that place." Uh ah like he couldn't remember. "What was the name of that place, Judge?" "I don't know what the name of that..." You know, Salem, he was trying to say they burned witches and all. That's what he was this is a witch hunt that's what he was trying to. But, you know, we don't have a whole lot of people like that today. At least I don't see them. And I didn't see them. Once I got out of the Circuit Court you don't see that very often. The courts of review are much more formal. Eh but, yeah, we had some characters. (49:49) 12  SH: Were they often effective? PR: This man didn't have too good a track record with me. But he in his previous, [PR coughs] in his prior years he had been a pretty effective criminal attorney. Yes, yes, I mean, he was. Not the smartest guy, I don't think. [Steve laughs] But uh he had a little personality. Jurors liked him, you know, he got right down front and ah they sort of, you know, he developed a rapport. And, I mean, this thing went, what's the name of that? I can't be talking to you. You know, first of all I'm thinking, I almost said to him, hell..."I can't answer those questions." You talk to the jury, not me. But, yeah there were some...there were several. SH: So from the Appellate Court then you went... PR: Then I was appointed to the Supreme Court when Justice Harrison retired. SH: Okay. PR: And unfortunately, after I went there September of 2002 and February 1st uh I had a bad, a very bad stroke. And I was off for several months and I went back and finished uh that year, and the next year, uh then the election was uh the following year. I was not, ah didn't consider myself physically able to continue at that point in time. So I retired in 2004 December, the first Monday in December. And then I came here in February March of 2005 and I've been here ever since. SH: Do you think election of Supreme Court justices is the right system? PR: I do. And I, I say that without hesitation because I've seen the other methods. They're just, the election of Supreme Courts of any judge has a political influence, unquestionably. The other stuff, the appointed is just another form of politics. I wish I could remember his name but I think it was '80... well sometime in the '80s. There was a judge appointed in Missouri to the Missouri Supreme Court who had never been a judge, who had never been in a courtroom as a lawyer. His claim to fame was Chief of Staff for the then governor. SH: I remember that. I remember that. PR: Okay... Paul, my good friend, Senator Paul, former Senator Paul Simon and I saw eye-to-eye on most everything except that. And he and I debated that one time. He favored appointed judges, merit selection. Now, in my view, you know, those are, it’s a buzz word. The merit has very little to do with appointments by political. Now there’s been a lot of other suggestions. Maybe the governor won't do it. But maybe let the Supreme Court make the appointment. We've had, all of that's been fought with difficulty. SH: Uh-huh... PR: Why should it be any different? I mean, the people who make your laws are elected. The people who enforce your laws are elected. Why not the people who interpret the laws? That's, and that’s just my inference. 13  SH: Okay good. What challenges did you face as Supreme Court justice? PR: In those days, when I started. Let's go back to when I first started. We were inundated with ah what we had way too much work. Number one, we had the...every death penalty case came to us. And by the time it comes to us, the record is about boxes maybe this much...ya know. They were fought with problems. They were so serious, you had to take so much time. Ah I felt that, you know, we're neglecting part of the other side. But it's important we have to do this. The other thing was called the Petitions for Leave to Appeal. Most cases don't get to the Illinois Supreme Court unless the Supreme Court agrees to take them. That's not true with death penalty. They automatically go there. A case where a judge in the lower court has declared it unconstitutional goes there. Ah there's a couple other minor categories. Other, but the bulk of the cases only get there if the Supreme Court grants leave to Appeal. And when I was on there, we were doing about fifteen hundred of those a year. SH: Wow. PR: Yeah. And, I mean, the paper really, you just, I would work evenings when we had term. When I was in Springfield getting ready for that. Nights, I mean it was just, the paperwork was overwhelming. But, now that's all part of being a judge. Nowadays, they don't have the death penalty cases. You know, that's been, that's no longer ahh in effect in Illinois. So that cut out a lot of the work there, a lot of the time. They have, the for some reason, their caseload is not, isn't as heavy. They don't take as many cases. But they don't have as many Petitions for Leave to Appeal and I can't ex-p I can't tell you why that is. But there's another aspect to that that most people, would have...until they've been there, you'd have no idea. The administrative responsibility that you have. We would have, for instance, one day we did nothing but attorney registration and discipline cases. An entire day. Every other month. Ah you had all kinds of requests coming in from different things. You'd have requests for this or requests for that [Philip coughs]. Speaking engagements um [Philip coughs] I've had nothing but horrible allergies this year. Excuse me. SH: That's quite alright. PR: Ah. We would have appointments to different committees and to we would appoint vacancies. And uh all of that was in addition to our basic job was hearing and deciding cases, obviously. You know, I've explained to you the death penalties and PLA's. That took up a great deal of time. But the administrative end was equally ah challenging. Ah just too much work really. Ah I think as I've explained to you, they don't have the death penalty any cases any longer. That was a big time-saver. And there's less PLA's. (57:29) SH: Judge, when you were on the Supreme Court did state politics were all swirling around you in Springfield did, how, did they impact the court in...? PR: Not much. Not much at all, no. Budget-wise, you know, they're always trying to cut our budget. They always thought we could get by on less. That was always a battle. "Well why do you need all that?" "Do you need that many probation people and the salaries for the public defender? I mean why do we have to do all?" You know, that's a constant battle. But that was, no, no, there was very little political, the political stuff seldom came, we're across the street. No not much if any. SH: You said that you were on the court when Blagojevich was governor? 14  PR: Yeah. Yeah. SH: So you were able to just view that. PR: Well, see, he was prosecuted federal, you know federal. His prosecution was federal. But since you mentioned that, you know, I was the most popular judge in the entire state of Illinois for at least a day, or two, or three because of a case called Jorgensen verse Ann Jorgensen, judge of the Circuit Court in Cook County, versus Rod Blagojevich, governor of the state of Illinois. And it was an attempt to diminish or cut back a cost of living thing that we had. And I authored the opinion. And ah It was the independence of the judiciary from the other uh... uh the executive branch in this instance. And when I ruled what he attempted to do he couldn't do, I was getting phone calls and letters from judges all I've never met or any sort of thing. It was one we put a lot of work into. I say we, I mean my staff and I. And it got a lot of attention all around the country. But uh to answer your, I mean, there... there was very little attempt to influence whatever could come from across the street. SH: Good. Good. And does Madison County, uh how did it get the reputation of being a judicial hellhole? And does it deserve that? PR: No. I mean, in a word, no. And I wish I had called to check on the verdicts of the last few years and I can say this without fear of contradiction. If you go back and start going through those jury verdicts the last five, ten years, you're going to see more verdicts for defendants and more lower verdicts than we had historically. Uh I uh I know it has that it has a reputation. I don't believe it's deserved. I mean, I can vouch for the judges in Madison County for their integrity. Ah I think I know all of them personally. Um I think a lot of this we get, a lot of this came from the asbestos. Ah there's a perception about that case is coming in from other jurisdictions. And, and frankly, I think there's been some cases now the Illinois Supreme Court has ruled, I think we're going to start seeing less and less of that sort of thing. Because of the United States Supreme Court case and one or two the Illinois Supreme Court has decided recently. But I can, I mean, I've served there, and I've served with some of these judges. Most of them are retired. But I know. Some of them I appointed when I was on the Supreme Court. Some of them I helped, I was chairman of their election. I know all of them. And I'm satisfied, you know, it it's a good bench. And I'm satisfied with the integrity of all of them. SH: One argument has been, [rustling] and I'd like your reaction to it and your opinion, is that there is little an individual can do um against a corporation except for to go to court and that it's a great, leveling sort of instance. PR: Indeed it is. I mean, the right to a jury trial is the key to justice that most working men and women have. Without that, you know, big business corporations are not going to be good citizens. Profit is, they're there for profit. And profit at what expense. "We don’t really care." I know that's not, that's a pretty broad indictment. It's basically correct I believe... in my view. And the jury trial, the jury of twelve or six people, has historically been what you're talking about an economic, you know, when back in the olden... that was against the crown, and against the king and all, you know, all of that sort of thing. The Magna Carta and all of that. But presently it's an economic thing, yes. I firmly believe that. SH: I guess my last question is um, how would you characterize, or could you characterize the changes 15  you've witnessed in the court system over your career? PR: Well, I've known a couple things worth mentioning, I think. Um the first is the specialized courts that have developed since I’ve... it started maybe when I was there but has expanded. By that I mean, in the criminal area we had a so called "drug court" court. Where people, appropriate people, appropriate candidates are diverted, so to speak, from law prosecution into a treatment approach. And they don't just walk off scot-free, but, you know, they end up being, doing supervise and getting themselves cleaned so to speak, off of drugs. And they do get a reward, a lesser penalty. We we’ve seen that in, we have another one for mental health. Folks with mental health issues. They get, it's an attempt to divert out of the criminal court. That and the veterans' court. Men, women suffering post-traumatic stress syndrome from the military are pulled, nothing on real serious criminal cases. You know, armed robberies and murders, I mean, none of that is diverted. But the lesser offenses, if they fall into some of those categories. I made a prediction, I think I was on the Appellate Court when Judge Ferguson, who's a longtime friend of mine, started the drug court. He was the perfect person to do it. He was patient, he recognized that failure was part of the process, and I said, "Ed, you're wasting your time. You know, not this thing will all fall apart." Well it didn't. And he was successful. And part of my penalty, I agreed to come back for every graduation, they called it, [cough] when a person went through the program, they had a little ceremony and they recognized them. So for several years I had to go there and acknowledge "I was sure wrong about this." [Steve laughs] And I was. But, I mean, that's a big change that I have seen. The other is what what I'm going to call the pro-se. When I was on the Circuit bench, we had very few people attempting to represent themselves. From what I see and hear up there now, it is a big, big thing. And we have a self-help center in the courthouse. I think in the basement. Some of the members of the BAR volunteer their time to advise people who can't afford an attorney. The public ah um defender, of course, represents criminal. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about civil matter. We have the the Land of Lincoln Foundation which represents people who can't afford an attorney. There's several organizations that do, they're overwhelmed. They can't take care of it all. So some of the lawyers volunteer their time. And there's another person there who just helps with, people fill out little small claims pinpoint and all minor stuff. But that has become a big thing. The judges tell me we're hearing as many pro se cases as we are attorney representation today and in some areas more. Family court particularly. That's a court I don't know anything about. I never was involved in, I always avoided it. One time, I'll digress for a second or two. As Chief Judge, and the family judge, our judge, went on vacation, whatever they were shorthanded. So I went out to volunteer. I tried to help out. And two of the attorneys who were long-time attorneys, my colleagues my age and my friends. At a recess said, "Philip, you know we love you. You don't know what you're doing. More harm than good. [Philip laughs] This isn't working. Why don't you go find a criminal case or a railroad case or something?” You know, and I said, "Fine. I just thought I'd come volunteer to help out." And they were right. I didn't, I wasn't suited for it. I'd never done, I'd never practiced that kind of law. Never did it as a judge an...but anyway, I digress. The family court tells me there are way more people representing themselves today than ever before. Probably so in maybe some of the probate and guardianship matters. The criminal court we have the public defender, of course who. Another one who's overworked. Another office needs way more help and way more money. That was always a struggle when I was our Chief Judge. I go from the county board seeking an appropriation to represent, you know, hire lawyers to represent criminal defendants. An you know, talk about political, "why the hell do we have to hire all those no-good so and so's?" I said, "Well it's not me, you know, saying this. The United States Supreme Court has dictated this." "Yeah, but I uh, you know, they don't have to pay for it” you know, 16  fight every step of the way. That's a perennial. That's true in every county everywhere in Illinois and probably elsewhere. SH: Well, thank you so much for your time. I wonder when you think back growing up in Collinsville, a family of coal miners and mechanics and your progression that parallels the progression of the region and the changes in the region. PR: Well yeah, I mean, you know when I look at my own family, I told you my youngest brother is a PhD at Purdue, my other brother is a uh certified public accountant. He's in San Francisco in the Bay Area up there. And uh we, you know, for coming out of the coal mine, we did pretty well. And I think that's not just me. I mean, that was true with a lot of the youngsters who I grew up with ah in this area. I mean, I credit the university. You know I couldn't have gone anywhere except SIU, financially. So, you know, it’s, as far as I'm concerned, you know, the university's been a god-send to this area. SH: It's been a powerful engine. PR: Oh indeed it has. I've served on some things up there. After my wife died, I set up a partial scholarship in the School of Nursing, which was one of her favorite ah things. But I'm on the Italian Studies. I've got no Italian blood at all but I got roped into the Italian Studies Culture Committee up there. And ah a couple others. I've enjoyed every bit of it though. I mean, I'm so happy we have that university. SH: Well great. PR: Yeah. SH: Well and did you have a role in bringing, opening up the Edwardsville campus? PR: No, not really. I remember, you know, it was one that first got started. Um I was just getting out of high school. Um one of the farmers, actually there was, it's recorded somewhere. A helicopter the farmer was shooting a shotgun. You know, it was twenty-six hundred acres. You know, and it's a place, you know, I've stopped there a time or two and get...I repeat this every time. It's a place of natural beauty, tolerance, I mean, it's right down my alley. SH: Yeah. And did you know John Rendleman? PR: Yes. Yes, I did. SH: I understand he was quite the guy. PR: Yeah. That he was. SH: And...uh PR: Yeah, I, you know, as they say, I'm trying to maintain some contact with the school all throughout the years but uh I have a granddaughter who's graduating from high school this year. And that's exactly where she, you know, she's going there. 17  SH: Excellent. Excellent. I'm glad to hear it. PR: Yeah. SH: Well, Judge, thank you very much. PR: Okay. I've enjoyed talking with you. SH: I've enjoyed talking with you too, sir. Thank you. 18 
MadisonCounty;Charles Jackson;1950;2017;Charles Jackson  1950 - 2017    Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Charles Jackson Oral History Interview Jesse Macias, Interviewer July 16, 2017 Jesse Macias (JM): This is Jesse Macias History 470 doing an Oral History Project and I'm interviewing Charles Jackson who's from... are you from Alton? Charles Jackson (CJ): I am yeah, born and raised JM: Born and raised in Alton, Illinois and attended Western Military Academy. So this is my interview with ah Charles Jackson, so...Charles if you could at first ah just the background on your life growing up parents, where you lived... CJ: I was born in Upper Alton, in 1950, my parents were all involved with Western Military Academy. My great grandfather was among the founders he was the owner from in the 1800s until it closed - the family - he purchased the school in the 1800s and the family was involved in the school until it closed in 1971 so I grew up right across from the campus of Western Military Academy and spent my youth there really. Always playing on those fields was very where the history of the school. Went to the Alton public school district through 8th grade, and then I attended Western Military Academy I was the third generation of my family to attend Western Military Academy and ah, loved Alton public schools, but also loved my experience at Western. JM: So you're ah family was always involved in it? Now was it like your great grandpa is that what? CJ: Yes the school was founded 14 years after the end of the Civil War in 1879 by an Amherst, Massachusetts college graduate who believed that ah the West needed a place for the proper education of young men. And he found a spot in Upper Alton Illinois and it’s the perfect - it's really an ideal setting still. And he founded the school and his first hire was my great grandfather Albert Matthews Jackson who was a Princeton graduate and had spent two years teaching at Blair Academy a prep school in the East that still exists its a $60,000 a year tuition school which prepared young men for the very best colleges the country had to offer and Albert Matthews Jackson and Wideman who was the founder wanted to create a school like that in the West and thought it was necessary so from that point forward the family had been involved for a number of generations... JM: Okay CJ: ...in Western. JM: So now that Blair in New Jersey? Is that the Blair Academy that I'm thinking of? CJ: Ah I don't know, Amherst College is in New Jersey, Blair Academy for some reason I thought was in Pennsylvania but I could be wrong I dunno... 1  JM: Okay I feel like I've heard of it but it might be a different one so... okay and at that time, Illinois was West. CJ: Oh for sure yes JM: Okay, and you attended school through 8th grade in the ah Alton Public Schools um, maybe talk about the elementary schools a little bit in Alton on which schools you went to, did you enjoy em? CJ: I went to Horace Mann to start with up on Edwards Street, I remember riding my bike up there, had a remarkable experience and Alton at the time I graduated from high school in 1968, and Alton in the 60s and 70s was there - in some of those years were a 1,000 people per class graduating class it was ah... an "All American Town" I had a great experience then I went to East Junior High School which is now East Elementary School I went there for two years before I went to Western. JM: Okay now when you were in East, ‘cause this was when Alton had several middle schools, they have one today, when you were back in the schools do you remember how many - was it East, West, and North? Or was there even a Central? CJ: It was East, West, North, and Central. And there was great in athletics there was a great competition between those 4 schools, winning the sitting championship in any event was a major deal it was really much bigger system then it is now. JM: What sports did they offer in middle school at that time? CJ: Well, one year they didn't offer any sports and I remember they put a volleyball club together I think the board worked to get sports um, I can't remember what year it was, but one of my years there they didn't have sports - otherwise they always had football, they always had basketball, they always had track. JM: And Alton was always pretty good at football and basketball? CJ: Yeah, awesome JM: It makes you wonder if they ah, kept those going, if they - CJ: Yes JM: I'm not knockin' Alton at all... CJ: They had tremendous athletics JM: They struggled at times. So then when you transferred to Western, was it much of a ah, transition for you? Or how was the transition to high school? CJ: I lived right across from the school my entire life so, it was easier for me than it was for anyone else who arrived there. Your first day at Western Military Academy was I'm trying to think of the right word, it was ah, an experience you would never forget. You walked away from everything you were 2  comfortable with into a place where you knew nothing and you were the lowest ranked person on the campus. The buildings that looked the same you didn't know any of the people who were barking orders at you, your schedule was different. Parents were not allowed to come back for six weeks after they dropped their kid off and after six weeks, most students at Western had adapted and it had given them some sense of accomplishment. But, I mean for me, even for me, across the street I moved from my bedroom to the academy to a barracks and I couldn't cross that street. If i needed something I'd have to stand on the corner and yell for my brother to throw me something, it was something I've never forgot, and I can't imagine how hard it must have been for so many students who arrived from elsewhere, including foreign students who couldn't even speak the language. JM: So you guys had kids from foreign countries come in? CJ: Oh yeah we had a large significant foreign student population, all, almost all Spanish speaking mostly from Mexico, and those kids were very interesting their parents were primarily involved in international trade or business um, some politics, and when they sent their son to Western what they wanted was a full deep immersion in American culture, they wanted them to know habits and language there was a rule at Western at one point, where Spanish speaking students could not speak Spanish to one another, they could not room together, they could not congregate and that was at the behest of the parents. Like I said these people - these kids have gotta learn this if they're going be - some of my best friends some of the very most accomplished people who ever graduated were foreigners. JM: I had no idea they had Spanish kids there. Do you know whatever changed that attitude they couldn't speak together or did it ever change where they could speak together CJ: It did. Um, when I was there that rule did not exist anymore. I think they just believed that the, they were learning the language and you didn't have to keep them from speaking Spanish to each other. A little bit off topic here a lot of the Latin American students were tremendous soccer players and they were always talking to one another in Spanish they thought it suited them and I'm sure they were swearing in Spanish and you know, nobody could prove it, but you know those rules were gone, but they did get a full emersion of American experience at Western. JM: Did those kids make a difference on the soccer team? Did you guys? CJ: Oh yeah, they were very good and Saint Louis Prep School, Saint Louis High School at the time were where they ground zero for American soccer they were really good and we were competitive not because of the American kids at Western, because of the Latin American kids at Western. JM: Okay, I never knew that either. So you said ah, coming in for a ah first year student or fresh, do they call them Freshman or do they have a term for the... CJ: New men. JM: They call them new men CJ: I mean, well, freshmen were freshman but if you came new as a sophomore you were a "New Man" and there were rules that applied to all New Men. They couldn't go out the front door of the barracks, 3  there were certain limits on them. JM: Okay. Did you guys have ranks when you were at Western? CJ: Yes. Yah, from the very beginning you were a Private, and then a Private First Class, then a Corporal Sergeant, Staff Sergeant, moving up the rank, yeah, everybody had a rank yeah - everybody had a rank JM: What was the highest you could achieve as a...? CJ: There was one Lieutenant Colonel one cadet assigned Lieutenant Colonel in the history of the school other than that, Major was the highest. There was one Major for 91 of the 92 years and that cadet was the Battalion Commander. JM: Okay. Ah, and that rank that you guys got from that high school could you, when you moved on if you went into the military, how did they, what did they do with your rank? CJ: That rank didn't translate at all JM: [laughs] okay CJ: We got out of Western with a with a certificate that said we were a Brevet Second Lieutenant in the Illinois National Guard but um, during war times, a lot of cadets went directly into OCS, Officer Candidate School, and then into the military and because they had the ROTC and had all these military classes they became officers immediately so there were benefits but you didn't become an army officer because you'd been an officer at Western. JM: Okay, but you did get to go through the... umm... Academy Officer Training Program? CJ: Yes. Yes and it did give you, if you went into the service, it was a huge advantage JM: Okay, Okay. JM: You kinda talked about when you first moved into living in the barracks was a little different. What was life like the barracks what were the barracks just like in general? Were they set up? (09:58) CJ: Well it was ah there were 60 cadets in the barracks three floors all two man rooms, and your typical day was crowded busy um and steered by bugles. Bugles gotcha up, bugles gotcha into formation to march to every meal and sit in assigned seats, and a bugle put you to bed at night. And basically, that was it. Your school days was just like everybody's else's school day, but Western had an activity period after school that they paid a real attention to. The school motto was "Mens sana in corpore sano", a sound mind and a sound body and they took the sound body part very seriously they had lots of sports, almost before anybody else did, they had almost every sport available and they expected you everyone in the building and on the grounds to compete in a sport and we were part of a conference you may know some of the schools of the conference it was the ABC league it was ah, John Burrows and Country Day, and Principia and what they would do with this athletic system that they had was they would assign every student a number based on how tall they were, how heavy they were, and how old 4  they were. ABC league. And, what it did was, if you were a little bit smaller you competed against "C" athletes, you could always move up to "B" but "A" could never go down to "B" JM: Okay. CJ: so it particularly in football, there are some people that great athletes just can't compete they had a "C" team for em' and they had tremendous coaches tremendous facilities and great schedule, so, I loved the system, everybody could compete in it, and they expected you to. And if in one season you chose not to, they had clubs  they had a sailing club, a fencing club, they had a stable, a riding club, a rifle range, I mean more than many colleges so - they wanted you to be active during activity period. And then in the evening there was a study hall um, if your grades were good, you could go to your room and study if they weren't you'd go to the big house the administration building and there would be a modern study, and then the bugle would put you to bed you'd repeat it the next day. JM: Pretty regimented CJ: That's a day. Very regimented. Not much time to get in trouble, although you could, but it was difficult. JM: Did you ever go to the administrative building for studying? Or did, you did? CJ: I did some time in the administration building studying yeah. JM: How many, how many kids did ah? [mumbles] CJ: You know, I don't know, the school's full attendance was probably 320 when all the barracks were constructed when the whole facility was built, 320, and for almost all the school's history it was at 320. When I graduated in 1968, it was 320. In 1971, three years later, it was down to 154, and they really couldn't they had trouble paying the bills and that was a decline... an anti- military, anti-establishment, anti-discipline approach, and it just wasn't cool to be there, wasn't cool to send your kids there, it was the only time in the history of the school when cadets when they went on furlough or went home, they said don't wear your uniforms on the train. JM: Okay... CJ: I would say you know, half the kids basically were in the study hall JM: [talks at the same time] half the kids, okay I didn't know that. That ABC league I'm familiar with it ‘cause we've coached kids through it before I never knew what "ABC" stood for. CJ: That's an athletic classification. JM: So you figure the "A" athletic you're the really like you're varsity is that how it is? CJ: It has nothing to do with talent, it has to do with how tall you are, how heavy you are, and how old you are. 5  JM: Okay. I think that they still use - they still call it the "ABC" League over there CJ: I think they just changed it, last year someone called me from Country Day and said that. JM: Okay CJ: I know all the same schools are in there though JM: Yeah, well I knew they used to be because you'll find this funny, I dunno but when Tommy was there we were looking to pick up a tournament and I - didn't have any help, I had to call all the schools myself, and I saw there was an "ABC" Tournament and I called one of the coaches at Burrows, or Country Day and said: "You know did you ever have opening in this ABC tournament so we can get in." And they never called back, they probably thought I was crazy to try and get into their league tournament. CJ: [laughs] JM: It didn't work out very well, so... CJ: You know Lonnie Wilson, right? You know Lonnie Wilson's son Jake, Jake got a full scholarship to Country Day because they can pick kids out, and it's a remarkable school, great education JM: Oh yeah, I was always curious about that, because he was a great player I seen other kids and Ezekiel Elliot the one over there and I was just wondered how they CJ: Now they're all ... JM: They had connections over there, you know, CJ: They find a way to get them in JM: Yeah I have a friend that plays football, he's got a kid that's a great quarterback, and he said yah we're going to a camp, it's a select only camp in two weeks, and it's run by the both schools CJ: Oh really? JM: He said the call it a combine, but it's not CJ: He might get an offer [laughs] (15:03) Western never did that. JM: You guys didn't do that? CJ: You know, in the 1930s they would um, the enrollment dropped because you know it was a private school and cost some money, and there was some bartering to get enrollment that I remember my dad talking about somebody gave em an Oriental Rug for a semester, you know just trying to keep the school open, and they got through that, very well but they couldn't get through the 70s. JM: Yeah, I kinda heard, or remember hearing those stories about the anti- you know what I mean? You 6  kinda want to say a little more about that so you had good attendance all through it was Vietnam came up, and there was the kind of a backlash on... CJ: Well Vietnam did it really, I think in 1968, one historian said we lived through more history than we could digest, Bobby Kennedy was assassinated, Martin Luther King was assassinated and in Vietnam, there was an event called the Tet Offensive where the the North Vietnamese Communist launched a coordinated attacked on New Year's Day against American forces, and it wasn't really a successful militarily but it altered the American psyche. Soon afterwards, Walter Cronkite came out and said "maybe it's time for us to leave if we're not going to win this" and the whole attitude changed, plus the baby boomers which would include me, were catered to, they were so big they could alter government, they could really move things and they turned against that war, and they'd it was just a you hear all the stories about people coming back from Vietnam and the treatment they got, compared to what all of history veterans have have received when they got home, and it was just not cool to go to a military school. JM: Do you remember any specific instances where you could - did people ever protest at school? Did you ever see things in the newspaper locally where people said because I always gotta kinda wonder how it got so galvanized where it was shutting down schools. CJ: Yeah, that's a great question, um, I really don't remember anything personal or Alton people there was always a rivalry between cadets and Alton people, for 50 years they played a football game on Thanksgiving Day and I mean there were fights and people wanted to win that game, Western wanted to win it, people at Alton wanted to win it, it was a real rivalry but, I mean, other than what was just the normal rivalry I don't remember anything where Alton was protesting against the campus at all. JM: So maybe just once the enrollment started to slip, they couldn't afford to keep it open. CJ: Well they had all these barracks and they had to fill them up, they were heating them, and cooling them, and yeah they just couldn't pay the bills it was hard to pay the bills. JM: Well I know it's probably a tough story because your family was involved in it for a long time, do you remember the last year or two of Western when they were startin' to see when it wasn't going well and ... CJ: Well, I probably should, um, I was away at William (?) College and I could tell when I came home that ah there was tension there was concern about where they could keep it open or not I remember when that decision was made, I was home that weekend, and my mother and father were with my uncle and his wife - he was a superintendent - they were at our house off campus and my brother was a student at Western and they came into the room and they said we're just gonna have to close it. And it had to be a torturous decision for them to do it, and I remember that night, and I remember my brother who spent his freshman and sophomore years attending Western, and he's going to end up going to Alton high school, so I remember that but I mean, to tell you the truth, I was 20 years old, doing other stuff, I was sad about it, I didn't know what I was going to do, but other than that. JM: It was Randy that went there the first two years, and transferred over to Alton High, did he went to state in tennis? Was that right? 7  CJ: Mm-hmm JM: Did he ever how was the tennis program at Western? They have a pretty good one? CJ: Ah fair, I mean they had some good teams, not like at Alton. Randy also owned still the single-game assist record in Alton High School in basketball. JM: I didn't know that. CJ: Yeah JM: How many did he have do you remember? CJ: 16 or 18 it's one of those two  he said 18 I said 16 [laughs] but he still has that record. JM: Yeah. I kinda want to talk about the uh sports a little more, because I do always think of that when I see Western and they still have that great field down there that I'm not sure if it's being used? CJ: Isn't that a great facility? I mean, beautiful. JM: I always thought Marquette should move in - I'm not sure... CJ: Oh yeah JM: they didn't because you [inaudible] on campus CJ: That would be great I'm not sure this school's gonna last forever. They'd had it for sale for 7 years or so, and I just hope someone can save that campus, because it's the history there is astounding. JM: Yeah. Now on their sports front then there's was football the big thing there? CJ: Football was the king of sports at Western and it had always been. JM: And the football game that you guys played on Thanksgiving was that Alton High or was it just... CJ: It was Alton High School. JM: Okay CJ: And Western cadets in from the 50 years that they played that game Western cadets did not spend Thanksgiving at home, they spent Thanksgiving marching Alton's streets to Alton high school and watching that football game and it was ah, remember Andy Simpson? JM: Yeah CJ: He had three brothers play in that game they were tremendous football players and she told me one time the buildup for that game there were two or three weeks off between the last game and then the Thanksgiving Day game she said it was unbelievable the buildup in this town for that, The Telegraph had 8  end of the world headlines about the strategies and the betting that was going on in town and it was really big and she said and then when the game was over we'd go home and have Thanksgiving dinner and we'd talk about every play they knew every single play at this game and Western was the same way they would bribe the football team if you can beat Alton high school, you'll get pie a la mode with your dinner [laughs] they wanted to win that was a huge game. JM: Do you remember who did it seem like won more often when you were there at least? CJ: All throughout the 20s, the early years, Western won them all, Alton went on a 13 game winning streak in the 30s, some really good games Alton won every one of them, and then in 46, 47, 48, Western won, 49, 50, 51, Alton won, and then Western dropped it was Western's decision to drop the game they wanted the cadets to be able to have a Thanksgiving vacation, and I think they might have seen what Alton was becoming then. It was becoming I looked at the enrollment one time I did a little book on this rivalry and the enrollment at Alton was just going crazy at that point so yeah. Its fun though it really a fantastic - my family talked about that game all the time. JM: I've heard a lot of stories too about the Western football and it seems like it would be great because you guys played Marquette which is kinda a rivalry there? CJ: Um, I think they might have I never I was there we did not, and in history maybe in late when I was out school they might have played em but I don't remember that. JM: Okay. Well you talk about Thanksgiving the cadets stayed home that is really interesting what about the other holidays when you after you enrolled and after you started the school did you go home very much or did the kids stay there for a lot of the holidays? CJ: They were almost always at Western ah they could go home for Christmas, and then they had a Spring Break. And during Spring Break, we had so many foreign students that ah, they could stay on campus, rather than go home and the commandant of cadets named Colonel Moore, would always take a New York trip and cadets were in uniform they travelled by train they'd go to Annapolis, and West Point, and Washington D.C. during that stretch, and then come back so, yeah but there were a lot of vacation. You couldn't go home on the weekend without very special permission. JM: What was your school year like? Did you guys run August to May? Or did you go... CJ: You know it started in September and it would end in the beginning of June. JM: Okay, alright. And that trip up to ah New York City were those kids looking so they could go to school, at West Point and the naval academy or were they just kinda were those kids looking so they could go to school, at West Point and the naval academy or were they just kinda ah New York City were those kids looking so they could go to school, at West Point and the naval academy or were they just kinda CJ: I think some were - but I don't think that was the goal of the trip I think it was just to occupy those kids you know, and give them the opportunity to see those things. There was a barracks at Annapolis that was um, dedicated to a Western graduate Edward O'Hare - O'Hare airport was named in his honor so they 9  always took them by that room, it was just something to do that they thought would be beneficial to them in the long run, but it wasn't to sell them on the school. JM: Okay, did you ever make that trip with the school? CJ: I did JM: How'd you like it? CJ: Um, I was a 9th grader, you know, he told us - the guy who was running it told us not to take the subway and one of the guys that I was with said we've got to take the subway, so we did it, and felt you know, rebellious, we survived the subway that's all I remember about it really. JM: Ah. So Western ah, they had really good sports teams, what were their academics like there? Were they pretty rigorous? CJ: It was meant to be a prep school from the very beginning. They had very rigorous entrance requirements, until the last three years or so, they had to lower them a little bit. 94% of the Western graduates went directly to college, and that numbers lower a little bit because of the war years, when they went to OCS and went to serve their country, for a little bit, but yeah, it was a college prep school which I think some people don't recognize about that but that's what it was  it was meant to be from the very beginning a college prep school. JM: And so you had uh, you couldn't just sign up and show up you had to do an entrance exam or you had to qualify to get in? (24:39) CJ: You know I don't remember an entrance exam, but you had to pass - put forth all your transcripts, you had to do an interview, a family interview, it was important not to be thought of as a reform school. JM: Uhhuh Yeah. CJ: That you didn't want to have happen. JM: Just an ... I was always kinda think it was it was more of a prep school myself because you know they still had the Missouri Military Academy and I looked at it as kids who were gonna get a good education CJ: Oh yeah. A very good education and you get that military which were the classes of all the classes of Western, I mean I had good teachers at Western but the classes I remember were the military classes: military law, battlefield tactics, weaponry, great stuff for a young man, fun stuff. JM: Were you guys took like the military classes did you have guys who served in the military you know what I mean - did some of the guys have the first-hand knowledge? CJ: Five guys on the staff at Western - Western didn't have to pay, they were regular United States Army Officers assigned to this school because it was an ROTC military school and they taught all the military classes and most of em are combat veterans and they were riveting when they started to talk to you about 10  what I mean they were Korean War vets, World War II, World War I vets if you go back you know, and they were telling these young men what happens on the battlefield, how you react to it, it was first aid, it was, I mean I wish I had a list of the classes and topics because you'd be interested in it it's very interesting stuff. Yeah, they were not paid, and we got weapons. Every cadet at Western was assigned an M-1 rifle which was the rifle of World War II and they had a rifle rack on each floor of every barracks and then they'd unlock em when we did parades and when we had military classes about ah taking the weapon apart, and putting it back together and cleaning it, we had um, walkie talkies, bazookas, you know all these weapons were available in the military department to introduce us to you know - these Western cadets to good stuff. JM: Did they train you guys with the M-1 and with the bazooka? CJ: Yes they did. I mean the M-1 we had the time. Primarily for the manual of arms right shoulder arms, left shoulder arms, inspection arms stuff like that, but the other weapons how to use em you know, and they'd - you'd go down there and they'd set em up and they'd give you complete instruction on how to use em - I mean machine guns everything it was - for a young man, it was it was a lot of interesting stuff. JM: It sounds like yeah their curriculum would be pretty - pretty exciting CJ: Yeah it was a lot more interesting than English. [laughs] JM: Yeah what about the extra curriculum at Western, besides the sports, did you guys have dances, or formals, or you know plays, or anything like that kids could get involved in? CJ: Yeah that's a great point, um, Western understood that the it was important to sell that you were going to have social skills when you came to Western. And Western had the great - I think Alton was chosen because of Monticello, they had not just the college there but a prep school there - and they wanted for their young women exactly what Western wanted for their young men and they arranged dances, dancing lessons, and outings on the riverboat it was there was one class at Western where 10 of the cadets in the graduating class married Monticello girls I mean those were arranged dates and it worked remarkably for both schools. Yeah it was great. They also had every new cadet would be invited to a very formal dinner in their first semester there in the superintendent's home and they would have - it would be very formal, all had the place settings would be very formal, the serving of the dishes would be very formal and they would be instructed in what dish comes first what fork to use, it was all about table manners basically and they were proud of that and Western cadets always remember that. They know how to hold their knife and fork, how to place them when you're finished, you know, and they thought that that was part of that whole socialization project that they were doing. JM: It's interesting you say that because the thing you can never have of I'm really shocked that a manner classes aren't more important today, I know they are out there but people gotta look for them, but I think most businesses you have to have the good social you know persona or have to be able to conduct yourself you know in social situations and people, just I think struggle with it for a lot of reasons some of it might be technology but you know for a school to offer that that really that goes a long way. CJ: I think that's why I remember it I mean it was ah, an important part of what you know, the wanted the young men to walk out of there complete gentleman. Who knew military and was prepared for college 11  but they they understood when it all comes down to it you've gotta converse with people, sit down at a meal and not embarrass yourself. JM: The people skills, yeah, they go a long way. [CJ chuckles] Was there any um religion aspect to the school? Were you guys CJ: No. Everyone attended church on a Sunday, but they was a Jewish groups that went to Jewish churches there was there were Catholics, there were Presbyterians, there were Baptists so there was a church squad every Sunday we marched my particular group would march up to College Avenue Presbyterian Church - which just closed but they were bussed to people, but the school other than that other than Sunday worship service there was no religion involved. JM: On a Sunday though, did the whole school attend? CJ: Everyone did, yes. JM: ... go together? CJ: No, they didn't go together, they all went to their own church. JM: Ah okay see whenever I think of military school I always immediately place it with you know some kind of religion in the background or you know what I mean, or being associated more with that so. That's interesting. Um... CJ: I mean people who lived in Alton for a while will remember cadets the cadets coming into the church on Sunday and then marching out. But it's a whole bunch of churches and they all went to their own churches. JM: So did they wear their uniforms when they came into the church? CJ: Yes. JM: I would remember that too. CJ: Yeah. JM: There was no church in Alton there was particularly like had a lot of the cadets if you didn't a religion did they all end up going like to uptown to one of the churches or... CJ: I think they all went to a church. I mean, I know I went to my church, I don't know where everybody else went, but and I'm not sure who had the most, but I know there were church squad busses leaving every Sunday, and arriving back for lunch. JM: That's pretty interesting. Um, as far as ah, CJ: [cough] 12  JM: the cadets their life was the military full time was there anything people did outside the school I guess the kids don't have a job, everything you do is on campus for the most part, did you... CJ: Yeah I think so, um there are some exceptions. We had when I was there when I was a junior we had a senior who was a tremendous swimmer and he swam with an Alton group and some AAU tournament and did very well. We had some excellent musicians one who played with the Alton Symphony Orchestra there was some exceptions but those are the exceptions, for the most part, no they were pretty separate. JM: While on campus, did people have did you guys have set responsibilities where these guys were working the kitchen, these guys were on cleanup detail, or who was in charge of keeping up with the school or maintaining the school? CJ: Oh they had a staff who was involved in maintenance that cooks we had people who worked at Western for years um, the guys the chef's name was I can't remember his first name which I should it's Stafford and his um, son was like was a very high ranking student at Alton High, and then became a civic leader, we had a barber that was hired. The cadets served as waiters and it was sort of a prized job you got paid a little bit and you'd get out of some formations you'd serve the food to the rest of the cadets and stuff like that, um, yeah it was pretty much run by cadets other than the maintenance of the camp this was not, I mean kids could get on time squad and they'd have to you know, perform some duties but that was other - they had a maintenance staff independent of the cadets. JM: Okay. How were the accommodations at the Western? Was the food pretty good do you remember what the meals were like? CJ: I remember liver and onions, and it was just awful. But, I think I think if you ask most cadets they'd say generally the food was pretty good I mean you know, what I dunno who it was Grant said "an Army travels its on it's stomach" or Sherman or someone they said the best way to eliminate grousing and discontent is to make sure they're fed well. They were fed pretty well, yeah. Basically. JM: How did the meals work? Did you guys get just one plate? Could you go back? Or was it a strict diet? CJ: There were no seconds if you were at a table where you could get someone trade you his dessert for something you could do that, yeah at Western they had a table chief at one end of the table and an assistant table chief at the other, and five - it was a long rectangular table - and five cadets on either side and the cadet in the middle was assigned that position and that was called Siberia because the food would start at the two ends of the table so everybody would pick what they wanted, and this guy always got the worst food, and they would rotate people in and out of there so if somebody made the table chief mad, you know, and he would also at the end of the meal would stack the silverware the forks, the knives, the spoons, so the table chief, I mean the waiter could clean it up in a hurry. My first meal at Western, maybe because I was the superintendent's nephew, they put me in Siberia for a while, and I remember thinking I mean they got the food to me, and they were picking it up, and this is the fastest, nobody can eat this fast it turned out I got real comfortable eating that fast, but it just seemed like it there was there were always time limits on stuff, you know, you just ended up adapting to it, the meals would be one of those. JM: What was about an average meal, or how did you guys get? 13  CJ: Oh I dunno. Seems like 15 minutes to me, I could be wrong I don't know how long it was. JM: And that was breakfast lunch and dinner? CJ: Yeah - we'd march in, when we were finished we'd snap to attention and march back out yeah I don't remember how long it actually was, but it just seemed abbreviated there was no you know sitting around the table with coffee conversing, you'd do that someplace else. JM: Yeah. And Siberia is where nobody wanted to be? CJ: That's right Siberia was a punishment seat. JM: You had to do it your first year? [coughs] Did they have any other traditions where maybe the freshman had a responsibility they didn't want or, if a kid was not falling in line they were going to... any unwritten things? CJ: Well, there I might have mentioned this. At Western, when you became - when you were a freshman, if a senior was in the hallway when you came out of your room you had to snap to attention and just wait there until he just let you go, sometimes he'd make you stand there a while, sometimes he'd let you go - you could never wear your hat in the barracks and you could never in or out of the front door, I mean there was a little bit of verbal hazing which seemed to work, I mean you were pushing kids to get uncomfortable and you wanted the freshman class, the new kids, to bond in the best way and the best way for them to bond was for them to go through this experience together that came through the military department: "don't be easy on them, you want to make this difficult so they when they conquer it they've accomplished something." So yeah there was some of that but you know we had an event at the end of the year called government inspection where a high ranking government official defense department official would come and inspect the school and inspect your uniform, your room, your barracks, the facilities your weapons, he'd ask you questions about chain of command, um, field first aid, and if you passed you'd get an honor ranking Western always got the honor ranking, and after that government inspection weekend all the rules were relaxed, all the freshman became old men instead of new men. JM: I think a lot of schools kinda gotten away from that, there's a reason you're tough on em, people you know they don't want people kinda be pushed nowadays I feel like you get something out of it, the school I went to was kinda tougher on freshman, and it made you appreciate - get in line - and it made everything... CJ: Well I mean the military has done this for a long time and they believe that there is a benefit to having the, I mean, in the uniting of this unit, if you share this hardship and then conquer it, I think it works too, I believe it. JM: That's a pretty good lesson to learn too. So you ah graduated from Western Military Academy in what year? CJ: 1968. JM: And then, what were your choices for ah, college you said you went to William Jewell? 14  CJ: I went to William Jewell College it's a Southern Baptist school, Liberty, Missouri. JM: Did you go there to play sports or anything? Or you were just like.. CJ: No I didn't, one of my teachers had gone there, um, someone from Alton had taken me out there to look at the school, it just seemed like a good choice for me, I didn't really do well there, I was um, Western was been troubled during the time, after my junior year is when Western closed, and it was a private school, and I was not paying my own way, and this is ya know, what am I gonna do? I was gonna go to Western, and teach there, so I dropped out of school for a while and then I went back to school at SIUE, got the teaching degree the history degree, and turned out great. JM: How was SIUE when you attended there? You know, say much about it? CJ: You know I don't, I just went to classes I wasn't drawing any big conclusions about the school, it worked for me. JM: Have you been on the campus at least seen some of the changes? CJ: I have. It's remarkable. Yeah. Astounding changes. JM: I ah, even from when I went there, it was only 20 years ago, and its grown since then but the people that I talk to from the early days at SIUE, they never envisioned what it would what it grow to be so it’s... CJ: You know SIUE used to be SIUA? It used to be at Alton. JM: Well I've heard the people say before we could have had SIUE. CJ: Ahhh I dunno about that, but it was for a while, JM: It was housed, where was it housed? CJ: Shurtleff? On Shurtleff campus. JM: Oh. Okay. CJ: The dental school campus JM: And then did they just make the decision that SIUE had more space? CJ: I guess so, I don't know how it happened, but... JM: [laughs] I hear some people say stuff about that... JM: You ah, you went to William Jewell, and then you went back to SIUE got your teaching did you look - were you trying to find a job in Alton, or were you lookin just anywhere? CJ: You know, I didn't know if I wanted to teach, my script had been written in my own mind. I was gonna go to Western my dad had, my grandfather had, my great grandfather had and I thought do I want 15  to teach in a public school? I was questioning that, do I want to teach co-ed classes? I mean, I was comfortable in this all male environment. And I said well, I gotta finish this, I gotta started - I'm three years into it, so I got a teaching degree and my first job was offered to me in Chicago suburb um, this school was Fenton High School JM: Mm-hmm CJ: Bentonville Woodell near Oakburough, and I just took, it was just great, and then I got a job at Triad, Troy Illinois the following year, married an Alton girl, Ellen, in honestly it was it couldn't have worked out better, I had a great school district I was in the right job, felt great about it, I was teaching AP US History classes, I mean I got lucky I really got lucky. JM: So you knew Ellen before you? CJ: Yeah, she grew up ah near the campus at Western. JM: Ah okay, I didn't know that [inaudible] and then what year did you get that job at Triad? And how did you get that job? CJ: You know, I um, let's see, they had a job opening and I had been rehired at Fenton High School in Chicago, but I wanted to come back here, Ellen was living back here and I heard that Triad had an opening, and I went to Lou Houser who was the Superintendent of Bethalto School District, who I knew from church, and I said: "Whadda ya know about Triad High School?" And he said "They're better then we are." Now that you might wanna cut out, he goes: "They're a great school district." He said: "They're better than we are." So I went down there, and I um interviewed for the job and got it, and it was you know, I couldn't have asked more of, it was perfect for me. I got to coach basketball and tennis and it was some of my closest friends, my best relationships, students, just a great deal for me. JM: What else do you like about it? It just - good student body? Good community? You know a lot of the families down there? CJ: Yeah, and I watched it transition too. We were a school of 800, we went to 1300 when I was there, changed schools, just a student body with a good values you know they're curious, they're compassionate, they're informed, they wanna be informed, it was really a great district. But you know guys from there? Right? JM: Oh yeah, the Carmody, still pretty good friends, CJ: Love the district. JM: You know you oughta come up to the Alton open sometime the um, all the all Fall Converters play. CJ: I just sent Jeff Falkenberg the paper, you see the headlines? JM: No I didn't - Oh yeah, I did CJ: Yeah, brother affair? Right? So I posted something and he said: "Can you get me two copies?" So I 16  just sent it to him, yeah. JM: I didn't think about it CJ: Devon was one of my favorite students ever, he's a great kid. JM: He is a great kid, he's ah, he's teaching there now, coaching tennis just like you did. So you knew the Falkenberg for you all or you and Jeff pretty good friends? Did he coach basketball? Is that right? CJ: He's coaching basketball with David right now. David's coaching now. JM: Oh maybe that's what he was saying CJ: Yeah, so Dave's you know, I think freshman coach and Jeff is maybe sophomore coach I'm not sure which is which but they're both coaching there yeah. JM: So your son's coach and your son David is teaching in Triad. CJ: Teaching and coaching in Triad. JM: What's he say about it? CJ: Loves it. The legacy continues [laughs] JM: I talked to him when he first went down there, and I yeah, we'd love to have him back in Alton, but I'm really happy for him. CJ: He likes it. JM: Yeah he won't ever come back. JM: What about Mike Stump? How'd he end up down there, your friend Mike Stump? CJ: It was basketball, Mike was um, his first teaching job was a Springfield Griffon and then he went to um, I think it was Breese Central he coached there, Stan Eagleson the Hall of Fame Coach was his assistant there, and then my brother Randy was coaching at Carrollton and he moved to South Western, and asked Mike Stump to come to coach with him, so Mike became the coach at South Western then Randy went to Beth Alto, and Mike Stump followed him to Beth Alto, and then, ah, we were trying Todd Greg - you know Todd? Todd was coaching at Triad, and so I said: "I got the guy for you. This guy is really knowledgeable about basketball." So we hired him at Triad there, and that's where he retired. JM: Yeah, he was from South Western too wasn't he? CJ: Yeah that's right, Todd. JM: Okay. Now was his kid? Todd Gregg also? Was the other Todd Greg I thought also? CJ: Todd Greg's son played graduated this year from Triad 17  JM: Oh Okay. CJ: Yeah, and he played. JM: You got your job in Triad what about more on the personal life? So married Ellen, and you guys... CJ: Married Ellen and I think the best thing we did was our 4 kids, uh, all our, you know this isn't a parent talking but they're great kids, they're compassionate kids, and they're competent kids, very proud, and got 2 grandkids. JM: Oh I didn't know that. CJ: Yeah. JM: So um, what are they all doing now? CJ: Well, start with Matt. Matt works at Boeing he just got a new job a great job, he's gonna be working with ... I should be better about this, working in this simulator for a fighter I can't remember what it is, but it's a promotion it's a better job, he's very happy at that. He lives in the area, and he has a daughter our first - granddaughter. My daughter Jane is an attorney with a firm in Los Angeles, and she has a son named Jackson, Jackson William Wells, David is number 3, David is now teaching at Triad, doing very well down there, and Tommy is living in Chicago working at a very good job in Chicago seems very happy they're all doing well. JM: How'd your daughter end up in Los Angeles? CJ: Ah, New Orleans. She went to Tulane. When we dropped her off down there I did not like it at all I thought it was a hell-hole, but she loved the school Tule and now we love the city. Because we know exactly where to go, she takes us to the great dining, you know, the great Jazzfest, and she lives down there now. JM: So you guys don't go down to Bourbon Street and CJ: Well we did in the day, it would get down there... [laughs] JM: I see Matt down at the tennis courts sometimes, so him and David Yost, and CJ: Oh yeah, JM: So post Western Military Academy what do you guys do to try and keep alive some of the stories from it or, connection with the community I know there's kinda been an effort to you know keep this memory alive. CJ: I think it was 2010, Mississippi Valley Christian School who sits on the Western grounds, well, where the Western grounds - wanted to sell the site and some alumni got together and said if we're going to do anything to you know perpetuate the legacy of what happened here and the graduates, we've gotta 18  act now. So we went to the school and the city, and they were phenomenal. The school gave an easement of the land around the front gate which was hallowed ground for Western to the city, the city accepted it and made what is, in essence, a "pocket park" and they said do what you want with it. And we raised money, and we constructed a 12 foot high obelisk made of material that allowed us to tell in text and pictures the story of Western and it was 4 sided, we said let's tell a different story on each side of this obelisk I mean the fundraising was much easier than we expected because we had support in Alton and tremendous support from the alumni so yeah that's the big thing, we have done and we have alumni groups that we have not had in every reunion is an all school reunion because unlike other schools, the the experience was so unique that when you went through it, whether you went through it 1946, or 1966, you - it's a shared experience. Like you went through it together. Yeah, we've got that memorial going and all school reunions, but the group is getting smaller every year, we're not adding anybody to it. JM: How far back does that reunion go? What's the oldest class you guys have that comes back? CJ: That's a great question, I think in the past do you know the name, Jim Goodwin? JM: I don't think so... CJ: He was a class of 46, and he just passed away, and he came from Washington Missouri and stayed in Alton, and he was a one of the leaders of the city, he won the Rotary Club Service Above Self Award he was on park department he was a remarkable man, he just passed away, 46 was about I think right now in this upcoming reunion in August, we're gonna have like, I would say, I dunno if we'll get to anybody in the 40s. We have in the past, but I'm not sure, late 40s. JM: Where do you guys do your reunion? CJ: Well they always go to the Upper Alton Museum, they always go to the memorial site, they always go to Loading Dock as the introductory thing for on a Thursday, they're gonna have a formal dinner. And they always play golf at Gordon Moore Park, they go to a number of places, you know? They plan the weekend out. JM: I'll come down to the Loading Dock and catch you guys down there. CJ: That would be Thursday, Thursday the 17th. [laughs] JM: Okay okay. Well um, I really appreciate your time. Anything else about ah, ah, your life or Western Military Academy ah you want to talk about? CJ: I think we're good. JM: Alright I really appreciate it, we're going to use your interview. CJ: Did we get the time? JM: We got it yeah. CJ: Good. 19 
MadisonCounty;Norma Glazebrook;1932;2018;Norma Glazebrook 1932 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Norma Glazebrook Oral History Interview Meghan McNamara, Interviewer Alton, Illinois December 2, 2018 Meghan McNamara (MM): The following interview was conducted with Norma Glazebrook on behalf of the Madison County oral history project that is part of the Madison Historical, the Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive of Madison County, Illinois. The interview took place at the home of Norma Glazebrook in Alton, Illinois. The interviewer is Megan McNamara from Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Norma do you want to start with telling me when and where you were born? Norma Glazebrook (NG): I was born in Alton, Illinois, on February the 13th, 1932. I was born at home because they only hospital with maternity at that time was St. Joseph up on Fifth Street and they had an epidemic so doctors told the parents to be that child can either be born at home or if you want to go up there you can go there. So my parents chose to have been born at home. MM: And that was in the Brown area? NG: I lived in the... I was born and raised in my parents’ home on 1012 Brown Street in Alton. MM: And do you want to tell me a little bit about what your folks did for a living? NG: My mother was a stay at home housewife. She did volunteer work very much with the school on Mother's Clubs because I went to Humboldt school and we had a lot of children, which we called Dog Town where they live behind the old Illinois glass company. They lived either on houseboats or they lived on houses, on stilts, and when the floods would come they had to be evacuated and they were very, very poor income. And they went to Humboldt school and so did I, and my mother was in the Mother's Club that helped the children that were less fortunate. MM: You said they made, you she made like two meals or something. NG: The Mother’s Club made two meals a week of yip yips, milk, and a cupcake and it was ten cents I believe for a ticket and then they sold them to the children, and then the children that they didn't have the money for it, they gave them free tickets, so they knew they had at least one meal, two meals a week. MM: And you went there all through elementary school. NG: Grade school, yeah. Kindergarten through sixth grade. MM: And your father, he worked for the railroad. NG: Yes. He was a conductor on the Illinois terminal railroad. 1  MM: And your grandfather as well worked for the railroad? NG: He worked for the Burlington railroad, yeah. [crosstalk] MM: You had a cool story about your grandpa and the railroad. Do you want to tell it? NG: Yes. If you all remember the bridge from Alton to St. Lou... er, from Missouri to, Illinois to Missouri, there was no bridge at that time in 19, er, 1894. And my grandfather was an engineer on the Burlington and he took, they put in a bridge that would turn so that when the barge traffic went through with the higher boats that they could go through. Otherwise they couldn't because the bridge was too low. So my grandfather took the first train over that bridge and his boss told him, “Klel, I think it'll work, but it's all steel. It isn't rock. And I'm not real, not real positive on it, but if you feel it shake a bit, well I want you to jump." But grandpa said, “But he never asked me if I could swim or not.” [Laughing] But the train went over the bridge, they had a big celebration at the Illini hotel, which is now the Stratford Hotel, and they had served pheasant under glass and I don't know what all. I have a copy of the invitation. MM: That's a very cool story. You want to talk a little bit about um, the baton twirling? You want to get into that already or do you want to talk more about your childhood a little bit? NG: Basically I was just an average child. I was an only child so I was always out in the neighborhood looking for friends to play with because most kids had brothers or sisters to play with and I didn't have that, so I pretty well was average kid, but I was always out looking for friends to play with and unfortunately, there weren't a lot of girls in our area, but there were a lot of boys, so I learned to play kick the can and what all the boys... I was kind of a tomboy. MM: Um, well, let's get into the baton twirling. You always wanted to be- NG: Way back from a little girl on when I would see the major ads and we'd go to the different parades... patriotic parades and I'd see the baton twirlers or usually they were just a drum major directing the band, but that was what I thought I wanted to be when I grew up. Didn't realize when you got to be older you couldn't do those things. But that was always my dream to do this and I wasn't able to find a teacher and do anything with it uh, until I was 14. When I was 11 years old, I was in Shriners Hospital for six months because of the growth on my knee and that was in 1943 when the war was on and they thought that I had cancer of the bone on my left leg and I was in Shriners for six months and um, the doctors told him when we left there, I want that girl to get activity, strengthen her legs and mom and dad would never let me ride a motor, motor, not a motorcycle, a bicycle, because we were on a busy street. They wouldn't let me roller skate on the sidewalk, busy street. You might get out in the street and get hurt, and so the doctor says I want her to get a bicycle and I want her to get skates and I want her to strengthen the legs. And from then on I've been in baton twirling. I got a chance from a majorette down in southern Illinois that moved here and she was giving lessons in her backyard and I thought, well I'm on my way now. So I started there. MM: But first before you bought your first baton, you had a couple of [crosstalk]. NG: Well, yes. Anything I could ... If I got a stick... broom was a little too long, but mother had a glass towel rack in the kitchen and when she'd go to the grocery store, I'd try that, and in the living room on the rug, but one time it slipped and broke in many pieces and when she came back, I'd taken a wire coat 2  hanger, straightened it out and put it over the edge where the towel rack was and I have dish towels over it so she wouldn't see it that, when she picked up the dish towel, naturally the wire fell out and you know, the whole story was unfolding there. And so then, I uh, my dad tried to make me one out of a copper pipe, uh, half inch copper pipe with a tennis ball on one end and a, and a uh, chair crunch on the other end, I mean um, yeah. One of things that fits on the ends of the chair legs. And uh, that did not work too well. It was too long and we didn't know anything different. But then later on I sold Christmas cards and I bought my first baton from Plover Kramer music store way down Broadway. MM: I love your story. You want to talk about the first time you brought it home? NG: Yes. I sold Christmas cards for two years, bought the baton - it was under $5. I think it was about $3.98 to be truthful. But anyway, I brought it home and it was shiny, it had a hard metal, well, it was during the war when I bought it, so there was no rubber to be had for the ball of the baton, it was kind of a plastic thing and there was a chair tip? cup on the other end I guess. But anyway, it had a seam down the middle of the metal and it was shiny and I came home and tried to do things, I knew the wrist twirl and figure eight. And I came home with it and after I messed with it for a while I put it in the corner and I got up the next morning and everywhere my hand touched, the perspiration from my hand, it had rusted and there was all rusted on. And so when my father came home from the railroad, he worked nights, he took it down and sanded it down on his work bench and then he painted it aluminum color so it would at least be silver looking. And um, I tried that, that didn't work very well at all but least it was a baton. And then eventually I got a real baton. MM: So, when did your lessons switch teachers? I know you switched from your first teacher? [crosstalk]. NG: I started with Marion Slicker, who was the, just a high school majorette from southern Illinois when her parents moved to Alton. And then when I needed a baton, she sent me to Ludwig music in St. Louis and uh, to buy a real baton, which I thought was thrilled to death. I think it was $4.50. And uh, my mother of course went with me and we when I told him what I wanted they said, did you know we have a former national champion man here that is in our facility. He doesn't teach baton, but he's here and his name was Roger Lee. So he came down and fitted me for the baton, the size with my arm length and so forth. And he took me down to the basement of Ludwig's. My mother was with me and he said, “Well, show me some things you can do.” And at that time he said, “We have a very good teacher here.” And I had outgrown the, the high school majorette that had shown me what she knew. And I started there with lessons and then after while he watched me again and he told my parents, he said, “She has outgrown this teacher” and he said, “She has visions of being a real champion.” And he said, “If you will let me work with her and coach her in my yard at home on Sunday afternoons,” he said, “I will not charge you anything IF you go along and later on let her teach baton twirling in this area. We don't have much of it here. And I'd like to see it grow.” And so that my parents agreed and they take me every other Sunday afternoon to his backyard and, and he's the one that was my coach when I won the national championship in 1950 in January at the University of Ann Arbor, Michigan. MM: And so they didn't have the majorettes in junior high when you were there. You didn't start until high school, is that correct? 3  NG: No, I started when I was 14 years old. Played around before that. But when I really started my first lesson, I was 14. MM: Um, so you started the junior high majorettes, is that correct? NG: Yes, I did. I taught the classes for the band director so they would have high school majorettes coming in. Yes. MM: And then when did the Piasa Indians come into play? NG: I graduated mid-year, 1950 from Alton High and I realized that all the children that were taking lessons if they weren't in band and that's when they discontinued junior high school bands and, at that time to save money, and I realized those kids have no place to go. So I started the Indians as a marching group just to give them something to do with what they had learned. Our first performance was in September of 1950, at Bethalto homecoming, we were paid a dollar a piece. There were 15 of us and then one little girl thought she couldn't make it, did make it. That made 16. They paid us $15, each kid got a dollar and I got nothing. [laughter] MM: Aw. But it was probably neat to see all your hard work... NG: Right, right, right. MM: How did you advertise for that to get started and what were your age groups that you had for that? NG: I started them at five and a half years old. If you wanted to start taking twirling in the ... I had a junior red corps and they were from about six to about 12... no about seven to about 12, then I had a junior court from about 12 or they were more mature, maybe 11 up to 14 and a half and then they went into the seniors from 14 and a half, 15 through aging out which would be 20 years old. MM: And so you taught them all at your house at first, is that correct? NG: At my backyard at first and then we were at different schools. We were Roxana school, we were at Wood River Roundhouse and different... and then we ended up our summers were always out at the airport and I had the courtesy of having the airport out there, the big area open that people would come and park and watch the airplanes and things like that. That was our main place that we parked there, and Bethalto Junior High School in the winter time. MM: I guess we are at high school then. When you performed in the Alton parade, did you say you guys were the first ones to be called the marching 100? NG: Mm-hmm. In high school, yes. MM: And when did you move to the Ludwig's or Laura's? NG: Laura building? MM: Yeah. 4  NG: When I got a job at the Telegraph, I took a... I was going to [unintelligible] college and I wanted... I was going into advertising, promotion and communications and I got a summer job at the Telegraph and I told them if I liked it I would stay and switch night school for my last year and a half into college. And it... otherwise I was going back to college and I fell in love with the newspaper and I switched to Washington U night school and I taught baton twirling on the weekends and in the evening, and um on the two evenings that I didn't go to night school, and uh, I needed a place and so I rented the Laura building at that time it was Lakeview Business College and they were going out. I had their place and I rented it for $20 a month. That included the electric and the water. MM: And... NG: And I was there 20 years. MM: Oh my, that’s a long time. And you also gave private lessons at home? NG: I have pri... No, after I moved to the Laura building, everything was down there. Right. MM: So the private lessons was just right after you graduated. NG: I gave private lessons up until 1972, and I retired from the corps and the Telegraph in uh, ‘70... November, December of ‘72, I retired from the corps and teaching. And then I retired from the Telegraph in February of ‘73, and I got married in ‘73. I married Robert Glazebrook 1973 in February. MM: Oh, I wanted to back up a little bit um, to get back to some of the stuff that we talked about from your childhood. You know, your vacations that you guys took, getting the free passes from the railroad and then as well as the downtowns on Saturday night. NG: Right. Robert Wadlow and so forth. Right. MM: I'll just let you talk. NG: You want me to talk about downtown? MM: You can talk about downtown or you talk about a little bit more about your childhood like some of the things that we had talked about. About your holidays and your Christmas and then as well as like your vacations with your family. I also thought that was all very interesting stuff. NG: Well, we can go back to ... I was in Roosevelt, I mean in uh, Humboldt School and we had poor kids from down by the river and they were in my school classes. And from there on, in Alton on Saturday night, everybody went downtown basically a lot. Good part of the people would go downtown, and the men would drive and they would park their cars down in the first two blocks from Piasa Street all the way to State street. And the men would sit in the cars and they’d either be sitting in the car or else they’d be sitting out on the fender talking with other people and the women would be shopping downtown. Every downtown was no taverns and things like that. It was all stores. One after another, there was [unintelligible] there was Woolworths, there was Grants Department store, which was a general department stores. There was Newberry's, which was a big general store. And then you went across the 5  street and we had stores there and we had the old fashion restaurant there that was very well known. And everybody at downtown basically ate there. We had two or three drug stores downtown and it was, everything was either they sold clothing stores, Young’s department store, we had [unintelligible] ladies were ready to wear, we had Carl shoe store, we had many stores downtown. Women and men both, would just start one store out that door to the next one. It was like a huge shopping mall, but it wasn't undercover. And the men would sit at the car, or stand at the cars sit on the fenders or whatever and talked and smoke and things like that while the women were shopping. MM: And then you had a run in with a Alton celebrity when you were little. NG: Yes. Robert Wadlow was downtown on one Saturday night and I was amazed we had a Woolworth's department, or dime store there. And to get in the door he put his hands at the top of the door casing and stoop down to get under the door. And then after he got inside the walls or the ceiling was much higher so he could stand up straight and he was in the store there shopping around and I got to see him first right off hand and that made a big impression on my life. MM: Oh, I'm sure it did. But you said nobody ever went up to him or anything like that. NG: They never bothered him. They might say hello to him, but nobody ran up for an autograph. They treated them just like a normal person. MM: And then, oh yea, your family vacations. I love that story about that how your dad didn't have vacations or anything like that offered through the railroad, so... NG: No. My father worked for the railroad and their idea was you get free passes on the railroad, so if you take a vacation, you don't get paid. And so naturally everybody during those days, they wanted to work as much as they could because we were just coming out of the Depression and everything and before World War II started. And it was very important if they wanted to work and they didn't want to take vacation time anywhere. So we got tickets, but no, we didn't have time to go. MM: Let's see, what else did we talk about. Your college and how it played out that you ended up at the college that you went to you because you got offered several different scholarships for your baton twirling. NG: Yes, but what they gave you is... to do it was not enough money for me to be able to leave home and go to college and the transportation back and forth even though I had passed us on the railroad, it just didn't add up. At that time it was very metered. MM: So you went to college? NG: [unintelligible], or [unintelligible] Tech, yea. MM: Okay. And when did you start at the Telegraph again? NG: Yes. I started the Telegraph in I guess ’52... ‘52, ’52 I started the Telegraph. 6  MM: And you were in advertising, is that correct? NG:I was in advertising, promotions and communications I think is way they at that time, they don't have that kind of a critter anymore. I don't know what it is now. I think it's communications and something else. MM: So that's where you met your husband? NG: Well, yes. MM: At the Telegraph. Okay. NG: Basically, yes. He was in the advertisement there. Yes. MM: I'm trying to think about some of the stuff that ... What were some of the various businesses that you and your husband after you guys got married that you guys had? NG: Bob had Glazebrook Heights subdivision. He wasn't much of a golfer he wouldn't play, but that was what he called his golf hobby. He would go out there in the subdivision and he did not build houses, but he bought land, develop the land. And so the lots for four houses. There's 120 houses, lots in uh, Glazebrook Heights and he developed that. He was also a public... I mean an accountant. He graduated with an accounting degree from University of Illinois and he also sold insurance. And uh, his subdivision tied him in with selling real estate. MM: And one of the real estate places that you guys owned together was uh, was the hotel? NG: Way back he bought as an investment, the old fashion Keystone hotel down at the corner of Langdon and Broadway and it's now Crown Optical. And it's right across from that little old, the house was the 1904 World's Fair house on Broadway there. And uh, when we, when he bought it, it had been turned into just ... Well, there were 46 rooms there and most of the people that worked on the barges would stay there because the rent was $60 a month for rent room and on the barges were 30 days on and 30 days off. So they would keep all their personal possessions in that room and they would rent it the month that they weren't there for them to keep their possessions there. And then the month they were off, they stayed there and that had been an old fashion hotel and on the third floor they had a large ballroom and uh, it said that the women of the night so to speak, would stand at the second door, or second floor windows and watch when the men would come off the barges, and try and coax the men to buy them drinks. And then there was the dance hall on the third floor. MM: And the, the bus? NG: Also that was the uh, bus headquarters for the Jacksonville Bus Line that went from, I don't know how far south it went, but went from Alton all the way up to uh, well I think maybe Peoria. Well I know it was Peoria because I used to teach in Peoria and I would ride the bus up there on a Saturday morning. MM: And they would just sell tickets out of the lobby. 7  NG: Yes. They sold tickets out of the lobby and the lobby was probably 10 feet across and about 20 feet long. And that was it. MM: That's crazy to me. Um, any other major real estate places that you guys owned together or was it just... NG: No, my husband owned quite a bit. He bought quite a bit of land for subdividing out in Godfrey and part of that land is what Glazebrook Park is now. MM: Tell me a little bit about how that got... came about. NG: Uh, we had a nice lake out there and he bought it. It was all farm land and we used to go out there and fish on Sunday afternoons and things. We'd go hunting out there because at that time Godfrey was not incorporated. They didn't incorporate I think until 19, uh, 1992 I believe this when they incorporated and you could hunt, you could fish, you could do anything you wanted to in Godfrey Township. There was no restriction. And so we would go out there quail hunting and we'd go out there fishing in the lake and Bob used to say, “I know I've, I’ve developed subdivision, but" he said, “I just can't ever see this being a subdivision. It's so peaceful, so quiet.” And Godfrey, the town, or the city of Godfrey, the crossroads, the very center of Godfrey is right where our pond is in Glazebrook Heights. I mean at Glazebrook Park, I'm sorry. MM: So did he go to the township and ask them or did they come to him? NG: No, this was done after he passed away November the 20th in 1995. And we had always talked about this would make such a beautiful place for ... Well, first of all we thought about living out there and I said, “Well, you're quite a bit older than I am and I don't want to live out here by myself.” And so from then on it kind of, that idea washed away and um, he's made the remark to me one day out there. He said, “Wouldn't this be a beautiful place for a park? Godfrey doesn't have any parks.” He said, “We've only got one park.” And that was Homer Adams Park behind the village at that time. And it was one acre. And so, uh, in 19, after Bob died in 1995, I started out in 1996. He died in November and in January of ‘96, I started going through the preliminaries to see that the first 40 acres of the land that we owned was converted into a park in memory of him and that's why it's named Glazebrook Park. Then later on, after we filled that real well, there was another 80 acres that adjoined us and they never would sell it to Bob. And so then uh, one of the gentleman died, there was five or six brothers that owned it. And so I talked to him and I said, “Would you consider me buying it?” And he said, “Well, I'll think about it, but what are you going to use it for?” So I told him what I had in mind. I said, “We've outgrown the 40 acres and we need more and there's only one place to go and that's east. Other than that, it's all been taken care of.” So I went back to Godfrey and I said, “We've got a chance to get this.” And they said, "No, we can't afford it. So I went back and I went to the State of Illinois and the State of Illinois and I made arrangements to buy the land. And when they gave me the check, I turned it over to Godfrey and that's the way we had the land to start and we had money in the coffers to start it. Now then Glazebrook Park is now 120 acres, but it started at 40 and I donated the first 40. MM: It's grown. Quite a bit. 8  NG: It has grown. Right. MM: Did you have a say so in how it was laid out or anything? NG: Uh, we had a friend by the name of Wayne Freeman and he's Godfrey boy. And he married the girl next door to me, that, er, daughter of the people that live next door to me when I was growing up and I knew Wayne well. And, uh, after he found out Godfrey didn't want the 40 acres because they couldn't afford it, they had no money to take care of it. He came to me the next day and said, "I'll take you to Springfield and we'll get the State of Illinois to buy the land from you, you turn the check over to Godfrey and that'll be the coffer to start for the park." And Wayne Freeman’s title, he is uh, the chief developer and designer for Busch Gardens. He works for Auggie Busch. He now lives in Montana and that is the man that designed Glazebrook Park. MM: Oh, very cool. NG: Yeah. MM: Sorry, I'm just looking over my notes. NG: That's okay. MM: We didn't get too much farther than this. Well, I guess, do you want to start on Make-A- Wish? NG: If you want to. MM: Yeah, go for it. You can just tell me how you, how you got involved with it. NG: Okay. Um, in November, November of uh, 1995 ... I...My husband and [unintelligible] we married in ‘73. All I could [unintelligible] separate all my community dealings because we were going to travel a lot and things like that. So when I got married I kept all my community services and things like that. That had done the years before, including the corps, which I'd had for 22 years. I started it in ‘50. And uh. my husband had open heart surgery in 1990... uh, in 1970 ... Well, let's go back here. Wrong on that, 1995. We were married in ‘73, but in 1995 he had open heart surgery and they said it would be a success and it was. But the fourth day he threw a blood clot to the brain and he was in brain dead. So after he passed away, I no longer had community services and I'm an only child so that was pretty much ... I’m very close with my stepsons. My husband had three boys when I married him. I didn't raise them. They were either on their own or in college. And so anyway, although I [unintelligible] to a family, I had no rela... I had no brothers or sisters. So I decided I had to do something to keep myself busy and there was an ad in the paper for Make-A-Wish and I applied for it for wanting volunteers to do uh, with working out in the field with the families. So I applied for it and I went over to St. Louis and I joined the St. Louis Chapter, Metro East and then later on I was with them from 1996 January until 2012. And uh, right after, right after the terrible tragedy in New York, the bomb, uh, the explosions of everything, they switched it and made each of the groups, the different councils that we have throughout the United States, they made them by state other than by region. So now I'm in Illinois so I have my headquarters are now in Chicago. And uh, so I have been with them since 1996 January. This is 2018, I've been with them since then, 22, 23, 22 years I guess. With Make-A- Wish I've done over 300 wishes to families and I have worked with 9  their [unintelligible] speaking and I've also done with promotions and fundraising for Make-A-Wish. MM: And you kind of brought it to this area, right? Into Madison County? NG: Yes. Yes I did. Yes. And I have been, uh, I just reached this fall, I reached my 300th wish. And many families I still keep in touch with. We're not supposed to keep in touch with them unless they keep in touch with you. Uh, we don’t, they don't want us dogging people afterwards, but if they want to keep in touch with me, then that's fine. Then I'm allowed to keep in touch with them. MM: Any specific wishes that stand out to you over the past 300? NG: Yes. Yes. There's two that really stand out. When I first started working with St. Louis, we covered Wickliffe, Kentucky. And there was a little boy down there, fantastic musician. And he lived in a, basically we'd call it a shack and he lived up behind a gas station. And when we went to visit him, we had to park at the gas station, walk over a creek, and we had to call ahead of time because if there'd been a rain we couldn't get across the creek and there was no bridge or anything. And they lived in this one room, basic shack up there. His parents were mute, that is they could neither speak nor hear. And they worked on truck farms down in southern Illinois or in southern Kentucky, which is right across from Illinois, down to the end of it, and in Wickliffe outside of Wycliffe Kentucky. And, um, they had this one room, large one room house and they had, they were very poor. They worked in the fields during the summer for [unintelligible] barbers. And the little boy was a musician, talented to the nth ... He was 12 years old and these people in the town had built him ... He wanted a music room and of course they being mute, they had no interest in, not even know what it sounded like. And the city had, or the town had locally, had built him a little like shed the side of the house and he wanted it fixed electronically. They did have electric, they did not have running water. And um, I kept in touch with him until he was about 25 or 30 after that and he went on and uh, went into the musical field. And he...last time I heard he was teaching at a high school. And uh, that stands out. It was one of my first wishes and that stands out very much to me. MM: Well, that's great. And you had, I mean, you've, you’ve made a difference in a lot of kids lives kind of backing up a little bit. I remember you were telling me about how some of your kids that you taught baton twirling to ended up going on and being champions, is that correct? NG: That's right. And they were able to get college degrees out of it, yes.. Much better than when I was trying it. MM: Yeah. Well, I mean it kind of paid off because your teacher took a chance on you and gave you free lessons and then you, I mean... NG: More or less passed it on. Right. MM: Yeah. The gift that keeps on giving. And you said there was one more um, wish that stands out to you. NG: The first wish I ever did was with the CEO in St. Louis. And um, it was down in East Alton and little boy after we have a medical deal, but before they, we get their names, they've got, they’ve been 10  referred by either a doctor, a social worker, a nurse, a minister, family member, and then we take it from there. The children are checked out medically to see if they qualify for a wish but wishes for children between three and a half and 18 that have a life-threatening illness. And uh, they uh, this one little boy we went to, his mother had died of cancer and he wanted to go to Disney World. He was 12 years old at the time. And right after, about three months after his mother died with cancer, his father married the mother's sister. So a little boy now had a stepmother. So I went down with good news. Good news that the doctors had checked him again after his name was turned in, and he is off of our lists with life threatening illness and he's no longer eligible for a wish. The little boy was happy with that. And the stepmother threw a fit that she wanted to go to Disney World and she was so mad at us and when we left, she had a dining room table that had plastic fruit on the bowl on the table, and as the CEO from St. Louis and I walked out the door, she was throwing that plastic fruit at us if we went back because they didn't get a wish. She was so selfish that other than being happy, the little boy did not have to have the treatments, that he was doing fine and back to normal. Didn't qualify, didn't mean a thing to her. In fact, she wasn't getting a wish to make to Disney World was the main problem with her. MM: Oh my goodness. NG: So I went back with the CEO and I said, “This was my first wish.” And I said, “I just don't think I can do this.” And she said, “I've never had it happen before. And I hope I never have that happen again.” But she said, “That's unusual. I've never had that happen before.” And I've never had it happen since. MM: So they've got pretty much all gotten well from there. NG: They may still be in remission, they may still be doing treatments, but most of them uh ... I have a percentage rate of about 21% that have passed because of the illnesses they've had. MM: That's a lot. NG: Yeah, but not as when you stop and think 21% out of 300. That’s not... that’s a pretty good ratio. MM: That’s true. Well, Norma, is there anything else that you would like to include in your interview? Anything from Madison County that has ... NG: It's been a wonderful county. I've loved living every day of it and I hope to live to be a 100. My grandfather was 98 and my grandmother I think was 92 or something on my father's side, so I figure if you planned for good and long, well fine. And if you don't make it, well at least you planned for it that way. So that's probably it. I've had a wonderful life and my most rewarding thing in life, yes, I've had a lot of honors, but it's helping the children. That has been the most rewarding of anything in my life. MM: The Make-A-Wish children? NG: The Make-A-Wish children, yes. I've helped other children, but that has been a basic and ‘course, I did not have children of my own and I didn't have brothers or sisters. So the Indians, we had a reunion this year and basically I guess they're all, the whole pack of them, I guess were my kids, if you want to call it that way. 11  MM: Aww. Are the Piasa Indians still around? NG: Uh, no. They disb... I left them in ‘72 and I left them with a director from Chicago and they went on for a couple of years. But if you don't have a director that's right here, it's pretty tough doing it from back and forth. And then they tried a couple of years here but nobody had the patience or the time or the energy that it takes for that. And so I told ‘em, I said, “Before you get band, you want to disband” because I could see they were losing members and it just was not good. So they disbanded in 1995. No, sorry. 1975. I got married in ‘73. They disbanded in ‘75, but they were around for 25 years from 1950 to 1975. And we had a reunion in 1990, we had another reunion this past June. MM: Do you still baton twirl? NG: Uh, I pick it up to dust under it. [laughter] I wouldn't want to go [unintelligible] an ambulance [unintelligible]. MM: Alright. Well Norma, thank you so much for meeting with me today. NG: You’re welcome. MM: Um, I've learned a lot. You had a very interesting life. Trying to look back over [crosstalk]. NG: Probably very boring to most, but I've enjoyed it. MM: No. I did like the story, do you... I just found this in my notes, um... The um, the kids that got bused in to your school, you were talking about how they were more from like the farm areas and how they got to come an hour late. NG: Yes. ‘Cause they were cutting asparagus in the asparagus fields around Godfrey. Godfrey, asparagus, back in the '30s, '40s, '50s, they used to bring boxcars and set them on the side tracks for the asparagus farmers to fill the boxcars with asparagus, Godfrey asparagus. And you would go, my husband and I traveled a lot after we were married and you'd go different places, and these places would have on the menus, way back, Godfrey asparagus when it was in season. Of course, it was only in season from ‘bout April until about middle of June. [unintelligible] MM: So they got to come an hour late. I just think that's great. That’s hilarious. Well, thank you for meeting with me today and I appreciate... NG: Thank you. You've been very nice, and you've listened to a lot of rattle, and I hope you were able to get something out of it. MM: Oh yes. This is great. 12  
MadisonCounty;Bob Daiber;1952;2017;Bob Daiber 1952 - 2017   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Bob Daiber Oral History Interview Kelli Barbour, Interviewer Madison County Regional Office of Education July 11, 2017 Kelli Barbour (KB): Ok, the following interview was conducted with Bob Daiber on behalf of the SIU oral history project. It took place Tuesday, June 11 at the regional education in Edwardsville, Illinois and the interviewer is Kelli Barbour. So, welcome Bob Daiber. Bob Daiber (BD): Thank you KB: So Bob, if we could start off if you could describe how growing up in Marine, Illinois influenced your life? BD: Ok, uh, I guess, the way that it probably most of my life is that it was so local. Ok, and you, you grew up really, really in a time that is different than today in that, um, ah, I always, when people talk to me about growing up in Marine, uh, it was, it's, it could almost be like a story because you grew up walking around places. You grew up on the street really was how you grew up and in neighborhoods with a lot of different kids that you played with every day. You know, I grew up in the 1960s and that was before, um, people even watched T.V. all day long, you only watched T.V. [laughter], when you watched a particular program that were on, it wasn't like you had, you know, T.V. during the day was, um, I think soap operas and, you know, it wasn't like kids shows, I mean, cartoons were only on, on Saturdays morning and it was after school programs and things like that so. During the, during the day, you know, most of us played outside, um, um ball games were like all day long, like from 11 o'clock until probably dark and bicycles were the main thing because everyone rode their bike everywhere. And, as you got older, you know, you were more responsible so your distance that you could ride bike was further around town and, and so, that was what life was like growing up and, you know, you were, I think the thing is is that growing up in Marine, it was, it was a safe community. But, um, you were asked as a young person, you know, the responsibility, like, I, I always walked to school from the time I was four years old until, um, you know until I graduated from high school when I would come home on activity buses late at night. I mean, um, parents were, it was just different then, parents didn't take you to school. I mean, I walked to school every day with my, um, boyhood friends and, and walk home from school and, um, I did the same thing, uh, through high school, we, activity bus would drop you off, no one picked you up, you just. So, in saying that, what I really mean is, is that you, you part of the community. People saw you around, everybody knew whose kids everyone was, um, I, I, think one of the bigs things going to Marine grade school was very wholesome, um, because there was a lot of pride in the community, um, I played sports and, um, was, was knowing part of that, in the community and it helped shape personality with people and how younger kids looked at me and how I was inspired by, by older kids and, also, when I was growing up in Marine, there was an army base there and lot of people don't know that today but right on the northwest part of Marine, it was a military, a missile base in fact there. So, in the community, the other thing is, you know, I use to see these, uh, these young soldiers that were, that would come into 1  town. They walk around town, I had an older sister so they naturally were there, they, they visited my sisters and, and so my mom and dad would have them there a lot of times for dinner cause they felt sorry for these guys. So, there was another dimension03:35 that, you know, I learned about the military very young, growing up and, and um, it was at a time when we had the military draft in fact. So, um, but Marine taught me a lot because it was a working class community, as I look back on it. And I guess, the one thing that was most inspirational about it was, was that most people that lived in Marine were not college educated, ok. Um, and, other than, unless you were like a teacher, um, my mom and dad, um, my dad especially, um, was, um, a very, um, pro going to college. I mean, he didn't, he didn't get to go because of the depression and he, his goal was that all his kids would graduate from college, which they did. And, um, so, uh, and, you know, it was like living the American dream and everybody wanted better for, you know, this generation that I was growing up in. Um, so, but, there was also, you know, like real fundamental values, I think that, that shaped my life there and, uh, part of them was, was, was, you know, we had a church community we were a part of and, and you know, participated in and you knew people from there and, and the community as a whole was, was a big neighborhood, I want to say and everybody knew each other. You know, but, uh, you know, I had aspirations and a lot of it came from, you know, um, my education that I got when I was in grade school and went on to high school and, um, and how that began to shape what you were going to do and what your abilities were and, um, I never did really, um, plan to be teacher for example, it was just that, ah, you know, I was a good shop kid when I was in high school and I was inspired by Mr. Yakos, who was teacher, and that was kind of a roundabout way but I, in answering the question, I think, I think, just a lot of the values that were there in the community. KB: Mm-hmm BD: Um, made people who lived there what they are, about what they value, what they respected, what, you know, how they keep their property today. You know what mean? Because it was an expectation, you know what I mean? Of the type of person, you suppose to be, so KB: mmhmm, ok...ok, so you did become an educator, a teacher in the classroom. So with all your years in public education, what were some of the greatest changes in education that you've experienced over the years? BD: Well, this reveals my age a little bit but you have to realize there were no computers, ok? KB: Yeah BD: Packets calculators were really just becoming the big challenge when I started teaching in 1980. In fact, I remember teachers who didn't know if it was a good idea for kids to do, use calculators, um, as to how well their math skills would be. Like, if they used a calculator, could they really do the times table? If they used the calculator do they really understand percentages and fractions? Um, and then, you know, so typewriters, and then self-correcting typewriters, I mean I could go down this whole technical lineage of things I remember. Um, but prior to the computer age, ok, and with the advent of, in 1983, uh, I was teaching, uh, it was my third year of teaching, it was this big thing that happened in the United States, it was called "The Nation at Risk" study and I remember it because, very well, I had went back and taken some graduate classes and, and, so we were learning about what was being said and, and the "Nation at Risk" study began to change things big time in education, along with the advent of the computer, ok? 2  And, and the reason I, I was the two is the "Nation at Risk" study said that we were falling behind other countries and that there was no data accountability in what was going on in the United States and learning, ok? So you had the data driven part of education coming from that and you, you also had this other technological revolution that is going to take place electronically in education. So, probably the greatest thing that I saw happen was when the first computers, the Apple Two Ees, came out. And, um, and, I, I bought the first one that was in the Tirade district and I remember having discussions, I bought through a grant, yeah, about whether or not this was good or bad for education as to what was going to happened with this, ok? So, little by little, the story be told, computers became, you know, we started having computer labs and the changes in which kids were going to learn and how we did tutorials. And then also the technical application for those computers as for the different things they could do in business applications, as well as word processing...so that was, that was a major change in education. And then in the 1990s, with the advent of the internet, come about, was this whole new dimension. I remember, I wrote and got one of the first online grants, uh, to help the Tri district go online. I remember what was said to me by the principal at the time there and that the principal said, "I am going to go along with this but I don't think you know what you know what you are doing, that you are going to expose these kids to this whole world" and, you know, today I couldn't imagine a school not having the internet. You know what I mean? No school could function without it... KB: Right BD: but these things were all questioned cause they were new and they were risky because of, you know, outside of the world of communication, it was opening our world to everybody. But, uh, um, and then, you know, this whole thing with mobile learning, tablets, I think has been the one for one initiative we have seen as to how kids learn. Those technological developments have had all been major that I have watched, uh, unravel but, you know, something that I think far beyond that I've seen is I've seen, I've seen a change in maybe the dynamics in teachers, ok? And that, um, subject matter wise, um, you know, I think the way teachers teach has changed because of the technology, ok? And, um, you know, that also had to do something with, what I call, the art of teaching, you know? Uh, teachers, before they had all the technology, to be really good, had to be somewhat of an actor. There had to be an art to it, to hold, I mean, to.... KB: Right, to hold attention BD: you know, when people think about or they would say something about, "This guy was a really good teacher," they were really talking about, you know, cause, you know, "why did you like him?" "Well because he did this or this lady did this or what." And today, you know, teachers, in many cases, that are, that are in the classroom are more facilitators cause they are facilitators learning. So what, what I am describing is, is really a change in teaching dynamics that I have observed. And, um, I still believe every really good teacher has to have an act in the classroom. There have to be something that's the attention getter that gets kids attention, no matter how much technology we have. Um, the other thing is, is that, I think I have seen it in education happening is that there has been a request and I think schools have delivered it and it is a greater level of accountability, ok? When I started teaching there was no accountability, I mean, it was like freedom {laughter} and I laugh about it because today we have peer evaluations and you were evaluated but, um, it wasn't, it wasn't on benchmarks or by gaining scores and that is why I mention "The Nation at Risk" because it brought about looking at, you know, data ok? So, 3  uh, there was you know, how well someone did, so it was observation, ok? And today, I think we are more analytical, ok, as to how things happen. Uh, I might also just say something about just the nature of our schools, ok? And I don't know if it is all good, but I see our facilities resembling more as to what maybe higher education was today and not what high school was meant to be, ok? Uh, you know, like everybody tries to have the better facility, ok? And, and our goals, you know what I mean, like we have, very high-level sports complexes, I am going to use that as an example, and they attract residents because they are awed by them. Um, you know, they are not what they were in the 60s, 70s, or even 80s, or even the 90s, with what you see today. I mean, um, these are state of the art complexes, and, and, our schools, you know, I taught twenty years in a non-air conditioned environment with no phone, it was one phone line and, this will sound absolutely crazy, but it was one phone line and a pay phone, I even taught before there was a call cards, you know what I mean? KB: Yeah BD: So, you know, today, you know like I am sitting here with two cell phones and a phone, a land line on my desk and, and I just think about that sometimes and I laugh, I actually laugh about the first time, when I was, um, I was working on a textbook series in the late 80s and I think about taking these calls at the secretaries desk on, because there was only one line. You know? It was just, it's just different, the expectation of what you need to have today, and the environment in which you work, in which, no one think s about sending their kid to school in a non-air-conditioned environment. No one thinks about not being able to email a teacher if they have a question. Or being able to make a phone call, I mean, these are just facilities changes, you know? The other thing is, that I have seen, and being regional superintendant, I am the guy that has to sign the documentation on it, but um, school lunch is changed. Because, you know, um, up until, like 19, um, the mid 1990s, there was no breakfast programs. I mean, um, you either ate before you came to school for breakfast or you didn't have anything, you know what I mean? So, breakfast was... KB: It was just lunch BD: Yeah, lunch, lunch was served but there was no school breakfast and studies showed that kids that ate before they begin to learn, learned better cause they are not hungry and their attention span is better which I, I agree with, um, but that was a major, a major, change to see breakfast being served and lunch being served because, you know, I remember going to grade school and sack lunch days. I mean, we always had a hot lunch but, um, 50% of the kids probably brought their lunch. KB: Yeah BD: You know what I mean, in a sack, it's just the way it was, you know? But, um, you know, for all in all if I had, is education much better, much richer today than when I started in 1980? Definitely. Would anybody go back? No. [Laughter] No one, no one, would want to go back to, you know, one thing that I miss was Xerox, talking about Xerox. Cause I started teaching with mimeographs machines and you had these blue duplicator masters in the sink and especially when started school in August, it was hot. [Laughter] You know, so you normally came home, and you were purple, you know? ‘Cause you sweated.... 4  KB: Yeah BD: and you would be making copies for the next day and you'd be assembling them, so you had this purple and the smell. You know, there was the old factory part of the job too. And I remember when we got the first Xerox machine about what you were allowed to use it for and what you were not because we were still on purple digital masters. And, you know, just how you saved information in file folders to make masters as opposed to today what you are saving in your folders on your computer. And you know, if, if I went back into the classroom today, so much of the way I would teach would be electronic, paperless. KB: Right BD: So, you know, uh, and like today, uh, I operate a computer based testing center for certifications and, you know, things like that were unheard of, I mean, I have seen GED go from paper to paperless in this job. So... KB: Wow BD: Those are the transformations that I have seen in education, um, over my career. KB: That's a lot {laughter} BD: Yeah.... KB: Lots of changes BD: I look back on it, yeah, yeah, it's amazing. It's really amazing where we have come from. KB: Yeah BD: But the one thing that is consistent, that hasn't changed, is that every kid that comes into school wants someone to like him and wants the teachers to like him. KB: Yeah, that's true. Even though may they act like they don't BD: Yeah KB: They really do, right? BD: Yeah, every, every kid wants, every kid wants, wants to feel included and every kid wants to be liked. KB: Yeah BD: I mean, so.... KB: That's true, that's a good point 5  BD: Yeah, it is KB: That's a great point BD: Yep KB: Um, so why did you decide to leave the classroom and enter the regional education office that you are in now? BD: Well, it was difficult, um, I was torn. At the time when I became regional superintendent, um, I was also in the second term of being on the Madison County board, I was in government, ok, here. And I had an office on the second floor, here, in planning and development, I was, I chaired planning and development which oversees, like, all the development in the county, construction development, residential, commercial, business. And, um, it was a very busy time, it was there from 2002 to 2006 when the building boom was going on. And, um, there was a lot going on in Madison County, I will just be honest with you. We were looking at building roads and bridges and I was involved in all this, I was highly interested in it. It was luring my attention, I was also very involved in education at the time and tried because I was wearing many different hats. Um, I was, I think at the time, I was president of the IEA there, I was, um, I was department head, I was coordinating what was called teach prep. Um, I was teaching full time and, uh, so I was like really busy, ok? So, my life had gotten so busy and I was torn between two worlds that I really loved, ok? So, the regional superintendent, Harry Briggs, decides he is going to resign, he is going to go back and become a district superintendent and I was on the county executive committee at the time and the members of the county executive committee seriously talked to me, they told me, "Look, you should do this, you really should do this." And, and the discussion happened really, really the deal breaker happened one morning at about a quarter to eight, we use to have seven o'clock highway department meetings. And, um, it always tough for me cause I do those seven o'clock meetings and I never did want to stay because, for coffee and donuts, cause I had an eight o'clock class. So I would have someone covering for me until I got there at eight o'clock, you know? And they all knew I needed to get to school so...and on that particular morning, um, Frank Laub said to me "Hey, don't run off, I want to talk to you." So, Frank's like, "You know, I am going to be very honest with you" he goes "you're a fool if you don't take this because you are the right person, you do a great job, it would simplify your life, you know" and he went on with those [sic] and you are really needed in the county. And, and he said its, it would be a great professional move for you. So, but it was so hardly tried because I had been there for twenty-eight years... KB: Yeah BD: You know, plus I went to school there, ha, twelve years so, I like forty years of my life has been at this place that is on the wall that I look at every day here in a picture. And it was just like, I couldn't, I couldn't, I had a hard time imagining giving my keys up. Like I had the biggest ring of keys of anybody because of tech ed. I mean, because we all these locks and I had keys to bout everything there and, I was just like wow, you know? I just, you know, helped design that part of, it was a new school at the time. KB: That right, yeah. 6  BD: And, um, and I was, it was so nice and I just always dreamed of working, like what we talked about, you know? In such an environment and I was going to leave there to come to uncertainty. You know what I mean? I mean, and leave a place where everyone likes you, to come to a place where maybe not everybody likes you. But I looked at it as professional growth, I looked at it has a new challenge in my career and I looked at it has a place where I could make a bigger difference. So, um, Oberner, talked about it with my family, also it is an elected position so, you know, it wasn't secure. I mean, I was going to have to run in two years to get reelected. Well, the story be told, you know, um, I served in this office for ten years and, and a lot of good things have happened and, um, it was the right decision because I have impacted a lot more kids, I think, then if I have stayed being a teacher. And, um, and have brought some very positive things to education in this region. So, uh, but you know probably ah reminiscing I'm most proud that I'm a teacher. That's why I still teach. I teach at the alternative school, still go there and have fun, and teach um, units every year. I've taught every year that I've been a regional superintendent there and ah, kids prolly the greatest reward that I get is kids say to me: "How come don't you just teach?" you know? And you know I drive back and I think about it so, I you know, I don't say that I won't ever be a teacher again, but that was how I made the decision and I think it was the right one. KB: Huh. Wow. Okay. BD: I didn't make it for money, in fact I'll tell you a secret in this interview. I actually made less when I became regional superintendent than when I was a teacher at Triad the first year. KB: Really? BD: Yeah. I made less. Cause I gave up my county board salary. [laughs] KB: Ah okay. BD: So that was how I made less, in fact, Ken Miller who is the business major KB: So you had to give up the county board position because this was another county BD: Because this was another county elected office yeah so. KB: Interesting. Huh. Okay. So, what - tell me about your other political experience um prior to leading up to being the regional superintendent and now the next step that you're going into. BD: Well, you know, I was in when I was teaching at Triad, I had run for the legislature unsuccessfully. I had a really an interest when I did those legislative runs that I wanted to reform the way schools were funded because property taxes was people just complained and they still complain about property taxes okay, so I was on this mission that I wanted to get elected to the legislature to introduce legislation to try to reform the way schools were funded that was my whole my mission. I also saw you know, things that I thought I could help bring about in state government that would be good. But I was unsuccessful. So, from that, um you know, um, I became a village trustee in Marine, ah I decided I'd serve on the village board I was encouraged to do so there was an open seat, so I did that, and it was good and today I look - I drive around Marine and local government is really doing service for people so when I look at the pavilion in Marine in the park that I engineered and sought built, I drive to Pocahontas Road and I look at 7  the how much better that entrance is there because it was falling apart and I took it on and redid it, and I looked at Lubeck Reach which is a drainage problem that was there I corrected it - I look at the Marine Heritage Park at the lake there I began that, so ah, and then I look at the equipment that's was still there that I bought and purchased I did all this in 4 years time and so I saw a real dedication that I had done in community service there as a trustee and I was going to run for another term, and Don Goodall who was the township supervisor came to me and he goes: "You know, people talk about you, I mean you gotta think about ..." he goes "I wanna not be a supervisor and I'd like for you to take it over." So I said well, I'd think about it and then I left the village board and became the township supervisor which I did and which was really administrative, and being a township supervisor is you do alright, but it's really an involved job because you deal with general assistant and it probably taught me a lot about people in need. Okay. And so I have you know I'm still - you know I'm still township supervisor although I'm regional superintendent but I have a policy because of kids that go to school every day is that every kid that lives in my jurisdiction has running water, has electricity, has the amenities they need to live. Okay. So we don't often think about we have people living without electricity we have people who get their water shut off. So, water shut off, how's that kid take a shower or a bath the next day? There's no electricity, how do they go home and do homework or use you know, if they have a computer, how do they use it? You know? So, those are some things that I've felt very good that I've provided through general assistance and um, and also ah, just helping do the general maintenance in that area so, that I have done - I'm in 4th term and final term of that office I'm not running again. So I'll serve 20 years after this term is up as township supervisor, and um, but I've learned a lot about it and financial management, budgets, levies and all those types of things. So um, and as I mentioned when I was on the township supervisor I was also on the county board and the county board experience I will tell you prolly if there was anything that I ever reach back upon for knowledge um, it taught me so much about government about being a part of a legislative body and how you get along with people that you are serving with and how you support them, and it taught me so much about Madison County. Because I lived on one side of the county, and Madison County is diverse I mean the west side of the county is all-together different than the East side of the county in demographics in so many ways and in needs because we the river borders Madison County so if you live out where I live in Marine or Highland or Saint Jacob, you don't think about the river every day. If you live in Granite City, you think about the river everyday because you think about flooding and you also think about just what that river does and the other thing in Madison County and serving on the county board, it's rural on the east side and it's heavy industry on the west side so there's different needs. Your communities are different, your bigger cities are on the West side, your more rural neighborhood communities are on the East side, so I learned all about this, and got to be friends with people and they saw me as a supportive person and got involved in some really big skilled development with the Gateway Commerce Center and I got really involved with the Governor's Parkway something I'm really proud of that I was part of, and at the very end of the time that I was on the county board the America's Central Port was about to be considered, we took over the old Army Depot near Granite City, and that whole development began taking place there at the port district and then the last thing that I was involved with on the county board was the new Mississippi River Bridge Project because I was on the Highway Department and we had to exchange so many acres we had to acquire wetland areas in the old river valley in order for that bridge to be built which taught me you know a lot about environmental controls and my main role that I did as chair of a committee is ah you know I'd drive around the county I'd see a lot of these subdivisions that I signed off on, so I oversaw planning and development so I signed the preliminary plots final plots on these subdivisions and you saw vacant land that then became a now it's a 8  residential subdivision so you know, it was a great experience before becoming regional superintendent. But being regional superintendent and being one of the county wide elected officials in this building is special. I mean it's a unique privilege I mean, cause you deal with all the other units of government I mean, we have worked together to make Madison County what it is people blame you for what it is, so you take credit for what it is too and ah it's been ah it's been an experience that you know there's only so many people have it because there's only a few of us that have the privilege and being elected to a countywide office like this is a privilege because there's only a few of you that ever get the opportunity in a lifetime. I mean, so you know, I decided um, in being regional superintendent I was elected to become the president of all the regional superintendents in 2010. So I served a 4 year term in which I was president state wide, and ah, that was an honor, it was a difficult time we were challenged with numerous things legislatively including we weren't paid for 6 months, and ah but it ah it developed a personality that people knew about me in Springfield because I was there so much, and ah, I learned a lot during that time just about the state and education throughout the state which really began to set a stage for this next endeavor that I'll talk a little bit about and that's running for governor. Okay, because you know, you know Illinois is a big state it's a wealthy state, and it's broke. And our school system you know there's so much discussion about how do we fund public education in Illinois, how do we move education forward why is it last in the 50 states as to how it's funded, and so I decided after 2014 when I really saw what was materializing that this is something that I thought that a person from another another part of the state outside of Cook County should become a candidate. There should be a downstate candidate okay? And, um, so I began exploring it, and I will tell you I'm in middle of this exploratory phase of my candidacy, where about two months from circulating petitions in which when we actually begin circulating those petitions it really starts becoming a real reality that you're going to become a candidate, I mean not just there are 6 of us that are recognized state wide as viable candidates right now and I'm very proud that I have gotten the invitations especially the last two months to be involved as a candidate that's being looked at to get this nomination. And, as I've talked about many other things that I've done in my professional career it's a real growth not to mention it challenges me in every way possible, my speaking abilities, my ability to message, to ability to manage, um my ability to be creative in ideas and in thought my ability to you know, deal with people and be kinda a good personal presentation so um, it's a great experience and you know, ah, win or lose, you know, we'll go back to the very first question. It's about growing up in Marine, you know, I think the thing is is that about me is, is ah, tomorrow I can go to Marine put on my jeans and t-shirt and be just like I was 6 so, [chuckles] that's ah the unique thing about it. KB: Yeah. That's a good thing to go back to. So, since you led into the governorship, so why did you decide to run for this I mean that is the top position and it is because you just want to further make a difference across the state and? BD: Well, you know, I think my background is so diverse and my background in local government was really the reason I decided to do it. Yeah, it's about making a difference but more than that the big difference that the next governor's going make is whether or not they can bring about stability to the state. Whether they can balance the budget, whether they can get the state back on track, okay? Whether they are willing to really make hard decisions, okay? You know, whether they can come up with a creative plan to solidify the pension dilemma that we have. Um, whether they can curtail the runaway cost of Medicaid in the state which is consuming 42% of our budget, you know, how - how do we make this state better and um, and understanding what Illinois has to offer? Something that I haven't talked about is is that I've I have my lifelong background is in agriculture and it's the biggest business in the state you know 9  what I mean? Just having a working knowledge of agriculture, I think is a huge asset to someone who's the chief executive of an agricultural state on on harmful legislation or helpful legislation that it becomes law you know? I think also you know, I've got 38 years in public education. Um, and you know it's one thing to you know be advised about education is something else to have dealt with school budgets dealt with school administrations understand how school boards operate understand the impact that schools have on their communities economically okay? And understand teachers and understand I explained that I was president of Triad's education association with the IEA, um, you know, why should teachers be able to collectively bargain? You know, understanding, so I feel that my ability to govern, comes from the diverse experiences that I have had throughout my life okay? And that I can I can lead in those capacities. So um, this really wasn't an aura about something that you know I woke up and I said one day: "hey you know I think it would be great if I died and they could say that I was a governor." My goal is to be able to make a difference and you know, bring about a change that I think is needed in the image of the state, so that's why I'm running. KB: Okay well you kinda answered what my next question was going to be what are your strengths but like you said with agriculture obviously that's an enormous strength as well. BD: I think that a strength that a lot of people you know don't always look at is the amount of time a person has spent in government. Understanding it. I said something about understand you know like, when you serve on a county board you realize you don't always get everything you want. Okay? That's a strength. You have to understand government that you have to be able to accept success and failure. I mean, because both happen. And so those are unique strengths and some people have a hard time you know when you look at any administration locally state level the national level you know the big debates over big issues you know, the compromise that happens and those people that didn't want to compromise and that's government. That's what it's about - that's government and that's how policy is shaped for people. Okay? KB: Yeah. So, as bad as Illinois is as everyone knows in the media certainly plays on, I mean how to fix such a broken state? I mean that's gotta be such a huge mountain to climb... BD: Right. Here's the beginning, first of all, it didn't get this way overnight and it's not going to get better tomorrow, okay? But it's gotta begin somewhere. So if you don't have a plan then you prolly shouldn't be willing to step up and do this and I have a plan and that plan is, first of all, you have to develop a manageable budget. Okay? And that's where it starts, and a management budget gets you a better bond rating and you begin to pay your debt down. The Senate Bill 6 that passed was good, because it is a plan okay? So, ah, that's why I supported it Illinois needs revenue a lot of people are really touting against this tax increase we have $15 billion dollars of unpaid bills backlogs of bills so the crisis is not over because this has happened but people in Illinois are paying $11 million dollars in interest. That's just wasting money away. So, my plan is to pay down the debt reduce the interest improve the bond rating, stabilize the state, then be able to move forward. KB: Hm. Wow. BD: And you have to allow in your manageable budget, debt interest, and you have to allow principle payments and the key thing is is that all these different aspects that consume a 36 billion dollar budget 10  you have to be thinking about you know how you're going to make that pension payment, okay? Or what could have been done that would have relaxed that pension payment you know? Because, you know, myself and every other teacher and every other state worker that has paid into the system or that has you know dedicated themselves as a professional part of the reason why was because at the end there was supposed to be something for them. Okay? So I don't think it's fair that you know we pass policy in this state that you know lies to people who did what they said that they were going to do. KB: Mm-hmm. Right. So do you consider yourself an underdog going into this primary? BD: Oh, well definitely, well, first of all, being from down state there's a whole lot of introduction that's gotta be made the Cook County area is about 3/5 about the total vote of the state, so there's a whole lot of introduction that you have to make okay? But um, I have great name recognition in this region, which is the second largest populated area of the state I think this region will really determine who is going to be the gubernatorial candidate for the Democratic Party, um, and ah things are going well for me in Chicago, so I'm not going to say I'm an underdog until I see how far I'm down in the polls. [chuckles] so, ah, I have a lot less financial resources there's people in this race most of us aren't too far apart plus or minus a couple hundred thousand dollars but you know when you have a candidate that has just unlimited financial resources what does that do? You know what I mean? So... KB: And plus the name recognition, as well BD: Plus name recognition, yeah so that makes a challenge, but that doesn't mean that doesn't mean that that's what happens on election day. KB: Sure. Right. BD: So. And it's a long way out yet, it's 7 months. So there's a lot that can happen. And money can be good, and money can be bad. KB: Yeah, that's true. Yeah. Well, hopefully, you'll be the change that the state needs. BD: We'll just see. KB: [laughs] Right. Okay. Well, thank you for this has been a great interview I think and I think a wealth of information too. BD: Okay good. KB: That's going to benefit the county so, BD: Well, I really appreciate in fact I'm going to send an email out Monday ah to you'll get one we're going to have a meeting here August 4th of ah everybody that's participating... 11  
MadisonCounty;Ron Holland;1949;2018;Ron Holland 1949 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Ron Holland Oral History Interview Greg Kessler, Interviewer July 9, 2018 Glen Carbon, Illinois Greg Kessler (GK): The following interview is conducted with Ron Holland on behalf the Madison County Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive. It took place on July 9th, 2018 at 7 Chaparral, Glen Carbon, Illinois. The interviewer is Greg Kessler. So uhm, I usually start out by asking just you to say your name, where you graduated from high school, and when. Ron Holland (RH): Yeah I'm Ron Holland. I graduated from Granite City Senior High School in 1966. GK: Okay. I think I'm going to move this closer because I... Okay. Uhm. Alright so uh when when did you get interested in music? RH: Uhm. I was around fifteen. It was the first year that I couldn't play baseball. Didn't have a team to get on. GK: Oh. RH: And uh there happened to be uh my uncle's old acoustic guitar was in our garage and we didn't pay much attention. We played around with it a little bit more when we were younger kids but we never learned to play anything. And uh, a friend of mine could play a simple melody of "Tom Dooley" or some old folk song and he showed that to me and I started playing and I kind of thought well that's fun, you know. I didn't have anything else to do for the summer so I uh started playing around with that thing and took a few lessons and learned a little bit. And uh then kept on playing. Eventually got an electric guitar. GK: What was your first electric? RH: My first electric was a Dwight. It was actually made by Gibson but it was a more economical guitar that was sold out of Sonny Shields Music Store in East St. Louis. GK: Okay. RH: I went there uh the teacher I had taught me downtown in Granite City but he was worked out of that store. And uh, yeah, it was a Dwight. It was a double cutaway. Red. Nice guitar. I wish I still had it. I don't even remember what happened to it. GK: Uhm. Who did you take lessons from in Granite? RH: Uh, I can't remember his name because I was fifteen at the time. 1  GK: Uh huh. RH: And well his first name was Keith but I don't know. And he played around a lot in St. Louis area. GK: Okay. RH: Uh, yeah. GK: Uhm, so you started playing when you were fifteen. Uh, what was the first thing that you learned? RH: Uh, I started learning uh when I took some lessons. At that time, lessons consisted of learning to sight read music. Which a lot of people don't do that eventually anyway. GK: Right. RH: So I only took lessons probably for about six months or so. But what I really learned from him was chords. So I practiced playing chords. I had a guitar exactly like that. That's not the same one but it's exactly like that. GK: Okay. RH: That's why I bought that. For sentimental. GK: What was the first song you learned? Do you remember? RH: "Tom Dooley." GK: Oh it was "Tom Dooley." Okay. RH: Yeah and then after that, when I got an electric guitar, well I started playing uh...I would go down to Jack Johnson's Music Store in Granite City and buy sheet music and I bought a song called "Abilene" and songs that were hits on the radio. That was kind of a crossover pop hit but really a country song. So I would learn that and it had chord charts at the top and it had the lyrics. And so I would try to play those chords and try to sing it. Uh or learn the melody and have somebody else play the chords to accompany it. So that's kind of how I got started was doing that thing. And then the Ventures were big then. This was pre- Beatles. Uh the Ventures were playing. This was somewhere around 1962. Uh started trying to play "Wipeout" and "Apache" and things like that, "Pipeline." Instrumental guitar songs. From there uh... from there I eventually tried to create a band. And so I have a twin brother, Don, and he liked my electric guitar and he wanted one too. So he got one so he didn't take any lessons but I taught him. I taught him chords so I tended to play the lead and he played rhythm for me. My younger brother, Gary, who was three years younger, he had already been taking piano lessons since he was I don't know, ten or so. So uhm we got together with another guy, Gene Hudson, who we knew through a church. He had been playing for quite awhile. He was a better lead player than me so I switched to bass. And somewhere along we picked up the drum. And the name of that group was the Dimensions. And we played a few little jobs, not much. GK: Where did you play at? 2  RH: Our first... our first job was actually at a grade school in Mitchell, Illinois. I don't even remember what it was but we played that job. We probably didn't make but five dollars a piece or so. And we played a junior high dance at the [YMCA] in Granite City which was on Friday night, Saturday night was the high school kids. But we played junior high and uh that's what we did then. GK: So was that Teen Town? RH: Yeah. It was. But Teen Town was referred more to the Saturday night. GK: Oh okay. RH: And we were playing for younger kids on a Friday night. GK: Okay. RH: And then on Saturday night, The Coachmen were playing for the Teen Town. GK: How long did you have to play? RH: You know, I think it was four hours. GK: Really? RH: Yeah. GK: You guys had four hours worth of stuff? RH: Uh, yeah. Yeah we did. We repeated a few. We always say that we had a request to do this one again whether we did or not. Everybody does that. GK: Did you, was this still pre- Beatles or was this after? RH: No, we were probably after that then. GK: Okay. RH: Because the Beatles hit we first started becoming aware of them late in '63 was when they started playing Beatle tunes in this country. So and that's the thing once they hit then oh everybody wanted to be in a band then. Even guys who hadn't started playing yet. We were forced in it because we had already been playing for a couple years. At least we could do a little bit. GK: Uhm, how long ago how long did that band last? RH: Uh let's see, I would say... probably three years. Three or four years maybe. GK: Okay. 3  RH: But we didn't play a lot. We mostly just got together and had fun. Other than that at the YMCA on Fridays, that was kind of toward the end of that band. In fact we had a female drummer named Vicki Couch for awhile out of Granite. GK: Really? RH: Yes. We did. GK: That must have been... RH: Yeah. Yeah but then you know she left and there was a couple times when we had a booking and she had a date or something and said she couldn't play. Well, that was kind of the end of that. I don't know if I should bring that up. GK: That must have been revolutionary in 1960-whatever. Have a... RH: We just happened to know her through a church also. And then she admitted she played drums, and she was pretty good too. But anyway we ended up getting Chris Hamilos and he was a very good member. So I can show you a picture of that group. GK: Yeah. Sure. So uh this band broke up. How many of the people stayed into the next band? RH: This band. This band did not break up. GK: It didn't? RH: No. What happened was uh I graduated high school in '66 and that summer we continued to play the same band here. And then my brother, my twin brother, went into the service. He went in August. GK: Okay. RH: So we replaced him because he did most of the singing. And we replaced him with Jim Simpson. Who was I think in my younger brother's class, '68. Uh... so... that fall it was that group but Jim Simpson instead of my other, my twin brother. Uhm and then the Coachmen were playing the Saturday nights at the [YMCA], Teen Town, and they broke up around December. It was late in the year. November, maybe, of '66. And one of the people in that group was Rich Hodshire. And uh he needed a group because he was the contact with the [YMCA]. He kind of was the leader of that group I guess. He just approached us and said, "You guys want to play Saturday nights at the [YMCA]? We'll be a new band, we'll change our name, I mean you'll change your name." And so what we did was he joined our group. We had two keyboard players, which was odd, but I think Rich was thinking that I might not, you know, go if my brother who played keyboard, my younger brother, didn't come too. You know. He never really did ask me but I wouldn't have wanted to do that. So there for awhile we had two keyboards. And then he brought in a singer, Denny Henson, who was a really good singer. And that was the Rising Sons. Originally there were seven of us. GK: Okay. So that's late '66? (09:57) 4  RH: That's that's December of '66 is our first job was in December. I just remembered that. GK: And that's the that's the show at Teen Town? RH: Yeah. That's right. GK: Uhm were you playing essentially the same set or would you change it up to different things? RH: No, it changed quite a bit. Because we had Denny Henson now who can sing anything. We would do some Beatles songs which we hadn't really. We did a couple but we could do more. You know but still those groups then especially us we pretty much did top forty. Popular songs we just learned how to play those songs. GK: Where else did you play besides Teen Town? RH: Uhm, you know we played at a place called the Castaway over in St. Louis. I think it was somewhere near the Loop. We played there two or three times. Uhm we played at the Rainy Days out west of St. Charles somewhere. Uhm then we would get jobs like we had a job down in Steeleville, Illinois. It was just some teen dance or something they had there at the high school. And those kinds of things. We didn't play all the time. We played most weekends but I don't know if there was that much work. Maybe there was more bands than there was work for them. GK: What kind of money were you making at shows? RH: No, it wasn't much at all. When we were playing at Teen Town, uh... I don't think we made more than twenty bucks a piece. Somewhere around there. GK: What about these town shows like over in St. Louis. Things like that. RH: Uh I think they paid a little better. We'd maybe get thirty-forty bucks there. GK: Were those shows where you were playing by yourself when you were playing in St. Louis? So it was like four hours. RH: No, I'm sorry. I take that back. Not the Castaway. The Castaway was uhm uh... sometimes there were two bands. Actually, the Allman Brothers played there and we played before they did but nobody knew who they were then. They were called the Allman Joys but it was the Allman Brothers. It was before they hit it big and they were playing the Southern Blues then. And we just watched them and were in awe at their musicianship. Uhm, but that's kind of hey we opened for the Allman Brothers even though they weren't the Allman Brothers then. You know? GK: So what year do you think... RH: Now we wouldn't have opened for them if they... GK: What year do you think that was? 5  RH: I think that had to have been probably '67. GK: Okay. RH: Because our first job was December '66 so we played through '67 and then I played until August '68. August '68 was when I went in the service. GK: Okay. RH: And then they played for awhile after that but I was out of touch then in the Army. I didn't know... GK: Did anything change in '67. '67 was seen as the "Summer of Love" thing and did the shows change? Did the crowds change? Or didn't St. Louis just continue on the way it had been? RH: Yeah I didn't see much difference, you know. Because like I said, we were still playing whatever people heard on the radio. GK: You weren't surrounded by people in beads and... RH: No. Very few of those guys in this area. There were some, you know. I had a couple of buddies who joined right in that. Uh... yeah you didn't see as many people with long hair as you do uh in maybe if you went to St. Louis we saw a little more of that. More diverse crowd. GK: Uhm, during this time did you, were you looking at writing originals at all? RH: No. GK: It wasn't even a thought? RH: No. GK: Uhm, why do you think that its? Was it just not... RH: It's probably hard to do. GK: Uhm, but it just never came up? It was never a part of uhm... RH: No. I don't think we had any big ambitions, I think. Probably we were some what limited in the work we'd do. Plus with the circumstances with the war going on and people going into service, you know you were just trying to hang on you know. GK: Did you and you actually just said, was there any thought given to taking this to another level? To packing up and going on the road? Or talking to record labels or anything else that...? RH: No. Not that I recall. Now, you know, there's a little bit of history there. I don't know if you've ever heard of the Del Rays. The Del Rays were the band, I think, in this area. And a couple of them, Jim and Rich Lang, brothers, they were from Mascoutah. And they played at Collinsville Park Ballroom every 6  Friday night. Uh and uh they were very good. And uh I saw them first saw them at uh... Danny Thomas had a St. Jude fund raising money for his hospital then in Memphis. He had some Sam, the Sham and the Pharaohs and some other groups from the '60s I don't know if you recall that name. But uh I uh... I'm trying to think of a couple of there were a couple of big acts there and they played at the Keil over there and I went over and saw them and uh the Del Rays were actually on that bill because they were the local band uh who were associated with Nick Charles who was a DJ over in St. Louis. GK: Okay. RH: For a Top 40 station. I don't recall the station. They were competitors with WIL and uhm so... Nick Charles probably got them back and I remember hearing them then and wow they are really good. And we ended up getting to play with them at Collinsville Park. And uh for I don't know for I think a month. And then we played with them in Godfrey. This was uh on Fridays also. Uh and we would open for them and they would play. But what I'm getting at is uh in February of '68, I just remember the month. I'm not sure. Denny Henson was our singer and uh the Del Rays broke up and they recruited Denny for a new group called the Guild. If you've heard of the Guild? Okay... Now they traveled and wrote original songs and were mostly regional but that's I'm just giving you a little evolution there, you know. Uh... maybe lost my train of thought there but... GK: Was there anybody else from the sort of the local scene you knew who went on to do bigger things? RH: Yeah. I'm kind of getting at that. Uh Denny Henson who I knew since grade school. He came with Rich when we formed the Rising Sons. When he left our group and went with the Guild, he played with them for several years and then he and another member of that band, Tom Kelly, went to California and wrote some original songs. I've got a couple of CD's that they recorded. They're really good. And then Mississippi River Festival up at SIU. Have you heard of that? GK: Oh yeah. RH: Okay. I went up there because Dan Fogelberg was there. Well Denny and Tom Kelly were with him. They were singing with him. GK: Oh wow. RH: Yeah. Yeah. So he so he is the guy who kind of made it there, yeah. GK: Uhm anybody did anybody else from the Del Rays did they go on to do things or is that just those two guys? RH: Uh not that I'm aware. I don't think they did. Because the Del Rays they still had Rich and Jim Lang who were with the Del Rays originally. Then the other members of the Del Rays went somewhere else. That was Thom Bowles. Uhm and uhm Don Biver and Denny Ambre. And Denny Ambre was their bass player for the Del Rays and was really good. I think he played with Chuck Berry on some song over at Blueberry Hill somewhere over there. Very good bass player. 7  GK: Uhm you said you said a few minutes ago that the fact the war was going on and people were at risk for being drafted, did that cast a shadow over everything? Was that something that everyone worried about while they were playing? RH: No, not consciously. But maybe in the back of their minds. For me anyway. Because I was going to school at SIU but I wasn't a serious student. I wasn't attending enough classes to keep my grades up. So it was just a matter of time. I went on probation eventually got drafted. Ended up going to night school to finish after I got out of the service. GK: Did other bands have that issue? Are there other bands breaking up and rotating because of the same thing? (19:36) RH: You know, I don't really know. I would assume so... Really kind of had to be. GK: But it wasn't like a topic of conversation that was going to happen at some point anyway? RH: Yep, yep. GK: Can you tell me about the other guys in the band a little bit more? RH: Well uhm... GK: What they did and where they ended up. And... RH: Uh let's see. GK: Their parts in the band. RH: Now we're talking about the Rising Sons? GK: Right. RH: And uh. Yeah it was me, and my younger brother Gary who just past away in this past April. He...what do you want, what he...? GK: Kind of what his involvement in the band was. Then what his did, sort of afterwards. RH: Okay. Yeah, yeah. He was the keyboard player. Then he eventually went into the service also. He spent a year in Thailand. And he came home, worked a couple of different jobs. Ended up having a career as a cartographer for the Department of Defense over in St. Louis. Mapmaker. Worked there for thirty years then retired. GK: Was the Rising Sons the only band he was in? I mean besides the band that preceded it. RH: No, you know, he played with a couple of other bands. I don't recall the names. GK: Was this after he got back? 8  RH: Oh yeah. GK: Okay. RH: Yeah. In fact, he played maybe ten years ago he was playing in a band and did a few jobs. He played up at Stagger Inn with Rob Canada. GK: Oh really? RH: And a couple... Yeah. A couple friends. He was that was just three or four years ago. GK: Oh okay. What about your twin brother? RH: Uh, he uh. After the service, no he never played out again. He worked for uhm... He worked for a printing company. In fact he went out to Oklahoma. He's still out there now. But he's retired but he was the he was the uh customer service rep for Rolling Stone magazine. He actually, they printed that in Oklahoma. GK: Okay. RH: So he got a couple trips to New York because of that. GK: Did he continue to play on his own? RH: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah he still does. He goes down to... He belongs to the Elks or one of those fraternal groups and takes his guitar down there and plays and sings a little bit, you know. Just for the heck of it, you know. GK: Uhm so and what about your drummer? RH: Chris Hammels? He's deceased now. I had heard that he uh... He actually auditioned for a local production of Jesus Christ Superstar and I think he got the lead. He's a pretty good vocalist. And uh but he I think he ended up getting into IT or software as he moved to the New England area. And he was there for several years. Pretty talented guy. And the lead guitar player he worked steel mills here locally. I still see him on occasion. He's retired. That's Gene Hudson. GK: Did he end up in the service? RH: Uh no I don't think Gene ever made it into the service. GK: Is he from Granite? RH: Yes. GK: Is he from the Hudson family? The Hudson Jewelers people? RH: Uh I don't think so. 9  GK: Okay. RH: No. GK: You just hear that name in Granite and that's what you think. RH: Yeah Jim Hudson down there with the pawn shop. I don't think he is. GK: Okay so uhm you're playing and its you played with the Allman Brothers and you played at these out of town shows and stuff. How long between you found out you got drafted and you stopped playing? RH: Uhm it happens pretty quick. I think I only had a couple weeks notice, you know... So I just said sorry and you know that's when they got Jim Harper. GK: Did you play one last show? I mean did you have a... RH: I can't remember what my last one was. I don't really know. I don't think it was the [YMCA] because... I think when Rich left our group, Rich Hodshire, we didn't play at the [YMCA] anymore. I don't remember who replaced us. It's been a long time now. GK: Did you seem them at all after you left? Did you go and see them once Jim Harper joined the band? RH: No. No didn't have the opportunity. I was in the service and don't get home much. GK: They and they didn't pay out typically. Took them awhile to get things going. RH: Yeah. Probably probably. I don't know I don't know how quick they had a job between the time I left and Jim replaced me. Probably pretty quick. He played the bass. Because he cause Jim was also a guitar player. A lot of bass players are guitar players also. So he could kind of follow. Watch the guitar player and record his own. GK: Did your younger brother stay in the band? RH: Uh yeah. GK: He did? RH: Yeah he did. He stayed in the band until they dissolved. GK: Okay. Did he talk about shows or anything? Or what they were doing? RH: No. You know, I don't recall. I think he thinks that the band sort of after I left was kind of going down a little bit. Not that I had anything to... I think maybe we had just maybe run our course. GK: Did you know, do you know was did it change after that? Were they or was it just... I mean bands do. Bands just sort of peter out. 10  RH: Well I think over the course of time there's more and more bands and more competition. Maybe there's fewer jobs. I don't know. I'm just guessing now. GK: Did you have any desire to play when you got back? To start a new band or? RH: Uhm no not intitially. I didn't. I happened to meet a guy I still play because I still play today. I play a couple hours every morning just for relaxation, you know. I like to do that. I play whenever I got a chance. It wasn't a lot. But occasionally there'd be a guitar. But uh uhm I happened a guy... he put an ad in the paper looking for a guitar player. There was just two of us, you know. And we did more just kind of what you can do with two guitars and two voices. And we I don't know we played uh the Grog Shop over in St. Louis at the in the basement of a hotel over by the river. We played out at the Airport Inn we've we have like a five-week gig playing six nights a week. I couldn't believe it because we weren't that good. We weren't bringing anybody in. But it was amazing. GK: Was this right after you got back? RH: It was around, no it was four years after I got back. GK: Oh okay. RH: I got back in '70. This was around '74. About that time. And so for a couple of years I played with this guy. Then we met another guy who was a pretty good singer. He was from New York. Upstate New York. He happened to be here working at the [YMCA]. He was the Youth Coordinator or something there. And uh we got to know him. He happened to meet the guy I was playing guitar with and so we kind of got together. Then we picked up a bass player. We had, you know Rob's dad, Bobby, I've know Bobby for a long time. He's a pretty good bass player. We wanted him come over there were just three of us. Three guitars really. I played also banjo and mandolin to try to mix it up a little bit. And we wanted to have a bass and it sounded so good with the bass we said well we'll have four guys, you know. We'll make a little less money but we'll do that. So for about from '77 until '80. Somewhere in '80 we played you know like I said...Ground Round, Jacks or Better, Stagger Inn... GK: What was it called? RH: Whiskers. GK: Whiskers? RH: And we all had beards except for Bobby. GK: Is that the last time you played in an organized thing? RH: Yes. Yes. Yeah. I can show you a picture of that group. GK: Yeah. I mean just for the heck of it. RH: Yeah. 11  [long pause] GK: Uhm so okay so uhm uhm... Did you do you keep in touch with the guys you played with in the Rising Sons? The ones that are still around? RH: No. I don't really. Let's see who's still around? Gene Hudson's still around. Chris and then my brother are deceased. Jim Simpson lives in Florida. I saw him cause he was up here when my brother passed. But no, I don't really keep in touch. But you know you always have a connection with them and when you see them it's like, you know, you're forever friends, you know. But we don't keep in touch. Everybody gets busy with their families and... GK: I always described being in a band as all the worst parts of being married. Your family regardless of how annoying they become. So I guess there's never been a talk of playing together? RH: No. GK: Just setting up and... RH: Yeah. GK: Uh. RH: Now I, you know, before I mentioned the Guild well they had a reunion and they played from let's see I guess '68 through a lot of the '70s. And they had a reunion in the '80s at the Panorama in Belleville. GK: Oh the bowling alley? RH: Yeah. GK: Okay. RH: In the basement there. And they used to play there a lot. We played there too. When we were the Rising Sons. I kind of forgot about that one. But uhm they had a reunion and a big crowd showed up because they were very popular in the really the whole Metro area. They could do Beach Boys and, you know, anything. And uh I've got that on DVD if you've never seen that. GK: Did you go? RH: Yeah I went there. GK: Did you see a lot of people you knew? Like people from other bands? RH: Yeah, you know, that's the first time I had seen Denny Henson for quite awhile, and I said hello to him... and they did a good show. And then I saw them again at Mississippi Nights. They were doing a fundraiser there. And that was a few years later. That's the last time I saw them. GK: Did they play originals? Were they...? 12  RH: No, they didn't play originals. They might have had two or three. I'm guessing now but I know they played mostly pop hits, played oldies, things like that. Things that had been big hits. I don't think Denny and Tom who were two of the guys who then split and went to, I think, California and started writing songs. I don't know if there was much writing going on in the Guilds. There may have been. GK: Were there any other bands that were playing their own stuff at the time? Even one or two songs? RH: Uh... GK: Or was it just not...? RH: No, I can't. I can't think of that. GK: It just wasn't part of it? RH: No. no. I don't think people started trying to write unless they had ambitions to get signed to a label. And that was still albums, you know. There was no streaming or no Youtube or anything like that. GK: And you think most of the bands around here were doing it for fun, they weren't looking to...? RH: Yeah. GK: ...they weren't looking for the... RH: Because because if anyone's really serious about it, they may have left the area, you know, and gone to the coasts. One of the coasts. GK: One or the other? RH: Yeah. That's my guess. GK: And it really doesn't, people don't start, local bands don't start writing until the 1970s. That's my... RH: Yeah. I was just a kid playing in a band because it seemed like a fun thing to do. GK: Okay. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. RH: You're welcome. 13 
MadisonCounty;John Eliff;1940;2017;John Eliff  1940 - 2017  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois John Elliff Oral History Interview Rachel Gattuso, Interviewer July 13, 2017 Rachel Gattuso (RG): Alright so it is July 13th 2017, I'm here with John Elliff. Go ahead and give your name and background. John Eliff (JE): John Elliff, well I guess my background is I was born and raised in East St. Louis, Illinois move to Glen Carbon into the late 50s for just a short period of time, returned to East St. Louis. Married in 1960 and then returned to Glen Carbon and still there. In about late 61, middle to late 61. RG: Ok. And you said that you had lived in East St. Louis and then you moved back here, then moved back to East St. Louis. Can you tell us a little bit about what it was like living in East St. Louis? JE: East St. Louis was a nice town. I was younger of course at that point but ah, I was able to travel around East St. Louis usually on a bus or on bicycle. Felt very safe, went downtown by myself. I had a paper route in East St. Louis, I'd deliver the East St. Louis Journal for several years two or three years. On Friday nights I would collect my fee for the paper from the people I delivered to. And take the bus downtown and pay my bill. Always went to Hodge’s Chili Parlor to have a bowl of chili when I was downtown. That's how I became a chili addict, I guess. Now I go to Wendy's RG: [laughing] That's awesome. So what prompted your family to move to Glen Carbon? JE: Well I think it was more my always mother. She always wanted something that was a little further out - out of the city. Where we lived lots were 50-foot-wide by 100-foot-deep, so houses were packed and pretty tight. And her desire, and remember I was young, so I'm, this is what I picked up later in life. her desire was to have a piece of land she could call her own where she could have a nice garden and kind of do what she wanted to, and an opportunity presented itself they moved up here, started to build a house, winter set in house wasn't ready. They were living in the basement of the house at the time and decided they'd moved back to East St. Louis. so they did that and I guess returned for a couple of years and commuted back and forth to finish building the house to where it was a livable enterprise and then returned and lived here permanently. Now when they moved here, they bought land and when my wife Dolores and I got married they gave us land as a wedding present so we in turn then built a house. RG: Very nice. And when your parents live there, there wasn't very much like race riots going on during the time they were there? JE: No, the race riots in East St. Louis occurred in 1917? And that's when my father was born so he was just a baby at the time when that occurred. RG: What about the race riots in the 1960s late 1950s, early 1960s... [John speaks over] 1  JE: No, I don't remember any of that. I never recalled that occurring again, I always felt safe in East St. Louis. Never a problem to be concerned about anything so I just I can't speak to that because I don't know. And in the 60s, we were living here. RG: Yeah JE: So East St. Louis became kind of history at that point to us. RG: Okay. And what about segregation was there a lot of segregation in East St. Louis? JE: There was. I probably personally noticed it more when I was in the military. Because when I was in a platoon, we had one black fella just one. And I thought that was kind of odd, but in East St. Louis there were no black families living anywhere near where I lived. There were some in other parts of town, but at this point I can't recall exactly where that was. RG: Okay. so you moved here in the 1960s and you started working in Glen Carbon / Madison County, Edwardsville area you said that you worked as an IT specialist for SIUE, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville? JE: Well I wouldn't use quite that term. I worked for SIU for about five years in total. I worked in, at that time it was called the Data Processing Department because it was before computers had hit the scene. And the part I worked in was the keeping of the records. In those days everything was done on the punch card. And so a punch card represented a student and that's how we tracked students and kept track...of ah... they had a book rental system, we kept track of their books and what they rented. We kept track of them, we did some of the financial work at that time using the tabulating equipment, did the financial reports. And then I stayed there long enough for the first computer to be delivered I still remember it was an IBM-1401, one of the first ones on the market. We had to learn how to program that it was when Cobalt came into being. And so I learned how to program Cobalt and became of a computer programmer at that point then anything. So I didn't run the department at that point, I was one of the workers in the department RG: And what was like, what was the actual campus like? JE: Well, when I went out there, there were no permanent buildings. The college had purchased the land that makes up the college now which is I recall about 2600 Acres. And I do recall it was 54 or 55 homes, homesteads. So the buildings, the homes on the property became offices. And so when I first went to work there we actually set up shop with our Data Processing Department in the basement of a house that the college had purchased in order to acquire the land. Then we later moved and again I don't recall when and I tried to find that out by looking at some of my old records they're just not there anymore. We moved into the communications building which was one of the first buildings built on the main campus. And I worked there until I left. RG: Now you said that at SIUE they had the Mississippi River Festival, which I was quite surprised and did some research on it. It was a very big festival and a lot of big names. JE: It was a big operation. It was big-name people and ran for about what 12 to 15 years. And we went out there a couple times to see some of the big names, but I don't even remember who we went to see. But 2  the place was always packed, lots of traffic flowing in and out of St. Louis up to the university in order to go to the Mississippi River Festival. RG: What was the purpose of the Mississippi River Festival? JE: You know I don't know. I don't know what caused it to be initiated. It was certainly very popular people loved it I think then all the sudden it disappeared whether it was a cost. I just, I don't know the details of why it was no longer feasible for them to do. RG: And your, um, you said that you had a general location as to where it was before? Like where they actually conducted the River Festival. Can you kind of describe that? JE: Well it was, let me get my bearings, it was probably on the North-West side of what is the campus. And it was on a piece of property that had a slope to it so it made kind of a natural bowl where the entertainer was down in the bottom. They had a lot of chairs set up where people could actually sit in chairs. I think there was some kind of roof over top of that, but then most people would just throw blankets and sit on the hill as it rose up. Because you know the sound would just travel right up the hill so lots and lots of people could attend. RG: So your son actually attended the Mississippi River Festival? JE: That doesn't surprise me [laughter] RG: and he informed me that they named people that actually went to the Mississippi River Festival were as big as Guns N Roses, Rolling Stones. JE: That's probably true, yeah, yeah. RG: Cindy Lauper. Some big names like that JE: See those weren't people that appealed to me but if you got somebody else like a comedian like Bob Hope or something I would have went. RG: Yeah [laughing] so then after SIUE you started, uh, where did you retire at? JE: Well I left SIU and went to St. Louis Community College and I worked over there for 24 years. RG: And what did you do there? JE: I did Information Technology again. And I became the director of the department. There were two different kinds of computer operations there. One was the bookkeeping, record keeping that was the one I was involved in. And then there was the teaching of it which at that time was kind of few and far between and wasn't the big deal there it is today. Where almost everyone has to learn something about it but I wasn't involved in supporting the equipment that was used for teaching, but I was not involved directly and the teaching itself. Then I left there after 24 years and went to work for the State University of New York. We refer to that as the SUNY system. The SUNY consist of sixty-five campuses around the state of New York. I worked at one of the smaller campuses. It was a two-year school and, that's kind of my background in St. Louis, was two year. And I did the same thing there, I ran the department. Picked up some additional responsibilities there that went beyond the computer center. And then I left there after six 3  years and went to Maryland. And worked there one year, that was by choice. And decided it was time to retire. RG: And when you retired you came back to Glen Carbon? JE: Came back to Glen Carbon. While I was working in New York and while I was working in Maryland I commuted back and forth. Dolores lived here, and about every other weekend I would fly home, pay the bills, cut the grass, and whatever else needed to be done. And then fly back. RG: Wow. Now when you had spoken about Kiwanis, did you start that after you retired or before you retired? JE Well that was before. I belong to the Kiwanis many many years ago. RG: Could you tell me a little bit about who Kiwanis are? JE: Well it's a civic organization that tries to do good for the community. They have fundraisers and then they try to use the funds that they raise to help the community in one way or another. The Kiwanis that I was in was the Glen Carbon branch. There were about 30-35 members. I was probably one of the youngest, if not the youngest member. I kind of felt out of place at time because everybody else was older than me. We did a lot of work, you know, we'd stand in the street corner and raised money like they still do today. One of the things that we did is, as I have mentioned, is we we built the covered bridge. We provided the labor to do that. RG: And this was the first one, right? JE: The first Covered Bridge. The first Covered Bridge was the idea of Glenda Korvick who was the Glen Carbon village clerk. And her husband was in the construction business and he was in the business with a Bill Cayman. And so the two of them kind of designed it and took care of all the details of ordering material. And on then on the weekend on the Saturday, Saturday Sunday if possible, members of the Kiwanis would turn up and drive nails and whatever else was needed. So I was involved at that level. But it was, was not very long and somebody set fire to it and it burnt down. And so insurance through the village of Glen Carbon covered the replacement and the second construction was done by the contractor. And the Kiwanis was not involved and that. RG: Now the first bridge, you said - you had given me some information earlier when I had come over for research and you said that and you had told me why it was built and it was actually Glenda's idea. JE: It was Glenda's idea  she thought it would be an attraction for the community. That people would flock to Glen Carbon in order to see The Covered Bridge. I don't know if that's happened but that was what she thought would happen anyway. But it's- the village does use it as a symbol of the community which is kind of nice. RG: And, and we had talked about why was it, why do you think it was burned? JE: Don't know. Don't have any idea. I don't think anybody ever found out just exactly why it was burned down. It was kind of a, kind of a major disaster though. And it required a little rethinking because the fire department couldn't get through the bridge because when it burned it collapsed on the bridge and 4  it shut off flow. Fortunately, there was a short loop around where you could get around. But it had to be cleaned up real quick in order to avoid any kind of problems that the fire department would have to respond to. At that time it was fire department only, I don't think they did the the CPR type that they do now, EMFs. RG: Now Glen Carbon library, there used to be a barn restaurant that used to sit there. JE: Well there were a couple things there. I was thinking more about that, about that there was a tavern that was kind of down in a hole. And there was the post office, the original post office was maybe not that exact location, but right there in that area. It's kind of hard for me to remember exactly where everything was. Adjacent to that was a building that had been a variety of businesses over the years. But the most recent was, it was a restaurant. And a very popular restaurant, people came far and wide to attend. It burnt, and when it burnt the Kiwanis took the initiative to help clean that up. Acquire the property, and then acquire property behind it. And that became Miner Park. So the Kiwanis was instrumental in making that happen. RG: Now we talked about Miners Park and there was a, there's actually a caboose in Miners Park. JE: There's a real live caboose. And that was brought in from I believe Granite City. And a couple folks that worked for the railroad arranged to have that donated. It was brought in and it sat on the railroad track kind of at the bottom of Collinsville Street where if you come across the bridge right where the bike trail is now, the bridge crosses Judy Creek and the bike trail was the railroad track. So it sat there for a while and the Kiwanis project was to pick it up and move it in to the park and so we were instrumental in doing that with the help of a contractor out in Granite City. And I don't remember the name of the contractor, I should but I don't. RG: And with the caboose in miners park how did you guys, like the Kiwanis, they started something to pay for that? And that was the Glen Fest. Can you tell me a little bit more about that? JE: Well the Glen Fest actually began differently. Glen Carbon when I first moved out here had, oil and chip main road and ditches. And money was acquired, probably state money, I wasn't involved in city government at that time, in order to rebuild the main street. So the first year that it was finished they wanted to have kind of a dedication ceremony. And so we had a street festival and that was done because of the building of the street. But a lot of individual people, the Kiwanis and others were involved with that. And the money that the Kiwanis got was used for the betterment of the park. Any money that they got, again they would use for the community. And at that time Glen Carbon didn’t have a city park, Miner Park became that city park, and they were pumping whatever they could into it. RG: But what was Glen Fest like? What was it like? It was probably a lot different than it is today. JE Well not a whole lot. There was ah, the same road leads you into it. There were no buildings or anything in there. As the street festival evolved over the years it was moved into Miner Park. So there was a building built that had restrooms and storage for things that you would normally use to help work on the park. Eventually buildings were built, pavilions. A bridge was put across the creek so you could get from one side to the other because it was split by a branch of Judy Creek. But trying to think... That was about about all, it was- it was not much there at the time. It just slowly continued to grow. 5  RG: And what were some of the attractions at Glen Fest? Like rides? JE: They, we had rides. We had somebody come in, we had entertainment come in, live entertainment. We had a group of performers that come from Florissant, Missouri one time. We had some local guys that used to play in bands that came together so that they could play. In fact, I remember a fella that worked for me at St. Louis Community College was a saxophone player that used to play with the Dorseys, and other people. And his wife made him give that up because he was on the road all the time. But he was very good, and he came over he joined in. I asked him, would he come volunteer, and he did. RG: Now you said that part of the railroads, we're talking about the railroads and the trails, and you said that you also had a prior job not just with the Kiwanis and working on those projects but you were also considered a gandy dancer. [Laughter] could you tell us a little about that? JE: Well I worked at Shell Oil for a period of time. About a year, maybe a little more than a year. And I held a couple different jobs, but one of them was, and was for about half the time I was there, about half a year, I worked on the in-house Shell railroad. And my job was to lay new track, replace bad railroad ties under the track. You know, retample those drive spikes and the people who did that I guess, it's all done by equipment today. But at that time people would do that and then were referred to as gandy dancers. Now how that name arrived, I don't know. I will tell you one quick story, I was working there, in fact my foreman was from Glen Carbon, his last name was Perry. I can't remember his first name at this point. But he wanted me to pick up a piece of rail for a little spur we were running up at Shell, and sent me up to the back of the plant where they kept their supplies and since the track was going to go in kind of a round motion it wasn't going be straight. I was looking for a piece of bent track. I could never find one and I came back and I said I can't find anything that's going to work, he says no track is bent he says it's all straight, we bend after we get it here on site. And I thought my I guess I learned something today. RG: So part of Miner's Park, and you were talking about railheads and coal mining is a huge community thing here in Glen Carbon, and it's a huge aspect. And your wife had something to do with what is the main symbol for what is this town. JE: Well she volunteered to the design of the Miner Head flag. The miner head flag became the symbol of Glen Carbon for one of the festivals we had. And I think it was in Miner Park at that time. And one of the older gentlemen we had a contest, a 100 dollars to the winner, who came up with the best idea for a symbol for the community. Came up with the miner head. So we decided we would have to memorialize that in some way. So Dolores, my wife, made a flag. Which was the first miner head flag. The one you see- the one she said was a miner head only and if you drive around town there's a lot of people have the symbol, they put up over their garage door, other places on their property. And some of those are still there but the flag that today is a little different now the miners got like a pickaxe acrost his shoulder. But other than that, when you look at that basic symbol the first flag she did and it looked very much like that. What happened to it I don't know. RG: Yeah you said that the museum lost it. JE: well I can't blame on the museum. But I know the museum told me they didn't have it. RG: They didn't have it... And how did the whole ceremony go on with her and the flag and what did the flag look like specifically? 6  JE: Well it was black miner head image with lettering around it and under it. I think it was under it at the time and now it's around it on kind of a white silk background, and it was a modest sized flag, maybe three or four foot by two, two and half feet tall. It actually flew at one time down somewhere in town, again I can't remember exactly where. But there was a ceremony and the mayor at that time Munser was his last name, I can't think of his first name. I'm getting old. He accepted the flag from Dolores. So it wasn't a major ceremony, it was a small ceremony. RG: Now, Glen Carbon trail, you said that a lot of the trails run through Madison County, all over Madison County. But can you tell us a little bit more about the Glen Carbon trail and its relations with Madison County Transit? How did that all occur? JE: Well the railroad abandoned the tracks, they decided they didn't need them anymore for what they were doing, and so Glen Carbon bought the railroad right away. In some cases, those are very wide, I know in some parts of the country there are hundred-foot-wide so they're not just where the rail runs, but it's a lot of property. So Glen Carbon bought it and they bought it for a couple of reasons. one was to turn it into a bike trail. So the track eventual got taken out and the bike trail got put in. Glen Carbon also used it for it for their utilities, if I remember correctly their sewer line that services the community, when they put in the sewer system, runs down through there. Which is kind of a natural because Glen Carbon sits a little higher than everything west so there's just a gradual slope. In fact, some of the trains used to have trouble up the slope if they were pulling too much weight. But they put in a bike trail, it was named after the mayor at that time, a mayor who was instrumental in making that happen, Ron Foster, and he's still around. He doesn't live in Glen Carbon anymore though, he now lives I believe in Maryville. But Glen Carbon maintained those for a number of years and not too many years ago, it's been within the last probably five to eight years, they actually gave the bike trail that property to Madison County Transit because they were also developing bike trails in other parts of Madison County, and as far as I know the one in Glen Carbon was the only one that they didn't control. So Glen Carbon did some repair work to some things and then turned it over and gave it to Madison County Transit who then improved it, so today it's paved for when Glen Carbon put it in, it's paved with rolled asphalt, Glen Carbon put it in, it was oil and chips so it's much nicer than it used to be. I remember some of the board members weren't terribly excited about doing that, and they just didn't feel like they wanted to give away their bike trail, but it did happen. You know I think it was the right thing to do. RE: So that's a little piece of Glen Carbon history. And then you had mentioned like what the streets were like but what was Glen Carbon like a community in the 1960s like when you first moved back here? JE: Well it was a nice community. It was much smaller. It’s grown ten times. I want to say that the population was in the thirteen to fourteen hundred range when we first moved here back in the sixties. Something in my mind says I saw a placard that said that. I'd have to research that to be sure but it was a community where everybody knew everybody. Or everybody was related to everybody, if you want to talk about somebody you had to be careful because they could be related to the person you were talking about. But ah pretty laid-back community. I always felt again safe. The kids used to walk to school, kind of reminded me of what I had in East St. Louis. When I grew up in East St. Louis I would walk to school and the one place I would walk when I was in elementary school was a mile away. And then later when I was in high school, I would walk to high school because the bus didn't run quite where I needed to go, and I just, I never felt that there was a problem in doing that. And I felt the same way about Glen Carbon. 7  So there was nothing about Glen Carbon at that time that I would say was negative except that there were no restaurants or other places, you'd have to go to a larger community in order to do your shopping and some other things. There’s a small grocery store here in town but typically you'd go somewhere else to go a larger store. so that has changed but you know, I can't there's nothing bad to say about Glen Carbon at all, and we've stayed here all this time, we think it's a good community. It's grown, it's growing now to the point where I'm afraid it's going to become another Fairview Heights where we're going to have too many people and have too much traffic and that just changes the nature of the community pretty dramatically. I liked it the way it was before, I guess I'm kind of- I grew up in the city but I'm probably more of a farm boy than most people would think. RE: Now the old schoolhouse which used to be the library before the new one was built. What was that one like? JE: Well pretty much like it is now except it's in better shape today than it used to be. They spent some money to denotative it and clean it and fix it up. But that was eventually became the city hall. So I used to get up there, that's where the clerk's office was, upstairs in the second floor is where the village board would have their meetings. When they built the new village hall out on Glen Carbon road and they vacated that, and shortly after that it became a library. And when they built the library it became a museum. I wasn't involved in any of that. I was involved with the planning commission years ago in Glen Carbon  in fact, I was chairman for a short period of time. Today I'm involved with the police pension board, and I serve on that, I've been serving for about 18 or 19 years. When I was chairman of the planning commission, we developed the building code. We just felt that because construction was beginning to happen that we needed some way to control that and be sure that people were building properly and according to some kind of a code. So we adopted a building code, hired the first building code administrator who's the person who went out to check to be sure when someone was building a house they were doing it properly. That has grown too pretty dramatically. But that was probably most of mine involvement in the past years. The one thing I forgot to mention before, just popped in my mind about the Kiwanis, the Kiwanis used to do a turkey shoot. Where people would bring out their guns and shoot at clay pigeons and they would do it at where Irwin Chapel is right now. That was the field that they would use. In fact, I went out and bought a gun because I thought I try that but I wasn't very good, so it didn't last long. But that was one of their major fundraisers, doing that turkey shoot. In the old days that was very popular, today you hardly hear of it unless you're out in a rural, very rural community. RG: Now you ran for mayor 1981? JE: I ran for mayor and lost. RG: And lost. So what were some of the key political issues during that time? JE: Well I just I guess it was a little bit of arrogance, I felt I could do better than anybody else running the city, that was part of it. The other is that the mayor was always a part time position and I had a feeling that it was time because the community was beginning to grow that we needed an administrator, that didn't happen until much much later but that was one of my key issues: that we needed to hire a village administrator which they now have in order to oversee the day to day operations. It really fell to the village clerk to do that because that was the only person plus at the time was Glenda Kovery and her staff 8  that were there full time every day. So that was one of the issues, but it was more just that I thought I could do a better job than what I had seen being done. RG: And what were some of the people you ran against? JE: Oh my. Well, I ran against the fella that beat me, and that was Ron Foster. [laughing] But at the time there were quite a few people that were running, that kind of diluted the pot, makes it harder for someone to get elected. Ron was the hometown boy, he had also served on the village board so he had a leg up on me  I had not done that. When I look at it I guess in retrospect a couple times in my life I've said things always happen for the best because I get busy at work, I wound up with more responsibility at work. So whether I could have juggled the two as effectively as I thought I could at the time, it may not have worked out so. I never felt bad about, it just didn't happen. RG: So he was the hometown boy and he already had a position with the village? JE: He had been elected to be a trustee earlier. And when the mayor decided he wasn't going to run again, then he decided he would run for mayor. RG: um- JE: Timing was bad. I didn't pick the best timing. [laughter] But it all worked out okay. RE: So let's expand out from Glen Carbon. You were talking about like, there's been a lot of growing in this community, but Edwardsville was also growing as well as outskirts of Glen Carbon. You said one particular person had a lot of influence on that, and that was out Outwine. JE: Meryl Outwin, I think, I give him a lot of credit for developing Glen Carbon to be what it is today. He was responsible for Ginger Creek, Lakewood, which at the time were some of the nicest subdivisions in the area, including Edwardsville. So he kind of I guess brought Glen Carbon up a notch. Glen Carbon and Edwardsville have always been rivals, I think most of that's gone today, but way back when they- they didn't get along. If you look at even today, I spent some time helping out at the food pantry, it's called the Glen-Ed pantry, Glen is first and Ed is second. There's some other organization that are called Ed-Glen so somebody stepped in and said wait a minute, wait a minute, Edwardsville has got to come first. So it's Ed-Glen, instead of Glen-Ed, and that went on for a number of years. But the two communities grew independent of one another actually because it's, it's you know, it was a nice place to go. It was also the fleeing out of East St. Louis at that time, so some people came up here. people from Granite City wanted to move up to get away from the steel mill and the smoke and stuff, EPA has cleaned a lot of that up today but at that time you could drive through Granite City and you'd stop and wipe your hand across something it was just soot, it was a shame. But Glen Carbon didn't have any of that. RG: And you said the one subdivision was that he was involved in was Canterbury subdivision? JE: No that was one I was involved in RG: Oh that was one of yours? JE: Yeah, I and a couple of friends formed, we formed a small corporation. We were only eight members, we sold stock. So every, all eight members, had the same amount of stock. And we bought a piece of 9  land, I can't remember how many acres that was, I think it was 20. And we developed that into a subdivision. We did a two-phase development. First phase, second phase. Some of the people that were part of the corporation fell by the wayside as that was all going on, they just didn't have the same level of interest. But yeah, I was involved with the development of Canteberry Manor. Which is now 35 lot subdivision, and still there, still exists. And that was on the east side of Glen Carbon. When we bought that land it was not in Glen Carbon. We actually petitioned to have in annexed to Glen Carbon. And we did that so we could bring in sewers. Glen Carbon was putting in sewers and they wanted to make those as prevalent as possible. So we annexed to Glen Carbon in order to get sewers and water. It was an interesting project. RG: What was it part of in order for it to get annexed into Glen Carbon? JE: It wasn't really part of anything. It just a piece of land that, I think today may be if you're going to annex, you'd have to annex in tandem. At that time I think they kind of annexed around some other property in order to bring us in so we could get the sewers for that development. But the process of annexing is just to put together a document saying what you want to do and present it to the village board and see if they agree and that's when the attorneys get involved in order to draft up all legalese necessary to make it official for the village. RG: Now you said there was like a mistake with this subdivision? JE: Yeah, that was kind of an interesting thing. The two engineers that did the, we had the basic design of what we wanted but the engineers did the detailed drawings for the roads and where the sewer lines would be and water lines would be. When we came up with the name and we told them what it was, we didn't write it down for them. We told them we wanted it to be called Cantebury Manor. Well out idea CANTEBURY, they called it CANTEBERRY like a berry bush. And by the time we found out that had happened it had been all recorded with the county and everything was official. And we would have had to backtrack, and we decided it wasn't worth it. So it still carries the name Canteberry Manor. RG: And then you also spoke with some Meridian Hills also called seven dips that you told me didn't look the way it does today. JE: Much different, I used to drive that road when I worked at SIU. Because we lived here, and I would go down that hill and the line of sight on that road was just terrible. You were coming up a hill or somebody could have been coming up the other way you couldn't seem them until you were right on top the hill. So it was a dangerous road, you had to be very very careful. But over the years Glen Carbon ended up acquiring funds, rebuilt that road, paved it, put curbs in, sidewalks, smoothed it out. They cut down the hills and filled in the valleys, so it's much much nicer road today than it used to be. RG: It's not as steep? JE: Not as steep. I wasn't involved in any of that development of that road or the reconstruction of it. Although I do know the engineer that did the design work on it. RG: And who was that? JE: Walt Plotbeau 10  RG: Ok. JE: He did most the design on that on when it was done. They also changed it a little bit when they when they did it. It used to be it would come straight out down where the covered bridge is. Now it comes to the intersection up where main street Glen Carbon Road, Meridian, and Glen Crossing all come together. So that little spur was a new leg and it rerouted the road. RG: Then you also, another, probably another building that was built here was Saint Cecilia's. Which is one of the prominent Catholic churches here in Glen Carbon? JE: It's the only one in Glen Carbon RG: Yeah JE: Although there are others in adjacent communities, but it's the only one in Glen Carbon. I was on the building community. We designed, uh, my job - how I got it I don't recall, was to try to find a piece of land to build on. I talked to some people that had some property out just across the street from where the church wound up. And I just felt that their price was way too high. Nice piece of land but the price was beyond what the going rate was at the time. But I heard that the property that the church, the village hall, Autumn Glen, and Methodist church sit on was going to be available because the individual who developed that was the fella that developed Montclair subdivision. And he had passed away. So I approached the bank and worked out an arrangement where we acquired fifteen acres of land in order to build the church. So that was mostly my contribution. There was no out of pocket cost on my part  it was just the labor part to be able to make that happen. But it all turned out, I thought, pretty good. And then I was on the committee that did the design of the church and later the addition of an adjacent building that we call the Family Life Center. I got busy at work towards when construction was starting and so I wasn't really involved in overseeing what was going on with the construction because I didn't have the time any longer, but some of the local people that had been here for a while along with the church, they did that. So that's been 35 years ago. RG: Wow. And then so you said the village hall and the police station are currently right next door to it? JE: They come along after Saint Cecilia's. They bought another piece of land I think probably 15 or 20 acres and built the city hall. And then later cause the original police station was in the city hall building and then as they expanded, needed more space, they built a new police station. And that probably goes back 12 years maybe. RG: Yeah, and where was the original city hall building and the police station in Glen Carbon? JE: It was the old, what is now the museum. RG: Oh, and that was the police station as well? JE: It was everything. RG: Oh wow. And then, so going farther out, I know like this is a huge place where everybody goes nowadays is Wal-Mart our shopping centers there in Glen Carbon, which used to be when I was a kid Cottonwood Area, Cottonwood Mall. And then before that time though it was called Cottonwood Station. 11  JE: Station. That’s right. I think it first called Cottonwood Station. And Meryl Outwine was the one that developed most of that. I don't know if he sold the land or if he developed the buildings or just how that all happened, but he was the guy that was instrumental in making Cottonwood Station a reality. And then the subdivision next to it, which was Cottonwood subdivision, he was instrumental in that also. Back where Eden Care center is, all that area back in there. There's a road that goes in next to Eden, and it kind of goes around and loops back around and ties into itself. They call that the Banjo Drive. That was- cause when you look at it from the sky it looks like a banjo. And he developed all of that back in there. Some of that wasn't such good development, that part of it, but most everything else he did, he did well. RG: So what was Cottonwood Station like? JE: A couple little places to shop. There was a laundry mat. The Bargain Center was there. They had a bowling alley, fitness center, the indoor tennis courts is what I remember the most. I didn't- I wasn't a tennis fan by any means but I do go out and play once in a while. That's all gone, that's all been torn down been replaced. But that's pretty much what made up Cottonwood Station. Wal-Mart came in at some point and kind of added on to that. And then at some point, I don't know why I can't remember why the Bargain Center actually moved across the road. And built a new building, and that became the Bargain Center for quite a few years. And I think he was involved in that also. RG: Meryl Outwine JE: Meryl Outwine, yeah. He did Lakewood subdivision, Ginger Creek, Jodia. And had an option on lots and lots property, and I would have to guess in the late 70s, the cost of money went sky high. The loans, some of the loans- well the loan that we had for the Canterbury Manor subdivision, we were paying like 18% interest. And that hurt all the developers. And I think that's when a lot of the land that he had optioned with the intent of turning them into subdivisions, when back to the bank. It was a bad time for a lot of people. RG: Why do you think there was a bad time? JE: Well, if you had loans and you were sitting on some of that because of the high-interest rate you just couldn't make the payments. That was- wasn't enough money coming in to cover your cost. So the banks who had money invested in some of these started taking the property back. And looking for a new buyer. RG: And what year was this around? JE: Well I think it was in the late 70s. I don't think it was in the 60s. I think it was mid to late 70s. RG: Do you think it was happening just here in Glen Carbon? JE: No, it was happening all over the country. RG: All over the country? JE: Yeah. RG: Was it a depression or? JE: I would call it a recession. 12  RG: Recession? JE: A recession. A pretty dramatic recession. RG: What do you think caused the caused the recession? JE: I'm not sure. I really don't know exactly what triggered it, lack of jobs, I don't know. I'd hate to speculate on that. RG: Okay. JE: It didn't, it didn't affect me that much personally except my involvement with Canterbury Manor. You know, that was a part time venture for all of us. We all had jobs doing other things. But how it affected us was the high cost of borrowing money. RG: And you said that in Cottonwood Station, I have an image of what it used to look like back then, you said that they back in the day in the open fields, between Cottonwood Station and the subdivision right in that corner, right across from where Walgreens is today, they used to do an event that you and your wife used to go to. JE: [laughing] About once a month, periodically, let me put it that way, they would launch hot air balloons from that site. So you could go out and there'd sometimes be 10, 12 out there. And they'd fill up the balloons and once they get them filled up then they would lift off and drift to wherever they sat down. And it was always interesting to watch those, they were very colorful. But yeah that was where Wal-Mart is now, where Regions Bank is now. That was just an open field, and that's where they used to launch the hot air balloons. There was a fella who started that, I think his name was Hesch, E S C H, can't remember his first name. I'm bad about names. And one of the things that I learned through all that was that I thought you just wanted to do that, you go out and buy yourself a balloon, fill it up with air and go floating. You got to be a private pilot  you got to have a pilot's license. So that was something that I learned at that period of time. But yeah, that was- that was interesting to go out and watch something different in Glen Carbon you couldn't see other places. RG: Now going a little farther out and I know you were talking about there was a rival between Glen Carbon and Edwardsville. Why would there be a rival between two cities, was it because their proximity is so close to each other or? JE: You know I never understand that rivalry. Edwardsville I think felt they were the bigger of the two communities, that they were the more affluent of the two communities. And they kind of looked down their nose at Glen Carbon which was more the working-class people. Edwardsville had the courthouse, Edwardsville had the banks, you know none of that existed here in Glen Carbon for a number of years. There wasn't a bank in Glen Carbon when we first moved here. One was eventually built, which I think is the one where Region's Bank is now. And I can't remember the name of it. But I think that was the first bank in Glen Carbon. So I think it was we're the big guy, you're the little guy, you know. We're the better off, you're not, you're more working class. I think it was that. 13  RG: So it'd probably be for a very long time ‘cause Edwardsville, Madison County Court House is there. And then you had Glen Carbon which was mining town and railhead town, so it was mostly working class. JE: Yup yup. I think that rivalry existed for long long time. Whether the kids when they went to school, because they went to a shared school, picked up on any of that I don't know. We certainly didn't talk about it or try to promote it in some way that would make our kid’s experiences negative when they went to school. But they were from Glen Carbon. Yeah, I think over the time that for the most part that has gone away. I actually saw the two mayors, the current mayor of Glen Carbon and the current mayor of Edwardsville sitting down for lunch together. So I figure that's a good thing. RG: [laughing] Yeah. So there was a huge disaster in Edwardsville 1981, the tornado of 1981. Do you remember anything about that particularly? JE: I didn't go up there I remember that it happened. There was a major rebuilding of the main street, St. Louis Street, I know that. After they opened some of the roads up, we took a quick run through to see kind of what had happened. But other than that I can't say that I know any of the details of that but it was a tornado. There have been a couple other situations since then. But tornados always seem to tear through Edwardsville not come down into the Glen Carbon area. My theory is that when they come in from the west, they hit St. Louis which is a hop because you got a lot of concrete in St. Louis. And whatever is coming in goes either north or south or both. And so it goes just far enough north or far enough south that Glen Carbon is missed. This last hailstorm we had is the first time I've ever seen anything like that since I've lived here. RG: Yeah, there- there has been a lot of speculations as to why a lot of the cities past St. Louis that are on the bluff don't get hit. JE: Yeah RG: Like even theories like the St. Louis Arch keeps it from- weather [talking over each either] JE: I don't think the Arch [laughing]. I was working in Clayton at the time the arch was being built, I watched that. The wind just blows right through the Arch. [laughing] RG: So actually speaking of St. Louis, where you live currently there is a road that runs past your house that is actually part of your driveway and your driveway being built up to your house was used for a specific purpose. Can you tell us a little bit about that? JE: Well the piece of property behind us which is still, well there used to be house ask there it burnt on a July the 4th, but I don't remember what year. But the- the St. Louis Press Brick Company, which is a large company in St. Louis used to haul clay in order to press and make brick. And they would use the road right in front of our house, we still have an easement there, there's a 20-foot easement to be able to get into that piece of property. And so that's how this road occurred. That's the reason it was put in, in order to let the trucks get in and out of the property behind us, which is really west of us, in order to haul out the clay to provide the necessary resources to St. Louis Press Brick Company. Part of the deed, our property deed when we got it specifies specifically that St. Louis Press Brick Company had a 20-foot easement for ingress, egress to that property back there across our property. 14  RG: Wow. And then talking about you know, your- where you live now your parents actually used to live across the street or they lived here? Or how did that all work on your family background? JE: You mean in Glen Carbon? RG: Yes. JE: Well the long story is that we lived in East St. Louis. RG: Yeah. JE: The fella who lived just kind of caddy corner across the street had been an old farmer and had wanted to get back in the farming business. We didn't know that what he meant by farming was raising hogs. But he found a piece of land, this piece of land here which across the way, 40 some odd acres. And it turned out that Collinsville's street actually split 9 acres off of that. And he was having trouble coming up with a down payment to buy the property, talked to my parents and was explaining what was going on, and my parents said well we'll buy that 9 acres. Which will hopefully, give you the down payment to buy the other property, so that's how it all happened. That brought them from East St. Louis up to here. He raised hogs across the street and depended on the prevailing winds this was not a pleasant place to be for [laughing] a couple years but he finally disappeared. But my parents built a house at the top of Collinsville Street. And later put in a pond next to it, which is the pond that is behind our house. I helped do that when the time came. We did have trouble with the pond it wouldn't hold water, so we had to pump it out and try to repair it with a product that was supposed to seal it. That helped a bit but not significantly. And then it filled back up to be what it is today. They, when I was married, they gave us a half acre of property off that 9 acres. Later I bought another half-acre. And they eventually sold that original house that they built and had another one built further south which is the one Scott lives in. RG: Your son? JE: Yes. So, yeah, they- they made a double move, built a house and moved. In addition then, a piece of property to the north of them, they decided they didn't need so they broke off a one-acre lot and sold that. So there's been a house built up there. But otherwise what you see is pretty much the same as what it was back when they originally acquired it. Except there are a lot fewer trees because they've gotten old and died. RG: And what did your family do for the longest time when they were here? JE: My father worked on the railroad. He started with Pennsylvania Railroad and then it became Penn Central and then it became New York Central Railroad. And he did that for 35-37 years, somewhere in that range. My mother, when I was in elementary school, worked at a cafeteria in a- what would now be a middle school, down in East St. Louis, Lansdowne Junior High is what the name was. After she retired, after they moved out here, she kept working for a while and then eventually just retired and became you know a stay at home housewife. My father worked until he was able to age wise retire. And then after that they ran around to all the flea markets and bought stuff they didn't need [laughing]. But they were both hard workers, very hard workers. And always had some project going, I used to hate that because I'd have to get involved once in a while and help and I didn't particularly like that. 15  RG: Like the pond? JE: Like the pond. [laughing] Yeah the pond, Dolores when we pumped out the pond we rented a couple of pumps with big fire hoses on them and we pumped them out across the dam down into the creek behind. And we had my father had stocked the pond with some catfish and others. We went down and Dolores dad came out, he was a fisherman, he liked that. All those fish when you skinned them and tried to eat ‘em tasted like mud. So that futile effort. RG: Is there- so what do you do today for Glen Carbon? JE: I serve on the police pension board. RG: And what does that entail? JE: We invest the funds that pay the retirement of the policemen when they retire. RG: So you're still really much involved in the community today? JE: Probably not as involved as I used to be. But I am involved, yeah. Now I don't know how much longer I'm going to be doing that. It’s probably time for somebody else to move in and do that. The problem is the state of Illinois in their infinite wisdom, has made it a little more difficult to get people to serve. And the reason for that is when I started you were appointed, you were on the board, whatever you needed to learn you'd go to the books or talk to somebody or you had an attorney sit with you that would help you. Now you have to do continue education. So a lot of people either don't have the time or don't want to take the time to do that, which means they're disqualified and they can't serve. So at this point, I've asked the mayor if he could start looking for somebody to replace me because I think after 18 years, you know, it's time to think about moving on and doing nothing. And I mean nothing  I'd like to do nothing. RG: Alright well thank you for your time. JE: I hope that helps. I know that I had some sketchy memories of things that happened in the past. I did try to go through some of documents that I had and pictures and stuff. I didn't find a lot that would help, to give you any additional information but RG: This is great. JE: Good luck with your project. RG: Thank you. 16 
MadisonCounty;Betty Vaughn;1929;2018;Betty Vaughn 1929 - 2018   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Betty Vaughn Oral History Interview Phil Schneider, Interviewer July 10, 2018 Editor’s Note: The original oral history interview contained a racial slur, which has been removed from the transcript. The audio file remains unedited. Phil Schneider (PS): I'm Phil Schneider and I'm here on July 10, 2018, to conduct an oral history interview uh with Betty Vaughn. Betty can you go ahead and give us your full name and your birth date? Betty Vaughn (BV): Betty Jeanette Vaughn and I was born May the 10th, 1929, on Thomas Avenue in Alton, Illinois. PS: Okay. So have you lived your whole life in Madison County? BV: Yes PS: Wow. Okay. BV: My whole life PS: The whole, a very, it's a long life. BV: Yes PS: Okay. Alright, well let's talk [inaudible] a few things. So you were born in Alton. Um, how long did you live in Alton? BV: We lived there possibly about three years. My dad got sick with malaria, and the doctor told him he needed to get out in the country and the fresh air. So we moved to Bethalto from there, over on Prairie Street. PS: Okay BV: That big two-story brick house, and we lived there... possibly... maybe... four or five years. My oldest sister started school in Bethalto and from there we moved over to Edwardsville. When you go around that big long curve going into Edwardsville. On 159, there was a big two-story white house, and that's where we lived there and we only lived there probably four, five years, and then we moved to Midway. PS: Okay, yeah BV: And that's where we built, my dad built a house there and we lived there and that's where I attended 1  school from there The only school I went to was Yorkville Country School. PS: Oh was it? BV: Yes. PS: Okay. So you've been all over the county? BV: Yes PS: Okay. BV: I've been all over the county. PS: Okay. Um so let's talk a little bit about your family in a little more in detail here. BV: Okay. PS: So you were born in Alton, your parents live in Alton, you followed them around. Where’s your family from? Like your grandparents, your parent's parents. BV: Well, my grandparents, my great-grandfather was born in France. PS: Oh, really? BV: Yes and he came. They got an opportunity to come to America. I do not know what his wife's name was. And I couldn't find the information. Uh and so when they started, they got as far as Canary Islands. And that's as far as they would let them go. PS: Okay. BV: And that's where my grandfather was born at. And they lived there for a period of time and then they got the opportunity to come to America. So they came to America and they landed in Hannibal, Missouri. PS: Oh, really? BV: Yes and there they my grandfather married and her-his wife's name was Rosetta. And they lived there. Grandpa worked in a coal mine. And he had eight children. PS: Oh, really? Wow. BV: And his wife died when my dad was eighteen months old. And he never he did remarry. My dad's oldest sisters really raised him. That was the only mother that he really had. And they lived there for oh quite some time and then they moved to Springfield, Illinois. And there's where grandpa worked in what you called Shanklins. It was a company that made and I don't know they might still be there. They made heavy equipment. PS: Okay. 2  BV: Like graters and things that roads [inaudible] PS: Mm-hmm. Gotcha. BV: Grandpa worked there all the time until he retired. PS: Hm. BV: In fact they made him retire twice before he ever finally give it up. He kept going back. PS: Really? BV: He said he didn't have nothing to do, he wanted to go back. So they let him be janitor for a while and finally he got so old they told him you have to leave we can't let you work here anymore. PS: Yea, wow. BV: Now during that time my dad left Springfield and came to Alton. And uh there's where he met my mother. At Springfield at Spring Street and they married there and lived in Alton. Dad worked at Olin, at that time it was called Western Cartridge Company PS: Okay. BV: And my mother worked there for just a short time. And after they got married by she said she got married to have a home so she quit. And she never did work anywhere else. Just a home, she was always a home wife. PS: And what were your parent's names? BV: My parent's names was James Arthur and Nancy May. Her maiden name was Long. PS: Okay, okay. BV: And their, their, their folks was up around Carrolton, Illinois, and up in there. PS: Okay. BV: But my dad uh worked at Western Cartridge and he worked there twenty-five years. And uh in the meantime, we had moved to Bethalto and there we lived in that house there before we moved to Edwardsville. From there we moved over by Midway. We got acquainted with some people that had a farm over there and it was a homestead place. Well at that time dad didn't feel like he wanted to go to farming right then, so he built a blockhouse. And then so we lived at Midway and I went all through school, went seven years to school. I graduated from the eighth grade. Uh my teacher said that she thought we could take two years in one, so we I took the third and the fourth grade both in one year and graduated from the eighth grade. PS: That's pretty impressive. 3  BV: Yes, seven... seven years I went to school. I was twelve years old when I graduated from grade school PS: Uh-huh. BV: Well, my dad got the opportunity to buy this farm. That was homesteaded and so those folks we traded houses. They traded their farm. A hundred and ten acres PS: Oh, wow BV: For their, for our farm, we had thirteen acres and a blockhouse but they were getting too old, they couldn't farm anymore. PS: I see. BV: That farm was on the way to Moro about two miles off of 159 PS: So BV: Back in the country PS: Okay, so how old were you and they when you guys traded houses? BV: When we traded houses there let's see I was out of school I was probably about twelve, thirteen. PS: Okay. BV: And uh then uh I farmed, I helped Dad farm. Until I was seventeen. PS: Okay BV: And then at seventeen my dad thought I wanted maybe to get out in public. I didn't really want to but he thought I did. I liked farming pretty well, so I went to work at the red and white grocery store here in Bethalto. PS: Okay, now where would that be at today? BV: That was right where um uh let's see that's where, right there, I'm trying to think what the name of the store is right now it’s uh, it was down from Augustine. Well, right beside of the expressway coming through. PS: Okay, okay BV: That first building on the corner PS: Okay BV: It was a red and white store 4  PS: So where the uh Augustine Insurance is? BV: And Augustine was down on the other corner PS: Oh, okay BV: It's been there since then PS: Okay BV: He, well he had a grocery store. At that time it was a grocery store PS: Okay BV: And that's uh Andy Augustine PS: Hm BV: Always wore his ballcap backwards. He always known for that PS: Yeah BV: So I worked there for year. Then I uh went to work at Olin and I worked there for forty-six years and three months. I worked twenty-five years as a production worker. And this is in the loading room... PS: Yeah BV: ...for shotgun shells. And then they asked me to be to take on as a supervisor. PS: Really? BV: And I was the first lady salaried supervisor that Olin Corporation had PS: Wow BV: And uh so I was at twenty-one years before I retired and I retired in uh October the thirtieth in nineteen-ninety-three. PS: Hmm BV: And uh I really, I really enjoyed working there but I just really felt like the lord moved on me to retire. PS: Yeah BV: And so I did. And they asked me why, if everything's alright, I said everything's great uh but I just feel like this is when I need to go. 5  PS: Yeah BV: And so I retired and I've been - I've been glad I did ever since. PS: Yeah. [laughter] Okay BV: But my dad retired when he was, uh he had been there twenty-five years. PS: Yeah BV: But he wanted to farm. PS: Yeah BV: And that's what he did, but when we were on the farm then he went into construction work. Building houses and things and that's when he built the church at Meadow Brook. And uh well we got started at the Bethalto Church because a man that worked with him by the name of Dan Hanby. He invited us to church and we got started to Bethalto Church from there and that's where went to church all the time till we came over to cornerstone. PS: Mkay BV: And my dad built the church at Meadow Brook. And they moved, they started out the school, then he built the-the Church and worked there - pastored there till he passed away, and then his wife pastored it until she passed away. But it was, it grew and he felt like that uh Meadow Brook needed a church. Some of the people had gone to Bethalto, but PS: Yeah. BV: they needed a church out there. PS: Yeah. BV: And so that's why he did that. PS: So he uh he retired from Olin after, was it twenty-one years? BV: He he worked twenty-five years. PS: Twenty-five years? Okay. BV: Mm-hmm, yes. PS: Then he started farming. BV: Yea mm-hmm PS: How long did he farm before he moved into the ministry? 6  BV: Well he farmed up till let's see I guess in '55 I would say probably a good thirty years maybe because my mom passed away in '55. PS: Okay BV: And that's when he moved to Bethalto, he moved over on Sheridan Street. PS: Okay BV: And his father moved with him PS: Hm. BV: And he stayed with him until he passed away. And then my dad, well he moved to country air PS: Mm. BV: While he was pastor. But he was very healthy. Uh, he just really - it just seemed like he could never do enough for anybody. So he passed a good, that's a good challenge. PS: Yeah. BV: To go. PS: Yeah BV: [Laughter] PS: So you spent uh a lot of your childhood bouncing around the county and then you um ended up on the farm. Um, what was it like, ya know, growing up in that, in that time period? What did you do as a kid? BV: As a kid, we just, we made our own entertainment... on the farm. Uh, at that time, uh, neighbors visited a lot. And a lot of times they would come over of an evening and everybody'd walk to one another's house. Just visit in the evening and us kids played games, tag... PS: Yeah. BV: and hide and seek... and things like that we did for our own entertainment. PS: Yeah. BV: And we had a creek that run through there. We'd go down play in the creek, you know. Things like that and kids would do back then. PS: Yeah. BV: [Laughter] And uh, then in the wintertime, we did a lot of games and we put models together and 7  stuff like that, it was inside... the house. Of course, we farmed and we was outside a lot anyway. PS: Yeah. Right. BV: We played out and uh, I went to the country school called Yorkville. And it was three miles from where we lived. And, of course, most of the time we had to walk. PS: Right. BV: Everybody gathered together, all the kids did... and walked. But then the teacher would get permission from the parents and we'd play outside in the afternoon. Kind of get different you know in the snow. PS: Yeah. BV: And stuff for that. And that, as kids growing up that's just about all we did, we made our own entertainment. PS: Yeah. BV: We visited with other kids. PS: Yeah. BV: And we had a lot of friends because it seemed like everybody was interested in helping if you had anything to do. All the neighbors would help one another. We moved on the farm and when we did threshing, at that time we did threshing. And we had, went from one farm to another with the threshing machine. And they brought in meals like you wouldn't believe. They brought in a lunch that was bigger than a meal and then you had dinner. PS: Yeah. BV: And then you had lunch in the afternoon. PS: Uh huh. BV: And then everyone went home for supper. [Laughter] PS: Yeah. What would you uh what would they bring? BV: What did they bring? Everything, I mean there was, they had fried chicken, they would have all kinds of roast, they had all kind of vegetables. Of course, everyone had a garden. PS: Right. BV: And but their, their lunches was like meals. PS: Yeah. 8  BV: We would think it's a meal now. PS: Mm-hmm, so do you think, well we can get back to this question a little bit later, I guess, I'll come back to that later. So at the, at the school you did, you did first grade through eighth grade. BV: Eighth grade. PS: And um, what kind of subjects did you, did you, how did you, how did school operate? BV: Well we-we did reading, writing, arithmetic, history. We had what they call morals and manners. PS: Okay BV: And we had when you got into the seventh grade and eighth grade for spelling you had what they called orthrography. PS: Oh, what's that? BV: And that is you had like two or three words at each lesson and you had to define those words. PS: Oh, okay. BV: You separate and broke them up into syllables. And then you and then you usually had to make up something that you would know what that word meant. PS: Oh, okay. BV: For that, in the seventh and eighth grade. PS: Sounds like kind of a challenging like uh critical thinking subject. BV: Yes, yes it was. Uh huh, I really liked it. After I got used to it you know. Different from spelling and I loved arithmetic, I liked that. Now history when you got up to ancient history. I never did care about much ancient history. [Laughter] PS: Right. BV: But I liked American History. Something that was happening right then. PS: Makes sense. BV: I remember that. PS: Yeah. BV: But all our studies were just like that. I had I only had one teacher. All the time I went to school. We had a substitute teacher one time, whenever she was sick. 9  PS: Yeah. BV: But otherwise I had the same teacher all the way through school. PS: So was it a one room school? BV: It was a one room school. PS: Okay. BV: We had the, we had the biggest school, country school around in the area. PS: Oh BV: And at sometimes we had eighty pupils. We had PS: Oh goodness. BV: all in one, all in one big room. PS: Let me ask you as a, as a teacher, I get nervous when I have thirty students in a room. So I can't imagine eighty students and all grade levels. BV: We had this was all and you-you could've any time you walked into school you could have heard a pen drop. PS: Sure. BV: But our teacher was, she was a very nice teacher, but she was very strict. And she just got you started off, the first day of school. And explained to you what she expected of you and that was the end of it, and from then on, all the kids respected her for that. She treated everybody the same. She didn't have no pets. She just... PS: That's good. BV: Everybody was the same. And I think that's why she did so good in that school. We had what we called, they had directors. There was about four men that was like on the board of directors. PS: Okay. BV: And they would come every once in a while and have a meeting with her and... And let her find out if everything was going okay or what the school needed. And they had what they called a district superintendent at that time. He was a Mr. Wetzel was his name. In Edwardsville. PS: Okay. BV: And he came usually about once every two or three months. And visited the school and would talk to the kids, let us know you know what he expected of us. And things like that. 10  PS: Do you think uh students valued education very highly? BV: Yes, I think they did. I think they really did and I think they worked extremely hard. And I think anyone who went through school at that time, there was, I guess that was why a lot of them didn't want to go to high school. I didn't want to go to high school, so they didn't make me so. [Both Laugh] PS: Why not, is it too much work? BV: I just didn't like, I just didn't care that much about school. PS: Oh. BV: I wanted to be outside. PS: Oh that makes sense. BV: I didn't really want to be PS: Yeah. BV: In a building all the time. PS: And you were already enjoying farming anyway. BV: Yeah, right I was enjoying farming anyway so. PS: Okay. BV: I didn't, I didn't want to go. And, and at that time when the war was on. My dad worked at Olin and he was froze to his job, what they call froze to their job. PS: Yeah. BV: They couldn't quit, because of ammunition. And the military. Well the government took over Olin at that time for the military. And so they couldn't uh-uh leave their jobs, so, but they and you couldn't hire anybody because it was all the men was in service. PS: Right, right. BV: So that's why I went to help them, with Dad serving, we did our own farming and everything. And at that time down at Powder Mill Road that was blocked off. And they had soldiers that stood there. PS: Oh yes. BV: Twenty-four hours a day, you could not go down Powder Mill Road, because of that. That was all blocked off for government. PS: This and this was during, during World War II? 11  BV: The war. Mm-hmm. PS: Okay, BV: Yeah. PS: Okay. So you, so your dad was working there? BV: Yes PS: And you were still in school or you were, uh no, no, you were... BV: I was at farm. PS: Farm. Okay, okay. Uh, so did he have to work longer hours to keep up with the demand? BV: No, they only worked eight hours, but uh, they didn't have much overtime back then. They just had more people, I think at one time there was like six thousand employees at Olin. PS: Okay. Wow. BV: So that's why you know at that time it was a big thing for. PS: Yeah. BV: He worked in the brass mill. PS: Okay. BV: Yeah. PS: Okay. So as a kid um did your, did school go to the extra? You know like sometimes nowadays kids have field trips or school plays, kind of things. BV: We had school plays. PS: Okay. BV: Yes, we did. We had always had a big Christmas program. And uh usually on the last day of school we had a big picnic. PS: Oh okay. BV: They would get all, all the parents and everybody came. That was our last day of school. That's the way we separated. PS: Okay. 12  BV: Or celebrated that day. PS: That's a nice, that's a nice way of doing it, you know. BV: Yes, uh-huh. PS: And so did school run the, it ran nine months, like... BV: Yeah. Nine months. We started on the first day of September and we went through April the thirtieth. PS: Oh wow. BV: That was just the way it was. PS: So you had all of May. BV: All of May. PS: Whereas now some schools go... BV: Yes. PS: Almost into June. BV: Yes. Yeah. PS: Okay. BV: We was out May, June, July, August, and then we was back to school in September. That's just the way it was right after Labor Day. PS: Hm. Um so as a kid did you any-any-any have hobbies? As you mentioned doing models during winter. BV: I, yes. Yes, I liked to build model airplanes or something like that. I always liked to do that. And at that time, most of the models were wooden frames. PS: Mm-hmm. Yeah. BV: And you glued them together. That's what I liked to do when it was... PS: That's neat. BV: Yeah. PS: Did have, did you, ever play any-any sports? I don't know how they, I'm sure the school didn't probably have sports team. 13  BV: Softball. PS: Do you... softball. BV: Oh, I loved softball. I played on uh as catcher and played on our softball team. We had, on our country schools, we would play one another. PS: Okay. BV: The schools would go, like would pick maybe on a Friday afternoon. We would go from one school to another and play that school in their game. And softball and I loved to play it. PS: So was it a coed team? Boys and girls? BV: Yes. PS: Okay. BV: It was combined. PS: Okay BV: Because we didn't have enough for boys and girls. PS: Oh, makes sense. Okay. BV: So we had the mixed team and any school we did. PS: And you said you played, you played catcher? BV: I played catcher. PS: Okay, how was your, how good was your team? BV: Oh our team, was, we thought we was the best team. [Both Laugh] BV: Everybody'd say "Oh! that Yorkville team." Yup. Yeah, but I loved to play and... PS: Yeah. BV: I never got tired of playing. One school we played, we played a doubleheader one time. And I know I was so tired I could hardly make it home, but boy I wouldn't a give up for nothing in the world. PS: [Laughter] BV: [Inaudible] PS: So uh so after, after school, you didn't go to high school. 14  BV: No PS: You went right, right to farming. BV: Yes. PS: And then around seventeen, you got your job at the grocery store. BV: Yes, uh-huh. PS: And from there you went into Olin. BV: Yeah, went to Olin. PS: Okay. BV: Yeah. PS: So you mention at Olin, you were, you worked in uh the production. BV: Yes, I was production. In production I ran loading machine, I ran the box making machine. I did different jobs. I learned I loved machinery so I learned how to run the machines. And work on them myself. Which at that time you had adjusters and they did that. PS: Yeah. BV: But I loved to do that. And I learned that I trained a lot of supervisors just while I was working. And then I was uh I was an operator instructor. And that you took care of all the ordering the supplies, for what the loading machines would need, and the different loads, you took care of the making sure that the girls had the right material to work on their machines and I liked to do that. I did that for several years before they, I went on as a supervisor. PS: So uh working at Olin, you would've have been there during Vietnam. Would you have been there during Korea or is that before you got there? BV: Well, I went there in forty-seven. PS: Okay, okay, so yeah okay. So did, do you feel like um working for Olin, working for an munitions company, did those moments of war, military engagement, did it make the work seem more intense of more purposeful? BV: It seemed, it seemed like so important. And I think they kind uh, your supervisors, they kind of made you feel that way. You were really doing this for your family of boys who was overseas and working. But I think people took interest in their jobs. Wanted everything to be perfect. You know, cause, ‘cause their boys was over there. You know. PS: Yeah. 15  BV: Their family was there, you wanted it to be right. And I think they did they took a lot of interest in their jobs. PS: [Silence] That's I think it's uh it's important to see that it's not only you know you're not just only working for a paycheck, but you're working there it's patriotic service. BV: Right, right. PS: Do you think that, they helped, kind of, you mentioned your dad was frozen to his job during the war. Did that happen again during Korea or Vietnam? BV: No, no that was that was only time at that time. And I think it was such a huge war, and so intense that that's why they, they didn't want new people coming in. Well, in fact, that's why they had guards all around everything. PS: Right, right. BV: And they didn't want nobody. You couldn't get, where you couldn't get down where you go on East Alton, you couldn't come down close to that place... At all. I mean they just really. And they had, they had, for the airport they had a flyover range where they weren't allowed to fly. So close. And we had a person one time that decided they wanted to fly over to find out just exactly what was going. And they didn't very close till they got shot at. PS: Oh wow. BV: Yeah. The pilot got hit in the tail end. And he was in after they got him down and I don't who they, he had been a former employee. Of Olin. He didn't have no reason or anything, he didn't, he just wanted to see what was going on in there. PS: So he had took off from Bethalto, from the airport hangar. BV: Yes, yes. PS: And flew over towards Olin. BV: Yes. PS: And they shot him down. BV: Yes they did. They got him right through his tail end when he was sitting there. PS: Wow. BV: And they told him "didn't you realize that's that was bad?" And he said well he never thought they would ever shoot, he didn't think he was that close. But they said that was a flying range and they was not allowed to be around that so. 16  PS: So how did the community respond to that? BV: The community said he got what he deserved. PS: [Laughter] BV: He wasn't supposed to be there. PS: Uh-huh. BV: And he knew that. That place was protected. And he should have stayed away. PS: How did you think that made the community feel to have such you know a high, like Bethalto, Alton, East Alton is a pretty small area compared you know... BV: Yes. PS: Even to St. Louis or BV: Yes. PS: Or to Springfield. So to have such a highly guarded factory how do you think that made the community feel? BV: I think the community felt extremely safe. Because of the presence of all the military that was here. And I think they were particular about what they did, where they went, and the way they acted. Because of the government being so prominent in the area. Because this place was small then to what it. PS: Yeah sure. BV: What it is now. You know. And yet everybody felt like that and everybody was concerned about the other person. They was really a family-oriented area. Around this way in Madison County. PS: Okay. So you manage getting promoted, at Olin. To... What was it again? BV: It was, I was a production supervisor. PS: Okay BV: A salaried [inaudible]. PS: Okay so you were hourly before now you are salaried. BV: Right. PS: That's pretty impressive of you. It's a real testament to your work ethic. BV: Yeah. 17  PS: You finished, you went to eighth grade and started working farm. Then at Olin. How did that come about? What is the process there? BV: Well I guess and I don't like to talk about it but I guess it seems like I'm bragging but I was taught to work that when I went inside the plant I belonged to that plant. And my dad always told me that. He said now when you go through that gate you belong to that company... You give them a good eight hours work. And that was the way I did it. And I always did and they could depend on me and I worked hard. I earned my money and I trained a lot of people that came in on jobs. PS: Mm-hmm. Yeah. BV: When they asked me to do that I said well you know I don't know I'd have to pray about it. That's what I told them when they asked me about it. PS: Mm-hmm Yeah. BV: And they said we knew you'd say that. And I said that's my, what I, and they said we know that. We know that. So that's what I did. I felt like it's, to me it's really amazing. And like I said I don't want to brag about it but when I think how good the Lord did this. When they asked me that I had no idea what the salaries were or what they made or anything. But at this time they were allowing women to work on men's jobs and if they had anybody that was absent, powder man, or adjuster or whatever was absent. And nobody wanted to work. I would work. ‘Cause I could do all the jobs so I just worked. Well, when I went out for them to interview me for the job they said now we have to tell you first there is no way we can start you off at what the wages you're making now. And I said I understand that. But he said to me what do you think is what you would be a fair amount to start you at? And I said well I would like to ask you to tell me first. I know what I feel like. But I would like for you to tell me. I wanted to know how the Lord directed me. PS: Right. BV: So he told me and I said just like that, that's exactly what the Lord told me you'd offer me. He said you what? PS: [Laughter] BV: I said yes, I asked the Lord what should I accept? Because I knew you told me you couldn't give me what they would. PS: Yeah. BV: That I had made and want you to start me off at. And that's exactly what it was and it was right to the dollar. PS: That's amazing BV: Yea to me it was, but and the amazing thing was that they only they did their increases and no 18  salaried person was supposed to tell anybody else what they made. Because they do that by merit. PS: Right. BV: Within like, I had two supervisors that was higher up than I am that had passed away and going to their funeral the first one I went to one of the big wheels at Olin had motioned for me like that when I went in and I thought you know this scared me because I wasn't used to going anywhere like that. PS: Right. BV: And so I went over to him and I called him by name and he said I got something to tell you. I said okay. He said you'll like your paycheck. That's all he said to me and they took me up to the top, Phil, within three months. PS: Really? BV: I was making the top supervisor. PS: So that's a real validation of your work ethic and your. BV: Right and that made me that really made me feel good to know that they had that much confidence in me. PS: Yeah. BV: And I had made an impression which I was backward I never you know never visit with anybody in the high up or anything. PS: Right. BV: That's just what the Lord did for me by my work. PS: So you're the first woman to reach that position. BV: Yes. PS: Okay were there any women after you? BV: Yes I think they have several of them after me but and they told me they said now Betty you're going to be really somebody that is going to be scrutinized. [inaudible] I just do my job just like I always have. But one thing that I did require of them I told them I said now there is one thing I want you to promise me this I know that no other woman has been doing this and I want you to tell me if I don't want to do anything different than if it would be a man on that job. What you require of him I need to be required of too and I want you to be the one to tell me. If I am not doing that job because I don't want someone else to tell me well you're not doing this or you're not doing that. If it was a man. I said I don't want to hear that. I said I want you to tell me if I am not doing the job I don't want to be on it 19  because I don't believe that's right. That wouldn't be right. PS: Mm-hmm. So that was you talking to your boss? BV: My boss. He was what they called a general foreman. PS: Okay. BV: Then there was a supervisor over him a superintendent. Over him before it went up into the president and the vice president. PS: Right. So how do you think I guess going into that position right so you're now a supervisor over men. How did they react to that? BV: I could not have been treated better. There was a couple that at first, they didn't want to say anything but. You could tell by their actions it was hard for them. PS: Right. BV: And I did my best. Not be showing of authority over them that would make them feel uncomfortable Because of being a woman. And I tried to work like if I was to if they'd of told me the next day you're going to work on the floor I could have went out there and worked with those people. Just like I had never been a supervisor. And that's I treated them like I like to be treated. I said, I'll tell you your job. My job is to see that you do it. PS: Hm. BV: If you don't do it I am going to be right there behind you to see that you do. Otherwise, that's all I just want you to do what I ask you to. And I never had a problem. I really, I really had to admire the men and the way they treated me. And if they had you know their pictures and things they had up in their lockers and if I had to go up there they made sure they covered them up. PS: Oh okay. BV: So they really did have respect for me. PS: Yeah, because I was going to ask not only are you a woman, but you're also a very committed Christian. So I know that sometimes working in a factory setting is not always the most polite atmosphere. BV: Yeah, that's true PS: Even among the men, so how did you handle that? BV: Well I just, I was just myself and anything if I heard them saying something I didn't like I just walked off. You know? They did their best not to say anything in front of me. 20  PS: Right. BV: But if they happened, if I happened to walk up and they were talking, they real quickly. They did that thing. They really did. I really had to admire the men. And I had blacks. I had all kinds worked for me. They had one time when I was down there and my birthday was... All of a sudden we shut down for lunch and all of a sudden over this intercom and in this entire building this black man... Started singing happy birthday. PS: Ah. BV: Talk about shocked. PS: Yeah. BV: I had just started out of my office and I stopped like, and of course everyone is watching for me. PS: Yeah. Yeah. BV: It was really good. And he was really a nice, nice young man. And I worked all kinds. I had people that was resentful to one another before. And I tried hard to work a relationship between them. So that they could work together and... I had a black lady and a white man. He didn't like black people and they just seemed like they, when I first went into this other department and they didn't like one another. So one night I just called them both down to the office. With a union steward. I took them into the inner office where nobody else could see but them. And it seemed odd, that they said, why are we down here? And I said you are down here, because of the way you have been treating one another. PS: Hm. BV: Now I want you to say whatever you got to say to her. She was a black lady. And I said and I want you to tell him whatever you got to say to him. Right now in front of this union steward and me. And then when we leave this room I never want to hear another remark ill-natured about one another. You both got a name and that's what I want you to call one another and I want you to work together. Just peaceful. Just forget everything that's happened in the past because it ain't going to be that way no more. PS: How'd that work out? BV: It tell you, you couldn't have believed it was the same two people. Nobody could have believed it. And I always told them when you leave this office if anybody out there on the floor knows about this it'll be because you told them. Because I don't tell stuff. It's up to you. If you want them to know it that's up to you. Otherwise, oh I won't say it. I said okay. Then this is the end of it and I'll tell you what you would have never known they were the same two people. In fact, the black lady. She was really hard to get along with people. From that time on if she thought I was going to be on vacation she took vacation. PS: [Laughter.] BV: She didn't want to work for nobody else. That made me feel good. 21  PS: Yeah. I was actually going to ask this question. You worked at Olin for the late forties into the nineties. BV: Yes. PS: So you worked through some pretty turbulent racial times. BV: Yes. PS: How did that go? BV: The racial down there they were pretty good in the department. Now I don't know how they did outside of the department, but inside the department, they were pretty good. You would see them once in a while kind of get two or three together. If I noticed that especially on my shift, I always went up and just started talking to them or something like that I broke up the conversation. PS: Yeah. BV: Whatever they were talking about. So that it wouldn't lead to more than to what it was supposed to. And I, they did good. I did have no problems with them at all. PS: With just the tension and what not you mean? BV: I think it was a lot of tension because of what was going on outside. PS: Yeah. BV: In fact. The once I would have them call in sometimes and I had a lot of black people work for me. They would call in and they'd say "Betty we are going to be late." Because this is their expression "the East St. Louis [blacks] are over here, and and we won't go outside our house while they're here." These were from Alton. And so they were afraid of them. And sometimes they would be late and sometimes they would make it in time. But that was their expression to me. PS: So why were they afraid? BV: They were afraid of them because the black people over there would come over to Alton and they'd just fight. PS: To antagonize? BV: Yeah. Yeah. And that's what they were afraid of. Not that they even knew all of them but they would just go in gangs like that. And they were bad about that. PS: Hm. BV: So that was the only kind of problems that would have but they would call and tell me "I'll be in but I'm going to be late." So they know that they were going to be late. 22  PS: Any issues among whites and black in the actual company itself. BV: That was the only ones. Once in a while it would. But as far as working together you would have never known they treated everyone. Like I said I worked hard to try to make sure they didn't have any reason. PS: Right. BV: To get to one another. You wouldn't. We would have the ladies sometimes you would get the ladies. Of course I had at first, I had probably fifty people that worked for me on my shift. And sometimes you would get the ladies that would get jealous of one another. You know? And they would want to not work next to one another. And I had a lady come up to me when I first went over to the department. I had worked in loading all the years, so I knew everybody there. And in the end the department where I was going to be supervisor for a period of time in the empty shell department. I didn't know all of them. This one lady she came up to me and she said Betty you can't work that girl next to that one on that machine. And I looked at her and I said I can't? PS: [Laughter] BV: She said oh no they don't get along. I said pardon me, but I am the supervisor and they're assigned to that machine and that's where they will work. So she turned around and walked off. PS: [Laughter] BV: They worked next to one another. Never had no problem. See they'd cater to them before. PS: Right. BV: And this time nobody, they're all the same to me. You work where you're assigned. Do your job and you would have them once in a while I didn't want to work with that one. Well that's too bad, that's what you're going to do this week. That stopped it. PS: Yeah. BV: Didn't let it go no farther, so. PS: Sounds like for the most part your job was really enjoyable. BV: It was and I give the lord credit for that. Because I prayed about it many times I'd have to make a decision I'd walk through the department. I had two floors to cover. And I would walk through the department and talk to the lord about it. And he always came through for me. Alway give me the right answer and things settle down. And that's why. And when I retired, the day that they had the dinner for me, my vice president came to me and he said you know Betty I got to tell you this. He returned thanks over the food for me. And prayed for me. PS: Oh. 23  BV: [Inaudible] PS: Really? BV: And he said there is one thing I got to know and I want to tell you I always believed that we were protected, even when we were on black powder, because of you being here. He said when you were here I knew I didn't have to worry about anything. That really made me feel good. Knowing that I was leaving the department and that's the way they felt. While I was working. PS: Yeah. BV: And I've always been grateful that the Lord helped that. That's why I don't talk a lot about it because it sounds like I'm bragging but I'm really bragging for the Lord. PS: Yeah. BV: Because it really it was an exciting time in my life those forty-six years. That I worked. I have no regrets. Lord helped me to witness and win people for the Lord. That went to other churches and things. And I really feel that like he blessed me by giving me that opportunity. PS: Yeah. That's great. BV: Yeah. PS: So let's, we'll wrap up talking about your work but let's I'll transition with this, I know that for a long time a lot of companies like this when it's a large company in a small town with a lot of social activities around it. How did Olin handle that back in the time period? BV: With the back in with the other companies around? PS: Yeah. Those or... BV: They had different companies that would try. They had what you call a Smith and Wesson company. Like that. And it never hindered Olin at all. In fact, they tried to be of help to them. PS: Oh okay. BV: Because they were just moving in with the weapons and things like that. And eventually they cooperated with them a lot. They did take, Olin did take a lot of work probably from a lot of other companies. Because of that. But as far as the glassworks were there, it was a big company. And it just seemed like they just blended in. They had to, Olin, each one had their own occupations for what they did. PS: Hm. BV: And it seemed like they cooperated a lot. 24  PS: Did they ever do anything like company baseball teams or that kind of stuff? BV: Oh yes. PS: Compete against each other? BV: Oh well. Olin had their trap and skeet team. PS: Oh okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah. BV: They did a lot of that. They did have, they competed with other companies, but there was no other ones here with that. Now they did have softball teams. They used to have what they call a westerner club and that's PS: Oh yes. BV: where they had the softball teams, baseball teams, and they did cooperate with others. We had a pretty good softball team, a men's softball team. And they would go with other companies and that. For competition and they used to have what they called beauty contests. PS: Uh-huh. BV: They did have different ones in the plant run against one another. PS: Uh-huh. BV: And then do that. PS: Yeah. BV: [Inaudible] things like that. Activities for the employees. PS: Uh-huh. Company picnics that kind of stuff. BV: Yes we always had a yearly picnic at the westerner club. PS: Was that like... BV: One year they had it for the ammunition division. PS: Uh-huh. BV: And then the next year they would be first. PS: Okay. BV: And then the second one would be brass mill group. 25  PS: Oh okay. BV: And then the next year it would switch around and the brass mill would be first and ammunition would be second, they did that, why, they just didn't want to show, it was just too big a group to have them all together. PS: Right. BV: And they wanted them to not feel like one was treated better than the other. PS: Okay. BV: So they just switched. PS: Like morning and afternoon or different days? BV: It was a whole day. PS: Oh wow. BV: They spent the whole day there. Yeah. PS: So what would they do at those picnics? BV: Well, they had all kinds of games for the kids to play. And they had the most of the eating was all kind eating of things. PS: Yeah. BV: That you had like that. And a lot of people just sat around and visited. You know because they didn't get to visit that much at work. PS: Right. BV: But they knew each other so they'd visit there at that time like that. PS: Do you feel like the company fostered a good community among the workers? It seems like you tried... BV: Yes. PS: [inaudible] BV: Yes. They were good about that too. I think that's why they liked the picnics like they did. Open like that for them. And they supplied a lot of the drinks and stuff like that for them. PS: Mm-hmm. Well good. 26  BV: They'd have an ice cream. They always any amount that you wanted to eat. You know? [inaudible] PS: That sounds like a good time. BV: Yeah. PS: So you retired was it ninety-three you said? BV: Yes. Uh-huh. PS: Okay. BV: October the thirtieth ninety-three. PS: Okay and you already mentioned before that you were really a big... You were very involved in your church and stuff. BV: Yes. PS: Right. So let's talk about your church life. Okay? BV: Okay. PS: How have you, what have you done as part of a local church? BV: Well I got saved when I was sixteen the family invited us and we got to Church at Bethalto. And brother Clyde Bailey well he eventually went to the Stone Church in Chicago. But at that time he was pastor in Spring street. And he came out and held a six-week's revival. And during that time there must have been thirty or forty that got saved and filled with the spirit and we had a baptismal service. In the Spring Street baptistery because Bethalto didn't have one and as it was a Sunday school was in class and then they voted us in as I was a treasurer for the Sunday school for a period of time. And then they needed a teacher for the junior boys. So I went in teaching for the junior boys. PS: How old were you then? BV: I was probably eighteen. PS: Okay. BV: And so then I went in teaching for the junior boys and after that they had a primary girls. So they wanted me to teach primary girls so I went from the boys to the primary girls and I taught them and I'd always accuse my dad every time I'd get a big group you split them. PS: [laughter] BV: He said well that makes you work harder. PS: Yeah. 27  BV: So then I went from teaching the primary girls I went in I taught the intermediate but at the same time then I started teaching the adults. They wanted me to teach the adults. So I started teaching the adults and I also had a shift workers' class on Sunday at evening. PS: Oh. BV: Before church. A lot of, we worked shift work back then. Everybody did and we had our pins that, we didn't want to lose our pins. PS: Yeah. BV: So if we had to work that morning then I had a class in the evening before church for if they wanted to win their pin they came there and that was their Sunday school. PS: Explain the pins because I have seen those before. BV: Yes. PS: And I didn't grow up with those. Explain those pins. BV: Those were started, my dad started that at Bethalto. That you were allowed two Sundays for sickness and the reason he did that when he started it out he wanted to get kids to come all the time. And bring their parents. So some of the little kids when they would go on vacation with their parents their parents didn't go to church. Well then they'd lose their pin. PS: Right. BV: So my dad said you know we got to be fair with this so you were allowed two Sundays in the year to miss. And then or you'd get a pin. And that's, that's how the pin started. And that's how I've what got my pins. PS: So how many pins do you have now? BV: I have right now I've got sixty-three years but I'm short seven. I can't find nobody that makes them. PS: Huh. BV: No they said they quit making them. David [inaudible] quit making them. There was a sunshine bookstore in Pontoon Beach. And she always ordered them for me and that company quit making them. PS: Huh. BV: So I'm stopped at sixty-three. This year in September. If I have the good Lord bless me with good health. PS: [Laughter] 28  BV: I don't have to miss I'll have seventy years. PS: Seventy years? BV: Yes PS: Consecutive? BV: Seventy years. PS: That's pretty impressive. BV: Yeah. Oh, I am proud of the fact that the Lord blessed me. PS: Yeah. BV: And when I was sick and in the hospital well your dad came. He was faithful when I had surgery and that. Before them, Brother Copeland came over when I was in St. Louis. He came over. And he'd teach me the lesson and preach the sermon to me. PS: [Laughter] BV: So I was outpatient for him he said. PS: Yeah. BV: And that's how I've got kept my attendance. PS: Yeah. BV: Like that. PS: So seventy years of Sunday school and you taught a shift worker's class. BV: Yes. PS: So like. BV: Plus the Sunday school mhm. PS: So you. BV: And I taught adults. PS: Yeah. BV: Oh I guess I've taught adults for the last probably the last forty years. I've taught. Brother Bell, he came to me one time and he said Betty I would like, I was teaching teenagers, and he said I would like 29  for you to think about teaching the adults I believe you're missing something. I said I sure am happy where I am at. He said I'm not saying you're not but I just feel like the Lord would like for you to graduate. PS: [Laughter] BV: I said well pray about this will you? And he said I have been. PS: Yeah. BV: I said okay I will. And so then in a couple weeks, I told him I said I'll teach the adults so I've been teaching the adults ever since. PS: Yeah. So how old were you when you transitioned from kids to adults? BV: Uh, probably maybe in the twenties. PS: Oh okay. BV: And all that time I was with, I was CA president. President of the youth group. PS: Right. BV: Clear up till I was thirty-six. And then they wouldn't let you be... PS: Yeah. BV: President anymore. PS: Right. BV: You [inaudible] but you couldn't be president anymore. PS: Yeah. Yeah. So you, for somebody who, you didn't go past high school because you didn't really want to, you didn't need to. BV: Yeah. PS: But or you didn't go past grade school rather. BV: Yeah. PS: Then here you are, you know, in your twenties asked to teach adults. BV: Yeah. PS: That's pretty, I don't even want to brag but that's pretty impressive. 30  BV: [Laughter] Oh, I was blessed by it. I really were. PS: So do you think, would say like you're a self-taught as a Bible teacher? BV: That's, I just studied the lessons. And read the bible. And asked the Lord to give me the words he wanted me to say it. I still do today. PS: Yeah. BV: You know who is going to be there. You know what they need to hear. And help me to say it. Always help me to say it in a Christ-like manner. PS: [Laughter] BV: That they know that I love them and that it's from you. And that's the way I teach. I study it. I study it every morning. Five o'clock I'm up. PS: Five o'clock? BV: Five o'clock. First hour I'm studying my lesson. PS: So how, Five o'clock that's pretty early. BV: [Laughter] PS: What time do you go to bed? BV: Oh ten-thirty, eleven o'clock something like that. PS: So drink some coffee in the morning, first thing? BV: Yeah. PS: [Laughter] BV: Make my coffee. PS: Yeah. BV: Sit there at my table and do my studying. PS: Uh-huh. BV: And reading the word. That's how the lord keeps me going for him. PS: Yeah. So how else have you served your church? BV: Well I was, besides a youth leader for so many years and then a Sunday school and then I worked 31  with any of the missionary groups. Or whatever they needed or any kind of repair work. That I could help with. I've always done that and then I was in the prayer warriors and our Bible studies that we have here. And stuff like that. Anything that they ask me to help to do I've done PS: Mm-hmm. And you are currently a deacon and you've served as a deacon for how many years? BV: I guess it's probably been about twenty years. Yeah. PS: And I feel like, maybe I'm wrong, but I feel like a woman as a deacon is a fairly rare thing in smaller towns. BV: Yeah. PS: So here we are again. You were the first female supervisor. BV: Yeah. PS: You know, at Olin. And now you're a female deacon on a board where you're the only woman. BV: Yeah. PS: And you've been the only woman? BV: Yes. PS: Okay. BV: I always have been. PS: So how do you feel like you are constantly like you're, I mean, don't take it the wrong way. BV: [inaudible] PS: Well, you're kind of a, like a feminist. BV: Yeah. PS: You are pushing forward for women. BV: Yeah. PS: So how does that make you feel, that you keep kind of pushing these doors open? BV: Well, you know, I tried to, I tried to think about, you know, and I tried not to show and work like I'm a woman and they're men. They think this way. I think this way. I tried to reason and my dad always taught me God gave you a good common sense and he expects you to use it. And you always think about what is the important thing. Not who you are. Or who they are. What is the important thing that is going on at that time. What is necessary. Not which one what people think or what other, what do you feel 32  like... Is the important thing and what do you need to do to be that and not show partiality. And that I've always kind of leaned towards that way. I've tried to think about. I'm not quick to speak, sometimes I don't say much, but in my mind, I'm turning it over and over you know? What is the right way to handle this? Should I say something or just keep quiet? You know? And that's just kind of the way I am when I listen and you know and it's like I told your dad when he had said you guys I said don't ever feel like you have to say [inaudible] don't ever do that. PS: [Laughter] BV: You say you guys, that's me. I learned that when I was supervisor. I'd tell them. You know, I know I'm the only woman supervisor, but you guys that's good enough for me. I know you include me so don't worry about that. Don't make me feel like I'm out here at the side. PS: Okay. BV: I'm right here with everything. So that's why. As a deacon, I feel like whatever goes on that's me. You know? I don't feel out of place or anything like that. PS: So you kind of like you pushed back against any kind of special treatment. You want to be. BV: I just want to be whatever, whoever, however, they're treating everybody else. That's me too. PS: Okay. BV: I like to be treated like everybody else. [Both Laugh] PS: Makes sense. So you've lived your entire life in the county. BV: Uh-huh. PS: You've lived mostly in Bethalto. BV: Yes. PS: Okay so how has things changed? BV: Well you know when I was a kid you'd noticed I guess they've always been to me they've been a clean county. And of course I've always lived in this area and to me they've always been particular about what they allowed like on the, some people may not pay attention but what they allowed on the roads. If they've always been particular made sure everything was cleaned up like dead animals. They never did leave over that. PS: Yeah. BV: They always made sure that somebody was there to pick them up. And they've kept the roadways up really good. And as a kid, I guess I just noticed that if anything was going on it was took care of right then. And the adults. It used to be you were kids and that's the way you were treated. You didn't... 33  Interfere with adult problems or anything like that. But you knew that it would be took care of. Because the adults took care of it and the county did it. And as a child, I never worried about what was going on in the county or things not being right. It always seemed to me like it always run good. You know? And as I've grown up I've seen changes in the county that's gone. Of course politics, I never was in politics. I always had to do as dad said again pray about it. You pray for the person. PS: Yeah. BV: Not the party. PS: Okay. BV: And he said keep it to yourself. PS: Right. BV: The lord don't need you broadcasting that. PS: [Laughter] BV: So he fix you and you take care of it. PS: Yeah. BV: And that's between you and him. And so that's what I've always done. I've always felt like in voting. I believe everybody ought to vote and I think you need to pray about it. Before you do and vote the way the Lord lays on your heart to do it and I've never felt like that I voted wrong or anything. Not always the party I voted for got in but I still felt like I did what I should. And so in the county as far as clean and I think they treat the people tremendously as far as they are good to the veterans. And all the nursing homes look at all the places they've got for handicapped people. And the homes that they're putting up now is for the people who need help. You know? See I think that is. PS: Yeah. BV: They ought to be commended for that. And they've got parks. Recreation of all kinds for all ages. They are not particular about any particular and I noticed that especially the parks for the kids. They try to improve on them. PS: Yeah. BV: Anything that's going on. And safety measures I think they do a good job on trying to watch for safety measures. As a town in an area as big as Madison County is to me we don't have that many problems. Yeah we got problems. PS: Right. BV: But they're took care of in the right way. And I think that speaks well of our county. As a supervisor 34  and that. PS: So living in Bethalto specifically for so long, you've, I mean it's really changed. BV: Yes it has. PS: In the past. You moved to Bethalto when you were... BV: Well let's see I moved to Bethalto well I worked, I lived in Bethalto when I worked at the store. When I was seventeen. PS: Okay. BV: I've been pretty close to it ever since then. PS: Okay. So how has Bethalto changed? I know its gotten bigger. BV: Oh its gotten bigger. As far as the leadership and I told our mayor about this because I had him as a junior boy in my Sunday school class. PS: [Laughter] BV: And I told him one time when we was at a meeting and he was there and I told him I said you know Allen. I said the thing that makes me proud of Bethalto is that the Lord has always seemed to give us a good Christian mayor. He may not belong to our Church. PS: Right. BV: But a good Christian mayor. And he looked at me and cause he had just been voted in. And I said he hasn't forgot that. And he reached over and he hugged me and he said neither have I. PS: Yeah. BV: I said now that's good to know. PS: Yeah. BV: I want you to remember that. And I said he's still right by your side as long as you'll let him be. But I and I think I really feel like that is why Bethalto has been blessed and took care of. That's what I call taken care of. Because the people have been good Christian people. They've gone to Church. They've respected God's house. Even though a lot don't attend as they should. But, yet, there is a respect... For the Lord and I think that's he's always blessed us with a good Christian mayor. And I think the leadership has a lot to do with that. And that's why I think it is changed, it's growed in numbers and things have changed as far as the growth in the surroundings but as far as a good place to live I wouldn't want to live any place else. PS: So you think the community its grown well, you think? 35  BV: Yes. Oh, Yes. PS: Okay. BV: I think it's grown well. The population has and they to me they don't have the right amount of population on the signs. PS: [Laughter] BV: But cause I think it just growed extremely. Everywhere you look. But they're particular about the way it’s kept. PS: Yeah. BV: And that's what I like about it. That's why I say the county itself. You go into a lot of other places and boy you can see junk heaps everywhere right in town. Well you don't see that in Madison County and that I like. PS: Mm-hmm. We are coming down to the end here. What are some of your favorite parts of living in this area? You know, I know that you've, you are a regular attender of the Halloween parade. BV: Yes. Yes. PS: And the homecoming. So what are some of your favorite things in this county? BV: Well. I always liked the fireworks. I've always liked fireworks. I like fireworks. And I like the decorations for Christmas. I always like Christmas time. PS: So do you go to the spirit walk and stuff? BV: I've been there but I don't go every year. But I've always thought that was nice that they had that. PS: Yeah. BV: It's kind of different towns that had. That I like that. And I think Bethalto does extremely well on decorations and things for Christmas. And they kind of promote it and yet they make sure that they're down after Christmas. So they don't leave them just there. PS: Right. BV: They have to be taken down and I think see I think those things are what keeps the county and the town. Looking presentable. And everybody, everybody wants to live in Bethalto. That's why we growed like we have. Because of the kind of town it is and I think that the people themselves have to be commended for this. Most everybody does tried to do their best about keeping their property up and everything. PS: Right. 36  BV: And that speaks well of the crowd. And I like any of the parks that they have. That they've done good about making the new parks. Because they growed. And then that we used to have just this one up here and you know that homecoming is a big time. You know? For the, that's something that Bethalto has always had. And always look forward to it. In fact, one of the first things I remember about the homecoming is that we lived up there at that big house. We went to the store and of course us kids was sitting in the car right across from there was the homecoming of course. And it used to be right at the street. PS: Oh really? BV: Oh yes. It never used to be way back where it's at. PS: So. BV: It was right there at the street. PS: So where city hall is now. BV: Yeah. All of that was homecoming right there. PS: Oh wow. BV: And the big old ferris wheel was right there at the where the on the water offices there. Boy the Ferris wheel was right there. And we were sitting in a car and here come a clown. We used to have a lot of clowns. And I like clowns, funny things. PS: [Laughter] BV: And this clown come up to the window. PS: Yeah. BV: And he knocked on the window like that. Well, we it scared us. PS: Yeah. BV: Because we know we weren't supposed to get out of the car. PS: Right. BV: And so he wanted us to roll down the windows. So we rolled down the window and he said he pull out this string of wieners PS: Uh-huh. BV: He gave them to us. That's for that he said. For us to ride the Ferris wheel. PS: Oh, really? 37  BV: Really it excited us. PS: Yeah. BV: When mom and dad come out of the store. They said what are you doing with those wieners? Where did you get them? Said that clown over there gave them to us. PS: Uh-huh. BV: And said we are to ride that with them. PS: Uh-huh. BV: You mean take, thems our tickets. PS: [Laughter]. BV: So we took the hot dogs. PS: Uh-huh. BV: And we rode the Ferris wheel. PS: Really? BV: That's the beginning of the homecoming [inaudible]. [Both Laugh] BV: That I remember. The first thing I remember about the Bethalto homecoming. PS: That's very funny. So you've gone ever since? BV: I've gone ever since. PS: Yeah. BV: Yup. Yup. And that's a time and it's, it used to be more so than it is now. Of course, I know a lot of people who've passed away. Everybody came to Bethalto. PS: Right. BV: It’s one of the biggest homecomings around. PS: Really? BV: Because everybody comes home. PS: Mm-hmm. Okay. 38  BV: That's what they call it a homecoming. They wanted to come to Bethalto. To visit all those that had grown up with. PS: Yeah. BV: And it used, it used to be and you do you see a lot of people that you don't see any other time. PS: Yeah. BV: Yeah. PS: So all in all you think that the country you grew up in and the county you're in now. BV: Yeah. PS: By in large it's gotten bigger but what major changes have take place. BV: Well the major changes that I think it has growed with the population. I think it takes good care. Of the growth over the population. And it has maintained the prestige of being a clean county. PS: Hm. BV: And a nice place to live. It has a, it has a drawing card I guess you would say. That people want to live here because of the way that it is took care of. PS: Mm-hmm. So for you the county you grew up in and the county you live in now it's still the place you want to live? BV: Yes. PS: Nowhere else you'd rather be? BV: Nope. Nope. No place else. Right here is where I'm happy with. Yup. Yup. PS: Well I thank you very much for your time today. I really appreciated the insights you've had. I guess if I asked you one more question. It would be you know other you know and I know you are very much a live in the present kind of person but other than right now what part of your life in the country have enjoyed the most? Was it being a kid playing on a farm? Working at Olin? What is some of your happiest memories? BV: Well I guess probably the happiest memories is growing up. And just growing up as I grew up as kid. In the county and the people and the things that went on. PS: Yeah. BV: That you were involved in. When we lived in Bethalto how we could be in. When I lived in Bethalto there in that big house. There was a nothing clear down to where it was Plageys store. And that’s where 39  the corner of Roosevelt right now. PS: Yes. Yeah. BV: That was all vacant that was a ball diamond. PS: Oh really? BV: Yes that was a ball diamond there. Mm-hmm. And that and I got pictures of that when therewas the big stand there and that's where they would gather to play ball. Just nothing but an open field. And across the road was nothing but a cornfield. That's where my dad he worked at Olin three days a week during the depression. And he cut corn, shucked corn after that. PS: Oh really? BV: After that. Mm-hmm. For help make a living. Yeah. And that was nothing but a corn field. PS: Wow. BV: Yeah. It has growed and I feel like I've growed with it. [Both Laugh] BV: I've enjoyed it. I've seen it, seen it grow and I like the growth that I see out of it. PS: I think that's a good place to stop. Thank you for your time Betty Vaughn. BV: Well you're quite welcome. I've enjoyed it. Talking about it. 40 
MadisonCounty;Kathy Childers;1961;2019;Kathy Childers 1961 - 2019   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Kathy Childers Oral History Interview Keith Sternburg, Interviewer Edwardsville, Illinois July 17, 2019 Keith Sternburg (KS): This is Keith Sternburg sitting at the home with Kathy Bellcoff Childers, we will be talking about her family and life growing up in Madison, Illinois. Today is July 17, 2019 thank you, Kathy, for sitting down and doing this project with me. Kathy Childers (KC): You’re welcome. KS: Let’s start with how your family came to Madison, Illinois. The first person that came over was your grandfather, Naum Bellcoff, and what country did he come over from? KC: Macedonia. KS: And he came over in 1907, he was 20 years old, and passed through Ellis Island. And I know that you and your sister a couple years went to New York and visited Ellis Island, can you tell us what the experience was like going to Ellis Island where your grandfather was? KC: It was amazing, because we’ve always been brought up with stories and things about when they came over from Europe. He and my grandmother, he came first and then my grandmother came afterwards after he was settled, but they came with the clothes on their back, and they had several trunks with them that they were only able to bring back what was able to fit in the trunks. KS: And do those trunks still exist today? KC: Yes, they do. KS: Does anyone in the family have them? KC: My sister does. And they're wonderful, they came with clothes and blankets that my grandmother had crocheted and made and... just very priceless items, I mean in Europe the women would wear what is called a shayek. Made of wool, and she brought that with her. Just all kinds of things from Europe that could never ever be replaced. KS: Do you remember your grandparents talking about what life was like back in Macedonia? KC: Yes. My grandfather not so much, but my grandmother would talk about, apparently she worked in the poppy fields and picked poppies. When she was a young woman, her mother had passed away, and then her father had remarried, and I think there might have been friction or something with the stepmother or whatever, so my grandmother's aunt and her family somewhat adopted her and took her to live with 1  them, which was in a village which was in Greece, the northern part of Greece. And they pretty, I mean they were Macedonian, but when the war with the Turks, they pretty much had to live as the Greeks did to survive. So, my grandmother spoke both languages. So, yeah grandmother had a pretty rough life. So, 'cause she was orphaned at a very young age. My grandfather not so much. I mean I never heard a whole lot of stories about him, but he was a great man. KS: Alright and your grandmother came over in 1915 and ended up here in Madison, and what was her name? KC: Rochkova. But Rochkova was the name, her birth last name, and then the Markuly family adopted her, which I think Markuly is more Americanized, because it was more of a Greek, like Markulis or something like that. But we have Markulys that live in the Belleville area. KS: Alright, and both sides of your family actually were from Macedonia because your mother's parents had emigrated from Macedonia, but they ended up settling somewhere else, where did they settle? KC: When my grandfather came from Europe, he came initially to the Wood River area and was to work at the refineries, and I don't know exactly when he left, he didn't stay here very long, and then he actually sent for my grandmother, who was still in Europe and then they settled in Minnesota, Hibbing, Minnesota actually. My grandfather had a farm in Hibbing and before, they were both married when he was still in Europe, and they had a daughter there, Dorothy, and she had passed away from a childhood illness, and then right after that, that's when my grandmother came and met with my grandfather in Minnesota. (05:38) KS: Alright, having both families coming from Macedonia, are there any traditions that they passed down that you guys celebrated, whether it be religious, cultural, food, clothing, things that you guys grew up with? KC: Absolutely. We are Eastern Orthodox. We still carry on all the traditions. My sister and I speak fluent Macedonian. When my, when we grew up my grandparents took care of us, babysat for us, so they spoke broken English, so when they would talk, they would talk to us in Macedonian, so it was kinda like learning both languages at one time, so our holidays, the foods that we eat, we still make the manja, which is stew, we eat a lot of that, and Easter is a big lamb dinner. KS: What're some of the ingredients and how do you make manja? KC: It's just like you would eat beef stew. We would call it manja. Just vegetables, beef, just like you would make a beef stew. Pita, which the Greeks would call it the spinach pita, would, the Greeks would call it spanakopita, baklava, we'd make that. KS: I know you'd said in the past that your mother made yogurt. KC: Yes. KS: Was that something that was passed down? 2  KC: Yes, that was brought over from Europe. My grandmother, I mean actually up until we were in our twenties, we never ate, as long as my mother was alive, we never ate store-bought yogurt, we would always eat my mother's homemade yogurt. Which was milk boiled, she would, farm fresh milk was the best, and she would boil the milk, and it would have to be to a certain temperature. She would measure the temperature with her candy thermometer, after it would boil to a certain degree she would take the milk and pour it into crocks, and she would wrap them with these woolen blankets as my grandmother would do and keep it on the stove for so long, and it would never curdle, I don't know what the, what made it form into, it was almost like a custard, and when it would get to that point then she would put it in the refrigerator and wait till it was cool, and then we were able to eat it. KS: Alright, any other traditions, like any clothing, dancing... KC: Oh, we do eastern European dancing, my sister actually, when we were little we were in the Croatian Junior Tamburitzans, which they play Eastern European instruments, and they dance the kolos. My sister actually continued that in college and was at Duquesne University and was a member of the Duquesne University Tamburitzans. We'd do a lot of Greek dancing, Macedonian dancing, Croatian, I mean we're very into our heritage to this day. (09:28) KS: And you and your sister bring the Tamburitzans once a year to the area to perform? KC: Yes, my father has had a scholarship, well my, since my sister was in the group, my dad would always bring them here to our area because of the large ethnic communities that we have here, and he started a scholarship fund with the Southwestern Illinois College which was originally Belleville area College. And each year I guess for the past... 30 years, 35 years he has brought them here and when he passed away my sister and I continue to bring 'em here, and we are able to give four $1,000 scholarships to students attending the Granite City campus of Southwestern Illinois College. KS: I noticed you had just mentioned the multi-ethnic groups in this area. I noticed on census records for your grandparents in Madison that they lived on Grand Avenue, and on Grand Avenue in the census records, they're not the only immigrants, that other heads of households in the families came from Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Greece... KC: Poland. KS: So when you were growing up in Madison was it still the case was there still this strong... KC: Oh absolutely, I mean the people that lived across the street, the Marengenies family, they were Greek. So Baba Thrusa, Baba means grandmother in Macedonian, so all of these old ladies, because of respect we would always call Baba Thrusa, that was her name, another Baba down the street. But everybody spoke different languages, and that's one of the ways, I mean, my grandmother spoke both Macedonian and Greek, but then when she was in America she spoke mostly Macedonian, but when my father learned more Greek, was listening to the neighbors across the street conversing with my grandmother. But yeah, it was all ethic, I mean all over, there was Russian church, Russian Orthodox Church in Madison, Polish, Saint Stanislaus, I mean it was all ethnic. KS: And were you guys very big in the church and attending? 3  KC: Yes, actually my grandfather and grandmother, well my grandfather, was one of the men big in the building of our church. The Holy Trinity Bulgarian Eastern Orthodox Church was one of the first Orthodox churches in America, one of the oldest now, but yes, we have, when my grandparents passed, in their memory we have a huge icon window in their memory at the church. KS: I noticed also in the area on census records is that your grandfather was the proprietor of a grocery store, what was the name of the grocery store? KC: Bellcoff and Son. KS: Alright, did he set it up with the intention that he and his son, your father, would work there together, or that maybe your father would take over? KC: Probably, but, I mean my father helped him, up until the time he went to college, and I'm sure because he went to college at Wash U. in St. Louis, I mean I’m sure when he was done with school he would come and help my grandfather. But then, when dad went to college and after that he went into, he enlisted in the Army and he was in WWII, and then when he came back things changed so... but dad spent a lot of time in the grocery store along with my mother, after they got married my mother would help out. KS: Alright now your grandfather's home and the grocery store... KC: Are right next door to each other. KS: And your grandfather had them both built. KC: Correct. KS: He built them. KC: Correct. KS: Alright, what were your memories, because the grocery store was still around when you were a child, what were some of your memories with the grocery store? KC: I mean I can remember going in there, my folks always said that my sister and I really never were candy people, but we would just go and, ya know, act like we were helping in the grocery store and, ya know. 'Cause we were very young when the grocery store was in existence. I remember my cousin Bob and I would play in the backyard with all of the big boxes that my grandfather would have canned goods in and stuff like that. We probably got into more trouble than we needed to be, but anyway. I could still remember the setting of the grocery store, I remember stories about, even to this day when people who we haven’t seen, elderly people who find out who my sister and I are, they would tell us stories of the things that my grandfather would do during the depression and stuff like that, that when certain families didn’t have enough money to put food on the table for their kids, my grandfather would give them food from the grocery store so their kids wouldn’t go hungry. I think that’s where a lot of my father’s habits, and things like that, helping others, kinda came into play. But they were always worried about the other person, 4  never worried about, you know, getting recognition for what they did. They always wanted to help other people, and he was really big with that in the grocery store. (16:11) KS: So was this grocery store like a centralized place in the community where a lot of people could have come, and your grandfather would've known who they were... KC: Yeah, but they were, yeah because he had a lot of food, it was actually in the middle of the street on Grand Avenue, and then down the street was Palchev's Market, which was another Macedonian-Bulgarian store, but then on the other corner on the next block was Schermer's, which was a really large grocery store, but my grandpa's grocery store had a lot of things that you wouldn’t be able to get in the other stores. He would have the imported olives, the imported feta cheese, things that people wouldn’t be able to get in your regular grocery store, so a lot of the ethnic people would come there. KS: Can you describe the size of it and what it looked like on the inside? KC: I can remember walking in the front door, and to the right of the grocery store was the, where my mother would check people out, and that’s where the candy was, and right behind her there might have been like, ya know, your bandages and things like that, and then you would walk in and on either side of the grocery store were the canned goods, the bread, things like that, you would walk straight back and was the meat counter. And I just remember the glass and then all the meat, and in front of that were these barrels that had the feta cheese, the kalamata olives, and then another thing too, chickpeas, they would have chickpeas in a big barrel which we called them nublebe, and they were like roasted, and you would eat 'em like peanuts, and all that stuff was in the front, and then to the left of the meat counter was an aisle that would walk to the back of the grocery store, there was the freezer for the meat back there, and then there was like the storage area where they would bring all the goods to stock the shelves, but then there was a door that you would leave the store, and it was right next to the family home. It was great. KS: And your grandfather maintained the proprietorship of this grocery store until his death in 1966. What happened to the store after that? KC: They closed it. And it stayed there for a while, and then my dad and my two aunts decided that it was time to tear it down. So... KS: But the home remains? KC: Yes, the home is still there. Not in a condition that, I mean, it’s just pretty much all gone downhill, but yeah, it’s kinda sad to see what they’ve done to it. KS: But you have memories of the home and KC: Absolutely, because we lived there. So. KS: Cool. So was it filled with things from... KC: Europe 5  KS: ...Macedonia? KC: Yep, like the doilies that were on the coffee tables my grandmother crocheted, just little remnants here and there. (20:06) KS: And I noticed in the census records that your grandmother was a hand sewer at a shirt factory, and you just mentioned the doilies. What are some of the things that she may have made, craft-wise, at home? KC: Oh, she crocheted house slippers for us, and she crocheted, all of the grandkids have pillowcases that she crocheted, the ends of, she made quilts. If you ever had anything that was torn or ripped, baba would always sew them for you or get the sewing machine out. She was very handy. KS: And you still have quite a few of these pieces around? KC: Absolutely. Still use them. KS: Alright. Let’s move on now to your father. Your father was John Bellcoff. KC: Correct. John Naum. KS: Naum. He was born in 1922, and he was one of three in the family. KC: Yes, my dad was the youngest, he had an older sister Dina, and in between Aunt Dina and my dad was my aunt Sylvia. KS: Alright, your father ended up going to Madison High School, correct? KC: Correct. KS: After Madison High School where did he go? KC: He was at, he enrolled in Wash U, Washington University in St. Louis, majoring in political science. While he was still side by side with my grandpa, or my dedo in Macedonian as you would call him. So yeah. KS: Then I noticed not too long after that was when WWI broke out, and according to, sorry WWII broke out, according to military records your father enlisted into the army on October 21 of 1942. What were some of his jobs and what did he do while in the military? KC: From what I was told he was in the European theater and attained the rank of staff sergeant. He did a lot of clerical and stuff. Those are the kinds of stories I, he met some important, he met, I can't remember who the man was, but he was like a movie star afterwards, and I keep, I might be able to answer that question for you later, after I ask someone. KS: Alright, he came home KC: Correct. 6  KS: And ended up kind of going into public service, and the political life. KC: Correct. KS: Is that something that he may have gotten from his father? Was your grandfather involved in politics do you know of? KC: No, nobody was in our family. But... yeah, I don’t know where the political stuff came from. I mean, he majored in political science, but he was always a people person and always wanting to help people, so maybe that’s where it all originated from. KS: So, like you had said earlier stemming from your grandfather helping in the community... KC: Correct. KS: ...especially during the depression, he just took it a step further and made it more community service, and politics. Now I know before he got elected to anything, he ended up working for the volunteer fire department in Madison. KC: Correct. KS: What can you tell me about that? KC: He started out just firefighting and then he became assistant fire chief, he loved doing that, along with, and at that time he was already working at the bank, the First National Bank in Madison. And he was vice-president there, and he retired in 1993 from the bank, but he did the volunteer firefighting along with working at the bank. KS: How long was he with the fire department? KC: 21 years. KS: 21 years then he became assistant fire chief? KC: Correct. KS: How long was he assistant fire chief? Do you remember? KC: No. KS: Okay. And after 21 years do you remember why he stopped working with the fire department? (25:06) KC: Well, I think my sister actually, he was a fireman when I was younger, and I think right after my sister was born was when he quit. 'Cause we, I remember a story that my mother would always tell us, that he would always tell her that, you know, she would ask him, "Are you one of the firemen that would go into the burning buildings?" And he was like, "Oh no, not me." And there happened to be a fire down 7  the street from where my parents lived with my grandparents at the time, and my mother was pregnant with my sister at the time, and I guess all the neighbors, whatever had gone down the street to where the fire was, and my mother walked down there also, and she asked one of the firemen "where is John?" And they said, "Oh he’s inside trying to rescue the people in there," and I think after that time was when, he came out of there safely of course, and accomplished what he went in there for, to save the people, or whoever was in there, and I think right after that, it probably came to the realization that he had a family and that, you know, it was time to step back. But as long as my father was alive, and when he became mayor, city clerk mayor, that was one thing that he always took care of is firemen. We had a fire down the street from our house when we were older, and I'll never forget, and I was still at home, and it might have been like 6 o'clock in the morning, and my father came into my room and woke me up and said, "Get up, get dressed, and go down to the bakery," because those firemen had been fighting that fire all night long and they were hungry. So, I had gone to the Busy Bee Bakery that was on Madison Avenue, also run by a Macedonian family, and got dozens of doughnuts to feed those firefighters who had been up all night. So yeah, he cared about people. KS: Alright, so taking a step away from it and living a little more calmer life then, how long did he work for, at the First National? KC: Until 1993 when he retired. KS: Okay and he became, do you remember what year he became the vice-president? KC: Uh no. KS: Okay. Alright, along with that work, I noticed in 1951 he was elected to Madison School Board, correct? KC: Correct. KS: And then how long did he serve on the school board? KC: He was there for 19 years. Let’s see, he was on the school board for 19 years, but he was president for 15 of those 19 years. KS: How long do you know is a term to be on the school board? KC: I would guess like 4 years, like any other election, 4, 6 years I don’t know. KS: And he was doing that when he met your mother. KC: Correct. KS: And your mother’s name was? KC: Diana Nickoloff. KS: Alright, your father was living in Madison, but your mother grew up in Indiana. 8  KC: Hammond, Indiana. KS: How did it come to be that the two of them were able to meet? KC: Well, they would have school board conventions in Chicago, and it just so happened that one of the school board conventions happened to be the same weekend as one of the big Macedonian dances, which happened to be in Hammond or Gary, Indiana. And my father had a cousin, Angie, who lived in Hammond, and she was also one of my mom and aunt Mary's best friends. And so mom and aunt Mary would always go to these Macedonian dances, and my aunt Angie, dad had gone to visit her when he was in town for the convention, and actually they were all at the dance together, and my aunt Angie wanted to introduce my mom and Aunt Mary to my dad. And that's pretty much how it all happened, and then I think six months later he proposed, and that's how it all started. (30:11) KS: How long were they married? KC: 54 years when he passed away. KS: Alright and after your parents got married, they had two children, you and your sister Norma. KC: Correct KS: And then he became the city clerk in 1967, how long did he serve as city clerk? KC: For 18 years until 1985, when he ran for mayor. And he was the mayor of Madison for 12 years until he retired in 1997. KS: Alright, so having a political life and being the mayor, what were some of the experiences like for you and your sister and your mother in the election and then the following re-elections? KC: Well, I guess you could say that the politics then wasn’t as crazy as it is now, but I mean we worked in the elections We didn't go door-to-door or anything like that, but my mother would have, my mother and another woman, one of her best friends, they would take voters from 7 am in the morning until 7 pm at night, drive them to the polls. We would be out at political functions with my parents. It was a lot for my mom, but my mom was a rock, she was the rock of the family. She was always at my father's side. It would take, I mean being in politics, would take a lot of my father's time, but you know, he would be gone in the evenings for meetings and things like that. Weekends would consist of them going to different functions, they would always go together. I mean you would think that there would be no time for family, but between his job and his politics, one thing that I can always remember and never forget was, we always sat down at the dinner table every single night together, and if there was anything to discuss it would always be discussed there. He always made time for family. So it was pretty interesting. Right before he retired the politics started to get a little more interesting, shall I say. I mean we met a lot of very important people, like my dad was the mayor and the Madison County Democratic Chairman during the Clinton election and his term, so we met the Clintons, we met the Gores, and my father was actually still alive when Barack Obama was president and actually got to meet him before he decided to run for president. So, it had its times, but it all turned out well. 9  KS: Alright so did you have to do, like fundraisers? KC: Yes, we did fundraisers. KS: And dinners? KC: Yes. KS: What were some of those like? Getting dressed up, was it fun or did it feel more like work, or campaigning? KC: It was fun, sometimes it got to be a little too much, it, it um, I mean... KS: Well growing up in this situation, was the expectation there? Did your father expect that you guys would show up to these things, or was there a conversation of will you guys show up? KC: He never told us that we had to go, but we were always there for my dad, and we were always a family, so I mean we would always be there for him. KS: Alright, so he served for 12 years as the mayor, what're a couple, or some of his accomplishments that you can remember him doing? KC: During his time as mayor? KS: Yes. KC: He brought the Gateway International Racetrack here, that was probably in 1996 maybe? 95, 96. That was one of his big things. (35:05) KS: Do you remember how long that process was, was it a long drawn out process where he had to fight for it? KC: No. No, not at all. And then also, where the race track was, before that they had a, it was called stages or something like that, but then they wanted to bring in the strippers, which my father was completely against that, so they kiboshed that, and then after all that happened then he brought the racetrack here. Chris Pook, who owned and brought other racetracks, or built other race tracks different places in the United States, met with him, and then they brought the racetrack here. KS: So, did you get a lot of support then from the city council? KC: Yes, absolutely. KS: Were you there for... KC: The groundbreaking KS: The groundbreaking and do you remember anybody else who was there and what it was like? 10  KC: Governor Ryan was here, and then the state representatives, and you know, the city council and stuff like that were all there for the groundbreaking. KS: Did your father get like a shovel, and everything like in the ceremonies? KC: Yes, absolutely, and he actually was holding my son, John, who was, I think he was a year old, it either happened in '95 or the spring of '96. But yeah, John was in the picture with all the dignitaries. KS: What happens to the shovels that they used, did your father get to keep it? KC: I have no idea. I think he might've got to keep it, which is probably in my sister's basement right now. KS: And when the racetrack opened, was there a ribbon-cutting ceremony that your father had to take part in? KC: Yes, that was awesome. KS: And then similar people showed up for that as well? KC: Mm-hmm KS: Alright and I noticed you had mentioned bringing in strippers to that one, I did notice in a newspaper article that they were claiming that they could bring in extra economy and revenue and your father went against it, and the city council fully supported your father in that one too. KS: Correct KC: And so, what were some of the moral issues going into why your father would not accept the...? KC: Well he didn’t want that brought into the area because bringing the strippers into the area would start bringing other things that weren't accepted into the area and he just wanted to keep it a clean place to live. KS: Overlooking the possible revenue that could come out of it. KC: Yeah exactly. KS: Okay. Alright. I also noticed that your father had his funeral director's license KC: Yes he did. KS: Do you remember when he got that? KC: I think it was the time when probably, probably when he was on the fire department because during that time, in his free time I guess you would say, he was assisting at the Sedlak Funeral Home that was in Madison, and he and another gentleman, because at that time they didn’t have like ambulance service 11  with the fire department etc., so Sedlak had an ambulance service, and he and another gentleman, who also had his funeral directors license, on the weekends that they, you know, weren’t at the fire station or whatever, and this was prior to him being married to my mother. They would work at the funeral home and do the ambulance service, but then he continued. After he retired at the bank, that’s when he pretty much picked back up with the funeral director. And he worked for Sedlak and he also worked for Davis Funeral Home in Granite. And he went to his continuing education classes to keep his license up. He did that probably until... well... I don’t know, they moved up to Edwardsville probably in 1997, and his arthritis started to bother him and stuff like that so he would work part time, but he did it for a while. (40:22) KS: Now did you go to the funeral homes frequently, 'cause I know you have a degree... KC: Funeral Directors, yes. No, we would go there once in a while, when he was on duty. But no, no. KS: So, you ended up getting your degree though in embalming? KC: Correct, I started out in nursing school and worked in an intensive care unit for a long time and started seeing the different nurses that I worked with leave the field and go into different areas, and I don’t know if it was because of the pace or whatever, but I thought with my father's funeral director's license etc., I thought hmm, that might be something interesting to go into, and I also kinda liked, like the, the autopsies and things like that, so I switched my major, and I had a lot of classes of course for my nursing already done, and then I transferred over to Forest Park and finished there with my funeral director's license. KS: Okay, with your mother's family being kind of farther away, how often did the two families get together and how often did you get to see some of those other cousins and aunts and uncles? KC: Well we would split holidays, I mean, we would go to Indiana for like Thanksgiving, Christmas or Easter and swap out, but the two families were very close, and in the summertime my mom, my sister, and I would go to Indiana for 4 or 5 weeks, so we could, my grandmother was already gone by that time, she passed away when I was 2 years old, but my grandfather was still alive so we would go and spend 4 to 5 weeks with my aunt Mary, my uncle Steven, and my grandfather and all of my other cousins and uncles and aunts that lived there. So, we were always very close, the two families. KS: And I remember that there was a picture I believe with you, your sister, and your aunt Mary in front of the home that they actually grew up in. KC: Yes. KS: And that was in Hammond? KC: Yes. Aunt Mary passed away last year, and this was probably, my mom also passed away the same year that my father did, like three months after, and that was in June. And that following, I guess it was December, January, we were in Indiana to visit my aunt Mary, and it was a very snowy day, and my sister decided that we were going to go to see the old house on Merrill Street, and so we drove to Hammond which is not, I mean like 5 minutes, 10 minutes from Munster, and we parked in front of the house in the 12  snow storm, and my sister said, "Oh let’s all get out," and we're gonna to take a picture in front of the house. So the three of us stood in front of the house looking, you know looking at the house, and it had been painted and everything and very well kept, and a woman came from behind, and she stopped and was kind of looking at us like, what on earth are these three people, especially this elderly woman, doing in front of this house, and she actually lived down the street, and so she got out of the car and said, "Can I help you?" And we said, "Oh you know," we explained to her that my aunt Mary lived here, she grew up and was born and raised in this home, and the woman was so excited, and so we said that you know, we were from out of town, we brought aunt Mary to see the house, and she said, "Oh well I'll take your picture," so she took our picture and apparently she had lived in the neighborhood for a pretty long time, so she and my aunt Mary, you know, aunt Mary was asking her about the different neighbors and stuff, there might have been a few that still lived in the neighborhood, but for the most part everybody was gone. But yeah, we, the house is still there on Merrill Street. So it was pretty cool. (45:09) KS: Sounds like you had a really strong family bond. KC: Yes. Absolutely, still do. Even though all of the aunts and uncles are all passed, our generation now is still very, very close. KS: Is there anything else that you would like to share about the family, about your father and his politics? KC: Well he was mayor for 12 years, and then he was also Madison County Democratic Chairman from 1990 to '94. He not only served the people of the city of Madison, but he also served the citizens of Madison County and the surrounding Metro East bi-state area. Serving on the Madison County Board of Review from 1957 to 1961, he was on the Tri City Regional Port District from '63 to 1997, and he was chairman of the port for 5 years. He was a charter member of the Southwestern Illinois Law Enforcement Commission from 1968 to 2013. He was past president of the Southwestern Illinois Metropolitan Area Regional Planning Commission, executive board member of the East-West Gateway Coordinating Council, he was past president of the Bi-State Development Agency, Executive Director of Boy Scouts of America, and he also served on the board, advisory board of Saint Elizabeth's Medical Center, which is now the Gateway Medical Center in Granite City. He was a lifelong member of many organizations, he was with the Madison Vets, the VFW. He did a lot. He loved serving people. He loved helping people. I mean, that was his big thing. KS: You mentioned he was with the Boy Scouts, was your father a Boy Scout? KC: That I don't know. I remember there was kinda going back to my grandfather and giving people free groceries, when my son was in middle school we met a family who actually, the mother grew up in Madison, and when she found out who I was, she actually saw my mom and dad at one of John's middle school basketball games, and she saw him, and she said, "Excuse me are you Mr. Bellcoff," and my dad said, "Yes I am," and then she proceeded to tell him who she was and who was her mother, and my dad, you know, recognized the last name etc., you know and they talked for a few minutes, and then she came to me and she said, "That man right there, I will never, ever forget him," and I said, "Yeah he's a pretty cool guy," not knowing what she was about to tell me, but he happened to be in the Schermer's Grocery store, that was the big grocery store in Madison at the time, and she said that he was in there for 13  something, and her and her mother were buying their groceries and they were running short of money, and he went ahead and paid for the rest of their groceries so, once again, they would have food on the table. And I don't know, stories like that are really awesome to hear. You just, that was just him. Always wanting to help others. KS: That sounds like he's leaving a really nice legacy behind him and how people are remembering him. You mentioned the VFW, and I know that he was in the service, do you remember if he was doing any like Veteran's Day parades growing up? KC: He always did, yeah. When he was mayor he always did the Veteran's parade, and I mean he was involved in all of that. He was also a Shriner, he was with the Ainad Temple, and he was in DeMolay when he was younger, and then he also received the highest honor with the Shriner's in 2000 with the 33rd degree. So. KS: I'm not familiar with the DeMolay, what exactly is that? DeMolay do you know? KC: It's like right below the Shriner's. I'm not exactly sure, but I know, it's like the younger, the younger boys, you become DeMolay, and then I think right after that then you go into the Shriners if I'm not mistaken, 'cause I think it's all within the same organization. KS: So still community? KC: Absolutely. Community service. KS: Alright so your father belonged to a lot of different organizations, which kind of reminds me of your sister, your sister Norma, appears to belong to a lot of organizations that she caught on from your father with that. KC: Correct. KS: Alright, is there anything else that you can think of? KC: I don't think so. KS: Well okay, why thank you for sitting down and taking the time out of your day to participate in this project with me. KC: No problem. 14 
MadisonCounty;Gale Cuvar;1934;2018;Gale Cuvar 1934 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Gale Cuvar Oral History Interview George Diak, Interviewer Granite City, Illinois October 12, 2018 George Diak (GD): Okay, the following interview was conducted with Gale Cuvar on behalf of the Madison County Oral History Project that is a part of Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois. The interview took place on October 12, 2018 in the house of Gale Cuvar in Granite City, Illinois. The interviewer is George Diak, a history major at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Alright, well let's get started um, when and where were you born? Gale Cuvar (GC): I was born in Granite City, May 24, 1934. GD: Okay, and um where did you grow up like what side of Granite? GC: Uh, I'd say more of the east side. GD: And um like where is that in relation to some other things like that are here today? GC: Uh, that’s more like the uh kinda like the older part of town. GD: So like in the downtown area? GC: Well not downtown but, actually well uh actually started out on 2600 Madison Avenue and we moved to 2200 Madison Avenue. GD: And when did you move? Like how old were you? GC: I was roughly nine years old. GD: Okay and um where did you go to school? What school did you go to? GC: Well up until we moved at nine I went to Webster School, and after that I went to McKinley School, and then after McKinley I went to Central School which was like a junior high school and then to Granite City High School. GD: Okay so I don't know where, I don't think Webster and did you say McKinley and Central I don't think those exist anymore where were those at in Granite? GC: Uh well Webster School was out in East Granite uh I think its like on Edwards Street or one of them out there and then McKinley was on 2100 Madison Avenue and Central School was closer to downtown on Edison Avenue. 1  GD: Okay so Granite had a lot more schools back then... GC: Yes. GD: ...than it does now. GC: Yes they used to have mostly neighborhood schools where everybody majority of the kids would walk to school. GD: Okay so it’s not like it is today where you get you know people bussed across town to go to a certain school, it was mostly like neighborhood... GC: Right. GD: ...based okay. Okay and what was your family like did you have any siblings or? GC: Uh I just had one older brother he was like five years older than me. GD: Okay so you just had one brother mom and dad... GC: Right. GD: ...that's what your family was like okay. Alright so now that we've talked about your schooling I know that you participated in a co-op program while you were in high school uh that you were able to work while you were actually going to school. Can you tell me what that consisted of? GC: Uh, yes I was I took pattern shop course in high school and uh I had a chance my last year uh of high school to go down to work at Arnette Pattern Company as an apprentice and uh and get my high school credits so I went to high school half a day and worked a half a day. GD: And was this every day during high school or was this only on select days that you were able to do this? GC: It, no it was every day of the, it, I think it was the best I can remember was most of my senior year. GD: Okay and did you do this any other year or was it just your senior year? GC: Just senior. GD: Okay so is that how you got started at Arnette? GC: Right. GD: Okay and so after graduating did you immediately start at Arnette? GC: Yes. GD: Okay and what were your duties at Arnette? 2  GC: Uh well starting out as apprenticeship basically you more or less done like painted patterns, swept the floor, just basically things like that for approximately six months and then finally you got started as an apprentice on working with uh journeyman pattern makers. GD: Okay and just for I guess context when did you start officially working at Arnette, like what year do you remember? GC: Uh, let's see I guess. I guess I officially started there in let's see 1952. GD: Okay and is that the same year you graduated high school? GC: Yes. GD: Um so also for context where was Arnette Pattern Shop located or where is it still currently located today? GC: Uh at the time it was located on 18th and Cleveland Avenue downtown and uh it’s still basically there uh but they've also built out on Missouri Avenue and it’s, although they still do some pattern work, it’s basically a machine shop now. GD: Okay so we've talked a lot about patterns, what exactly is a pattern? GC: Well a pattern is uh something we make off of a blueprint that is used to cast a part like in the automotive industry or any other industry where they need castings. GD: Okay and so you were in charge of making these patterns on the machines? GC: Uh well uh basically it was more hand work although we did use machinery to make them too but a lot of hand work. GD: Okay and by hand work how exactly would that process go? GC: Uh well even like we used different chisels, and we did even it was considered handwork ‘cause you used band saws and joiner planers and sanders and all that. It’s still considered hand work because you had to by hand use these machines. GD: Okay and how many people did you typically work with in the shop? GC: Uh since it was a small shop the majority of the time there was like six, six people working there. GD: Okay and so I know that you probably worked a lot with metal then, did Arnette have any kind of connection to the steel mill? Like did you make any patterns for them or did the metal you were working with come from the steel mill? GC: Uh basically we did some work for the Granite City Steel at the time and uh but uh not all that much. Very little work we'd done for the steel mill actually. 3  GD: Okay so there wasn't really a big connection between your company and the steel mill it was more of a separate entity I guess. GC: Right, right. GD: Okay um so uh how about how long did you work at Arnette? About how many years? GC: Uh although I left several times just for a short period of time but I basically worked there for 33 years. GD: Okay so you worked from about 1952 till probably the 1980s then. GC: Yes, yes. GD: Okay um was the so why were there those periods where you left? What happened? GC: Uh it was a slow down in business and they, when they had real slow times well I found other places where I could work for short periods of time and when they picked up I came back again. GD: Okay and you said that you found other opportunities of employment for you know whenever you weren't employed there. What were those places and what were your responsibilities there? GC: Well they were other pattern shops and uh they were all union shops so when we were down at Arnette I'd go talk to the business agent and he'd just send me to another pattern shop and so it wasn't for an extended length of time. GD: Okay and uh were these other patterns shops, were they in Granite City or? GC: No uh there was actually only one pattern shop in Granite City and so I had to go over to St. Louis area. GD: Okay and all these pattern shops that you worked at in the meantime were in St. Louis? GC: Right. GD: Okay um so you talked about a slow down in business, do you know what caused that slow down? GC: Well I uh just the customers that uh Arnette had they uh they just slowed down in business and the economy so until they picked things were just kind of rough there for a while. GD: And uh you mentioned the customers, like what kind of customers typically did Arnette draw? Was it more corporate or was it usually small business type of customers? GC: Kind of both like uh at the time American Steel in Granite City they'd done railroad work and at the time General Steel in Granite City and they'd done a big part of railroad work too and they'd done a lot of work for even Caterpillar and its uh just all kinds of businesses. 4  GD: Okay so was, it was typically a pretty big variety that... GC: Right. GD: ...was served. Um so, so let's see, so you obviously you had a pretty big part in Bodine, [Interviewer’s note: Bodine is a pattern shop in St. Louis, I believe I meant to say Arnette here.] so that was more of your career kind of life. What was your family life like? When did you really kind of settle down and start thinking about having a family? GC: Well that was back, what did you mention Bodine? Uh this was way before that I actually started, decided to have a family in 1960. And that was after I got out of... 1957 I was in basic training in the Army. Then I finished basic training, then we got married and then decided to have a family. GD: Okay so let's backtrack a little bit um, when did you meet um your wife Sandy? GC: Well actually I met her when I was a senior in high school. That was in 1951 or 52 sometime there I met her. GD: Okay and you guys had a relationship I guess from whenever you were in high school all the way up until you got married in 1960? GC: Right. GD: Okay and so why I guess did you wait so long to get serious and get married? GC: Well I wanted to get... rather than get drafted at the time decided to join I went in signed up for six months went in there and I wanted to get that over with before I got married. GD: Okay and so we've been talking a little bit about your experience with the Army, so what exact... so I'm guessing the war was... which war was it just for clarification? GC: Well I actually at the time I lucked out there was no war going on and uh all... I signed up for six months active duty and eight years of reserves and through that whole eight years no war broke out. I was very lucky. GD: Okay so we talked about signing up for the military, so you did that because you didn't want to get drafted was there a lot of drafting going on around this time in Granite even though there wasn't a war. GC: Yes, yeah it was just automatic you know when, when you got out of high school it uh, the age I guess at the time was like eighteen then you had to sign up for the draft board and you were automatically drafted when your time come up. GD: Okay so there's a lot of drafting going on you said so was that a big issue in Granite City? Was there any like draft protests was there anything going on like that or did everybody just kind of accept... GC: You just, you just accepted that there's... no protest of any kind. 5  GD: Okay so you decided instead of getting drafted you wanted to end up signing up for yourself, how did that feel knowing that you were going to basically serve in the military like what were your feelings as far as that? GC: Uh I didn't really uh I didn't have very good feelings about it I'd done it because I had to but uh I really wasn't that happy with it but uh. GD: Okay and I know you were working at Arnette before that what, how did that impact your employment there? Did they you know say to you like that you were able to come back afterwards or did, was your job kind of up in the air? GC: No uh actually uh I... to stay away from the draft uh because I was in an apprenticeship program I got deferred from the draft until I became, I officially became a pattern maker and so then I was... I was open to the draft again so that's why I... I just signed up rather than... rather than get drafted if I got drafted it would have been for two years active duty and so I decided to just go ahead and join. GD: Okay and so when you signed up what was the process after you signed up like where... what all did you have to do to kind of get prepared to go into the military and then where were you stationed? GC: Uh really there wasn't too much to prepare I just... I wasn't married yet so uh so I was down at Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri and so basically I was just there for basic training and uh after... after basic training which took about three months so then they... I didn't have to go anywhere else they just send me on home and I just spent the rest of that eight years in the reserves and uh luckily nothing, no war or nothing broke out. GD: Okay so while you were at Fort Leonard Wood, what was that experience like, like what... how was your daily life? What kind of things did you have to do as far as you know duties? GC: Well it was just a new experience for me and at first I hated it [laughs] and uh but I got used to it and uh basically all it is, is just basically how to, how to learn how to shoot a rifle and how to kill the enemies and that's basically what it’s all about. GD: So you were just at Fort Leonard Wood just for basic training you didn't do anything else there? GC: Right that was just strictly, strictly basic training. GD: Okay and then you were able to go home right after basic training? GC: Yes. GD: Okay and so you said you were, you signed up for eight years of reserves did you ever like did you ever have to go back to Fort Leonard wood every now and then or did you just strictly stay at home? GC: Just strictly staying home, I was kinda lucky there. GD: Okay um so I know that you were in a relationship with Sandy at the time, how did she, do you know how she felt about you being in the military at that time? 6  GC: Uh you mean uh before or after we were married? GD: Um, prob... I guess before. GC: Yeah, well although during, during the time of basic training I did come home several times and that, and she didn't like it either [laughs] but just things you had to go through. GD: Okay um so you know you were able to come home quite a bit um so then you decided to get married after you came home in 1960 is what you said? GC: Yeah. GD: And so what was that experience like, being able to come home and finally settle down and get your life started? GC: Well I'd say that it was a good experience and I guess it worked out well because we've been married sixty years [laughs] I guess we were meant for each other [laughs] GD: Um, [laughs] okay and then uh so when did you decide to have children? GC: Uh in 1960 had the first daughter Cheryl and 1963 second daughter Nancy. GD: Okay so... GC: And that was it. GD: Okay so then um you weren't, you didn't have to do any kind of military activity while you had children correct? GC: Right. GD: Okay you were just strictly in the reserves. GC: Inactive reserves yeah. GD: Inactive reserves okay... GC: Yes. GD: So then after you came back did um you know did Arnette take you back immediately or did you have to jump through any hoops? GC: Uh that one I, when I actually left and came back it was one of the slow periods for Arnette there and I went from a different pattern shop and although when I came back I didn't go there I still went a different one but by law they have to take you back when you go into service they have to take you back. GD: So that was like a federal law... 7  GC: Yeah. GD: ...that they were required, they couldn't discriminate that... GC: Right. GD: ...you were, okay. Um so you went to a different pattern shop right when you came back so when exactly did you end up back at Arnette? GC: Uh well, I wasn't too long that I was at this pattern shop and Arnette wanted me back and I was working it out then I went back there. GD: Um so, we've been talking a lot about Arnette and patterns and everything, did you ever have any experiences with like the steel mill or anything? Did you have any family members that worked there, any friends? GC: Yeah I had uh, although I've never worked there but I've had a brother that worked there all of his life and I've had uncles that worked there and cousins that worked there and, evidently the steel mill was a good place to work. GD: Okay so you have a big family connection to the steel mill... GC: Yeah. GD: ...kind of um, so I know that in recent years obviously there's been some issues with the steel mill and you know there's been a lot of talk whether its closing, whether it’s not. Did there not used to be two steel mills in Granite? GC: Um not, even though um there was an American Steel but it really wasn't, it wasn't the same type of steel mill where Granite City Steel they just made steel and American Steel actually made parts for railroad cars so they were really for railroads not... they made castings for railroads. GD: Okay so in your opinion do you think that the steel mill has had a big impact on this town? GC: Oh yes, and after all these years it still does, real big. GD: Do you think that Granite City relies on that steel mill to kind of stay... GC: Yes, absolutely. GD: Okay um so I guess we've talked quite a bit about the different manufacturing companies in Granite, was there any other kind of big manufacturing in Granite or was it mainly just the metal working? GC: Uh no there was uh, there was other ones... Oh there was uh like A.O. Smith that made automobile frames and there was uh a lot of other... there was NESCO which made uh oh like uh different pots and pans and things a lot of Granite and uh let's see there's Nestle oh they manufactured like tea or coffee that type of thing and Union Starch, there was just all kinds of companies like that at one time in Granite. 8  GD: Okay to put this kind of in relation to other things, where about were those kind of things located? GC: They was all located fairly close to downtown area, within walking distance of downtown area. GD: Okay so I know that obviously downtown has changed quite a bit since you know you were younger, so I know that when I drive through downtown I see a lot of empty buildings old businesses that aren't open anymore. How, what kind of did downtown look like as far as when you were growing up and whenever you, you know had a career and your family going, what has changed? GC: Well, just about everything in downtown Granite has, you just don't even recognize it because used to you, you could go in downtown Granite and do all, do all your Christmas shopping or whatever there was every type of store down there, and uh there was really unless you wanted to there was no reason to go anywhere else. But now it’s like a ghost town down there, there's really nothing down there. GD: Okay so there, all those business that used to be there like, what kind of places are we looking at? Just like a lot of general stores or was there any specialized shops? GC: Well there was uh just the basic every type of store from a shoe store to a drug store, uh clothing stores, hardware stores um, just all, there was, most of the drug stores... they had doctor's offices and dentist offices up above 'em, um there was just everything was downtown that you needed. GD: Okay so was a lot more bustling and active than you see if you drive down there today. GC: Right. GD: Okay and so I know that today there's a lot of initiative on trying to kind of revitalize downtown to try to get it I not, I guess not back to what it used to be but you see a lot of like we just recently got the theater down there and I know there's quite a few restaurants opening. What are your thoughts on what they're trying to do with downtown Granite? GC: Well my personal thoughts is, I don't think it'll ever come back I just, the theater is very nice and there's not that many people use it, but my opinion downtown Granite won't, will never be the way it used to be. GD: Okay and um do you maybe think a lot of that is because the population in Granite is declining as well as... GC: [coughs] GD: ...a lot of um, a lot to do with the steel mill as well, like it’s kind of up in the air on whether its staying around or not? GC: Well I think a lot of it uh, I, with the steel mill going, that's another thing there was a lot of downtown was restaurants and even gas stations and hardware stores and all that but a lot of the, and car dealerships and a lot of these steel workers kept them going. [coughs] GD: So you think with a lot of the steel workers not you know kind of participating in... 9  GC: [coughs] GD: ...downtown activity... GC: [coughs] GD: ...that you think that... GC: Could you turn it off? [coughs] [The interview was paused for a few minutes due to Gale having a minor coughing fit. We did not want to continue recording during this.] GD: So like you think that the steelworkers were a lot um, a lot of what kind of benefited that downtown area? GC: Absolutely, ‘cause at the time most steelworkers for the most part lived in Granite too and so they'd done their shopping here. GD: Mm-hmm, and so now you think that's changed because a lot of the steelworkers commute from other places to Granite? GC: Right, I'd say a big majority. GD: Okay um, so a lot has changed in Granite obviously so like, what do you think are some of the biggest changes that Granite has underwent? GC: Um, I think the biggest changes are that all the little mom and pop stores are all gone that, people then started going to shopping centers and uh and then actually too more and more areas are almost deteriorating and people are not keeping properties up like they should and downtown say its basically run, the buildings are run-down or torn down and it just, its just, I just don't see it recovering like it used to be. GD: Okay so you, I guess, do you think that a lot of Granite's identity other than the steel mill was a lot of these small businesses that are no longer here? GC: Yeah I think a lot of it. Although the steel mill has always been number one and, and it’s been rough because the steel mill has been closed down and started up again and uh [coughs] anyway that's a part of it was a lot of people have moved out. GD: Okay and, so with those people moving out do you think that the declining population is also affecting Granite? I know that we used to have a lot more schools around here, do you think like other than just the small businesses do you think the declining population is affecting Granite in other aspects? GC: Yeah I think so. Yeah we obviously don't need as many schools and... Yeah it’s uh... just everything in general was just different nowadays. 10  GD: Okay so when you were growing up was, what, kinda what did, I'm trying to think of how I want to word this. How was Granite kind of I guess you could say set up was it more, did it seem more like a small town or was it a lot more lively and bustling than it is today. GC: No it was strictly a small town. There was no... there was no stop and go lights or none of that it was just a small town. GD: Okay so pretty much everywhere just had stop signs... GC: Right. GD: Not very much traffic. GC: Right. GD: Okay um and do you think that the growth that Granite underwent was that, do you think that's a good thing in your eyes? GC: Well in my eyes no [laughs] but I'm old fashion, I liked it more as a small town. GD: Okay so we've talked a lot about Granite and um kind of your thoughts on um you know the businesses and everything that um I [laughs] guess that a lot of it that you've worked at and a lot that you've experienced, um so I know that along with that, sorry I'm trying to think of how I'm trying to word this next question um along with that you... Okay I guess what I'm trying to get at is um we talked about how you were on and off again at Arnette, what was the basically the last straw that you knew that you knew that you weren't going to work there anymore? GC: Well, the country was in kind of a recession and they'd just run out of work and uh, and I needed a job and uh so there just wasn't no work there and I had to find work so that's the reason that I left. GD: Okay and um so we're, you said something about a recession about what time period are we talking here? What years? GC: Uh, let's see I guess it, I have to think back it was probably in the 80s. GD: So at this time um, Cheryl and Nancy were either in high school or getting ready, or out of high school kind of starting their own... GC: Right. GD: ...lives um, how did that feel that you had to basically get up and look for a new job as you know your um children's lives are kind of getting started? GC: Well I, I wasn't too happy about it I was, after working somewhere so long and uh, it was a big change, and uh instead of driving to work for five or ten minutes I was driving a half an hour and in a different state and uh it was quite a change. 11  GD: Okay and um so I know that you decided to leave Arnette, was there, was there any work going on there at all? Did they keep anybody or did they just completely shut the shop down? GC: No they didn't shut down but it was just their own family members you know, their own family that's, so they, they didn't hire basically anybody so. GD: Okay so they just kept it between their family members that decided to work there and basically let go everyone else. GC: Right, right. GD: Okay um so I know that that must have been difficult to you know give up the job that you've had for that long, um how did you go about getting a new job? GC: Um, I found a advertisement in the St. Louis newspaper, Bodine Aluminum was looking for a pattern maker so I went and applied there and got the job. GD: Were they only looking for one pattern maker? GC: Right. GD: And you were lucky enough to get that one spot... GC: Right. GD: ...that was open. Okay and then so you talked about that it was a new experience for you, so how much, how much did this change impact your life? GC: Uh, actually it, it didn't change it a great deal although I was on the road a lot more coming and going to work and different hours although it was strictly days but uh, but it ended up being a good thing. GD: Okay so you talked about that your job was no longer in Granite, so you started working at St., in St. Louis, where at in St. Louis was Bodine? GC: Well it actually, although the address is St. Louis it was actually in the suburbs of um St. Louis, Overton, Missouri, which it was kind of like the North County area. GD: And um, so with this new job were your duties any different? GC: Basically the same. GD: So just more pattern making... GC: Right. GD: ...as far as that went. Um so how, was the shop bigger, smaller, about the same? 12  GC: Um the pattern shop part of it, it was, pattern shop and a foundry combined and the pattern shop part was basically the same. GD: Okay and about how many co workers did you typically work with? I know at Arnette you said you had about six. GC: Yeah there, there might have been, basically maybe at the time, like maybe as many as ten but. GD: So it was a little bit bigger than Arnette you think? GC: A little bit bigger. GD: Okay and so your duties were the same, do you think that was a better experience than Arnette or did you like working at Arnette better? GC: Uh, actually I liked it better because it just, it was a more relaxing experience. GD: And this is at Bodine or Arnette? GC: At Bodine it was more, a lot more relaxing. GD: Okay you say relaxing, what do you mean by relaxing? GC: Well you, you wasn't put under any pressure to hurry up and get the job done, hurry up, hurry up it was just more relaxing. GD: So at Arnette it was actually a really high pressure... GC: High pressure right. GD: Okay and why, why do you think that was a high pressure environment, were they trying to I don't know keep their business going by rushing you or why do you think that was that it was high pressure? GC: Well I, I guess when they bid a job they, they must have bid as low as they could and then they pressured you to get it done in time, would be the only reason I could think of. GD: Okay so then at Bodine it was a lot more relaxing. Did they still have some similar contracts like they did at Arnette? Was it still about a mix of small businesses and big corporations? GC: It was uh, it was more of a mix there because they just had all kinds of different customers. Mostly smaller items. GD: Okay and so were like, was the handwork still the same at Bodine just like it was at Arnette? GC: Yeah basically everything was the same. GD: Okay and so you moving over to not moving but changing jobs to one that was in St. Louis, how did this impact your family life? 13  GC: Well, it didn't um, really didn't change much cause um, the kids were all grown and it's just basically um, getting up a little earlier to go to work and a little more time on the highway. And the job was so much more relaxing that it kind of made up for it. GD: Okay and so about what was your typical day at Bodine? How like from start to finish kind of how, how did that run? GC: Uh, what do you mean like the relaxing part of it or? GD: Just in general like your duties you know like right when you got to work to like some general things that you did all the way up until the end. GC: It was uh, it was just more of a relaxing atmosphere they, they would tell you the pattern you had to made, how much time they bid on it and which would give us plenty of time and uh they just, it was just so relaxing. GD: Okay. GC: There was no, never a big rush. All we gotta have it right now or none of that you know, just relaxing. GD: Okay and so with the patterns, were they more of a group effort or was each individual person working on a specific piece or their own individual patterns? GC: Yeah no, once in a while two of us would get together working on one but most of the time it was just each guy was working on a different pattern. GD: And was this the case at Arnette as well? GC: Uh, yeah but at Arnette they had a lot of bigger patterns to make where it took several men working on it. But for the, for the most part you just had your own job. GD: Okay and you say bigger patterns at Arnette, like how do you mean, like what kind of patterns I guess? GC: Well like uh, just say on the railroad cars uh, they had what they call side frames when you look at a train car that they hold, you see that they hold the wheels on and then its just big parts, parts like that. GD: Okay and then so at Bodine, what were some of the smaller ones you made? GC: Smaller ones were uh say like uh like on the automobile parts, like on the brake system like maybe a small wheel cylinder, just small stuff like that. GD: Okay so just more precise things you were making more you know small things like that. Um, so I guess looking back at it today did you enjoy the work that you did there or was it just kind of you did it just because it made, you know you got the paycheck. 14  GC: No I, if I'd had it all over again I'd do it again cause it was just such a better place to work. GD: Okay and so it was, about what was just to get an idea of how much things have changed, what was a typical hourly wage or a paycheck you received from working at these places? GC: Where from Bodine or? GD: Let's start at Arnette when you first started there about what was a typical wage? GC: Well, being, starting out as an apprentice I started out at the minimum wage of $0.75 an hour. And worked my way up at the time to, when we got married in 1960 or 58 wasn't it? Better get that right [laughs] but I guess at that time wages were like $3.50 and hour or somewhere like that. GD: So it got a pretty big jump after... GC: Yeah. GD: Okay and then what about at Bodine? I know obviously I'm sure the minimum wage changed and you know inflation and everything so what was a typical paycheck at Bodine? Or what was the wage? GC: Gosh I wish I would have looked [laughs] GD: [laughs] GC: Uh, I guess it was up in thirty something dollars an hour or up in there. GD: And that was pretty good money... GC: Yeah. GD: ...considering the time period. GC: Yeah. GD: Okay, um so we've talked a lot about your employment and everything so what, like your personal life after work what are some things that you kind of did as far as you know, did, I know that you've spent all your life in Granite and you've never moved from your house um, so like what are some things that you just kind of I don't know, did you ever think about moving out of Granite or have you wanted to, did you know that you've always wanted to stay here? GC: No I don't think we've ever really considered moving out. So. And as of today I still, even though things have deteriorated, I still have no plans of moving. GD: And is it, do you feel like you have like a connection to this town because you've spent all your life in it, you grew up here? 15  GC: Yeah uh, yeah we although it’s not, things ain't like they used to be but uh, we still uh as we've gotten older and all of that we, our doctors are here and we do have a hospital close by and so that, we just I think are just gonna stay here. GD: Okay um, well that's pretty much all the questions I have for you, is there anything else you wanted to mention? About anything we've talked about or otherwise? GC: Uh, not off hand I, I could be a little off on some of them wages but I really can't remember that exactly. GD: Yeah um, anything else? GC: No uh, I think that pretty well does it. GD: Okay well thank you very much for your time I appreciate it. Um I think we'll just go ahead and wrap things up then... GC: Okay. GD: ...thank you. 16 
MadisonCounty;Tom Pile;1944;2017;Tom Pile 1944 - 2017  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Tom Pile Oral History Interview Suze Gibson, Interviewer July 11, 2017 Suze Gibson (SG): This is Suze Gibson interviewing Mr. Tom Pile July 11, 2017. Mr. Pile is a resident of Edwardsville, Illinois he was a long time teacher and coach for the Edwardsville School District. Mr. Pile, you were born on a farm in Winchester and raised by a single mom, can you tell me about that? Tom Pile (TP): Yes I was bor - raised on a small – in a small town, Winchester, Illinois that has roughly between 1800 and 2000 people. And ah, I lived in town until the 3rd grade and then we moved to a farm 7 miles away and it was one of my top ten worst day of my life because now I had to leave my friends and go to a farm that was isolated. Mom, was a single mother, raised by Mom until about I’m thinking just before the 1st grade and she married a gentleman from Pittsville, Illinois named Everdunn, and ah she carried that name and I had a sister three years old, older than me, and she did not want him to adopt us, which I can’t understand why a three- year-old would have that much power and he probably should have because he was just like a dad, you know, so he just passed away in 2013, and he was 92, so for, and I’m 73, so for - almost 70 years he was my father. So it was single mother for a while, which, doesn’t sound like much, until, you don’t have a dad, he left when I was born, and he moved to ironically Wood River, Illinois. SG: Okay, after college you went into the army and completed a year in Vietnam, did your military experience influence your teaching or coaching? TP: Well, yes. But everything then did, everything effected [microphone falls] my teaching I think it started when I was old enough to remember what I did, my mother affected how I taught, my granddad affected how I taught and why my ah, upbringing in little small town of Winchester growing up on a farm definitely affected my coaching and my teaching, ah you know farmers lot different than other people they're - you gotta do certain things, gotta be regimented and stay on task, those type of things so then ah, I had experiences in college. Ah, one of the reasons I went into teaching is ah for selfish reasons when I was in high school Kaye was a Christian and I was a Methodist and I heard the Christian Church was gonna go to Jacksonville to the mental hospital around Christmas and you know play games and show their support and do the right thing. Well, I wouldn’t do that, I think I was about a Junior in high school, I’m not going to go do that, and but I went, I finagled my way in, ‘cause Kaye was there, and so I went up there but I never saw Kaye so I start playing games with these patients, and ah talking to ‘em, visiting, laughing, trying to do the right thing and when I got done and coming home I went to bed and I was laying there thinking: “Gee, whiz, I mean I got this warm feeling in my body that was I never felt before with helping these people and so going there for the wrong reasons came out to be a right reason, so that's number one why I went into teaching, two, ah, these are outta order, Kaye and I were married and we went on R&R to Hawaii, and a guy we took a tour of the Arizona, and the guy was on there telling a story, had a suit, looked immaculate, he would go up high then down low and pause and very effective message on the Arizona even when we got done I didn't have any money I offered him a five dollar bill as a tip 1  which was unheard of in '68 and he said: "Oh, no, I tell this story because I love it." He said: "I'm a lawyer and I do this every Sunday." And I said, "Well, you are absolutely wonderful." But here’s the deal, he was storyteller and he was telling a story of the Arizona and he made it so real a couple times I even ducked like these Japanese Zero's were coming in and I said "Man, that's pretty powerful." So, if you - so that's what I did, I was a storyteller as a teacher. Three, ah I was in college at McKendree and a group was going to East Saint Louis to teach young kids to help young kids read and we did that for about 4 or 5 times, again, I went for a grade, all the wrong reasons then when I got done doin' it, I just felt that warm feeling again, and how powerful that was to help somebody read that couldn't. And, that was three. Four, I was going to master's program at ISU, and I could get three hours credit if I would go to a camp at Bloomington, Lake Bloomington, for underprivileged kids and I said yeah, I'll go, yeah three hours credit, my God, it's only a week so again, for selfish and not the right reason I take this on, I get there and we got 12-year-old kids and I mean they absolutely do not know how to act. So I'm the head of the cabin I got the oldest cabin, 12-year- olds, and probably the worst we got a kid named Reggie that was a bad actor I mean this kid didn't know how to act he was the worst. I had little problems with other kids in the cabin so I approach him and I said: "Will you help me?" you know, tryin' to throw some responsibility on him, and he said ah, "No!" real emphatic he didn't like me he didn't like whites, he didn’t' like anybody. Well, for some reason we were practicing for Olympic at the last day and he ran and he clearly was the best athlete in the camp. There was boys and girls there and all kinds of ages. I think it started from oh, 9 up to 12 and um, my cabin was the worst, it was the direstest, we got last every time, but I asked Reggie, we were runnin’ a race, and he won and I go over and hug 'em, I don't know why cause he was in my cabin I guess and his eyes got big, like I don't think he's ever been hugged, and, so from then on we got to the cabin he said: "Yeah, I'll help ya with these other kids." I said "Geesch! Thanks!" Well, now I got Reggie in fold now I had to get the other kids one kid peed the bed first 4 nights and they'd all make fun of em' so, I told told the kid I said: "Look, we had sessions how not to pee the bed." I took a bag of peanuts and my motivation for those kids was a peanut they got one peanut maybe two if they got three peanuts it was big time. I told ‘em, that I'll give him three peanuts if he will not pee the bed. And I'll be damned he didn't pee the bed. So, the next night three peanuts he didn't pee the bed. Now I told all of em' to get around, we came together there was about 10 in the cabin maybe 12, 10 or 12, been so long ago I forgot, and we came together and praised the kid and calpped and I mean that really really made an impact but, I was also the waterfront head [phone rings] of the whole camp. These kids couldn't swim, they were afraid they hadn't even had showers, baths, you know, occasionally, and I say 3/4ths of em' couldn't swim by the end of the cycle through motivation and different techniques outside thinking outside the box, I had every one of em' swimmin’. Not great, but everyone got in the water, everyone swam, and I got to thinkin’, man, that's pretty powerful if you can get 3/4ths of the camp that can't swim and then you teach ‘em the right way and do the right thing, then, that's powerful. So all four of those plus all the things did it and Vietnam it was the Army, I wanted to teach like some Sergeants they were very effective and they would teach people that don't want to learn, that don't want to be there after 20 mile forced march and teach people how to do things right, that's very powerful, so, that'd be five things, the Army, and these deals, and I don't think Vietnam had - I already made my mind up I wanted to be a teacher when I got out, and I had a year left of college, so I went into education and ah, became a teacher, so those are five reasons why I was a teacher. PLUS! One more thing, my mom who only had a year of college and then got married to the first husband, she was a Sunday school teacher and she was outstanding these she did a ah class with young adults well they wouldn't even go to other churches, they'd come to her because of her class and how she was very powerful, so, I get a little of those jeans, I think, from my mother who would have been an 2  excellent teacher, and who by the way, volunteered to be the director of plays twice when they couldn't have anybody that any teacher do it so she just did it free, and um, she also ah taught reading free, volunteered reader she'd tell me stories about what she did and stuff, and, ah, so that made an impact. SG: In 18 seasons as the head baseball coach at EHS you compiled a record of 508 and 147. You also brought the Tigers to five state tournament appearances and to win state championships in 1990, and 1998. In 1998, ending as the nation's top-ranked team and a perfect 40 and 0 record. When you reflect back on that record, how do you feel? TP: Well, I started coaching I didn't get a, I was the head coach in baseball and basketball when I first came out of college, and I wasn't very good. I was 3 and 19 and basketball, head basketball coach of a small school in Washburn, Illinois. They never won anything and they didn't care, well I got there, and we were 3 and 19 ‘cause we just were terrible and so I told Kaye, I said I - either I gotta get better or get out, so I tried to get better, next year we tied the school record in the third year we set a record and never been broken in 24 wins, which is unheard of at that school. I won a heck of a lot of games in baseball, which they never won, but it was a small school and I wanted out but I did learn one thing which I already knew but I hated losing and so if you - and everybody says that hate it, you know I work hard and I hate losin' well, I'm different than that. Mine is REALLY EMPHATICALLY, I hate to lose. Ah, I was telling a guy today at lunch matter of fact, that I went to camp my grandkids are going to camp, and I told em' when I was in 7th grade I was lucky enough to go to Wisconsin to this 6 week's camp. They had everything, canoeing, swimming, the rifle, fishing, you name it they did it. Well, if we had a whole group of campers going across to Lake Tomahawk and back I would be number one. If we played softball I had to be the best, and I was little and that's another factor that drives ya, and I didn't have a Dad, and I gotta forceful granddad and very domineering mother, and that's for some reason about the 7th grade when's I changed and had to be number one. Now if you want to be number one, it's very difficult. You've got to pay the price, it's a lot of stress, and then when you do get to be number one, then to maintain that, is almost ungodly. But I wanted to be the head basketball coach at Edwardsville High School and they were noted for basketball about it. Well, I didn't get it, I finished second, and I was furious and it still got scared that was in 19 - 73' I came in 4, that was '77 1977 I didn't get it. Then, in 981 four or five years later, they throw me a bone because I did a good job teaching and a good job as a football coach a good job as an assistant basketball coach and assistant football and so they said: "Well, we'll throw him a bone and give him a baseball job. You know it can't hurt..." and I was very emotional, very temperamental, and some of the people didn't like it - about half the people liked me and about half didn't. So, but that's pretty standard and that never bothered me, and I did it my way and not anybody else's way because Harry Truman I mean I'm a historian, I mean I read a lot of books, Harry Truman is one of my favorites, I didn't like 'em, once I read about him then I loved him, and ah, he said ah: "when you make a decision, do what you want and what's RIGHT because 50% aren't gonna agree with ya, and 50% will, so do what you want." So I did it that way, in teaching, and coaching I did it my way because half of 'em don't like ya, and half of em' do. I mean I've had parents, I've had kids about 4, the honor spot, 3 or 4 in a lineup, and those parents didn't like me, and you know they started every game, they hit 4, they didnt' like me, well one of 'em I found out because I didn't pitch 'em, he wanted his son to be the pitcher too, well we tried him out, and he threw fastballs, threw harder than anybody else, but his ball was straight and it didn't move, and he didn't hit corners, and he couldn't locate so we didn't use you know, and then why use him when we'd get work with other guys, make them better, and also he'll be a better outfielder and a better hitter if he doesn't have to do the pitching too. But they didn't realize that, they don't realize what's going on, but getting back to the, 3  what was original question? [laughs] SG: How did you feel about your record? And your 18 seasons? TP: Oh! Okay! Yeah we're talking sports, well, I mean, the record speaks for itself, 64 in a row, unheard of, state record: 48. We'd massively destroyed it, we're 4 away from the national record, and we would have won it, if we had a team beat and they beat us on a two-run wind-blown home runner we would have 72, which, 68's the record. There again, you see, ah when I was in the army, I had to be number one, I set a record in ah, the PCPT Test I had to run the mile with combat boots in 6:30 I ran it in 6:29 I had a hemorrhoid operation three days before I took off my boots in my fatigues, and I was down to my shorts and I had blood all over the place, but I'm going to run 6:29. I'm going to make the 100 points. So, I don't know why... I do know why, but I was driven and so my kids bought into it, but the main reason why we did so well in baseball mom and dad were down, and my Kaye was sitting here, and I just got the job we having dinner, and I hit the table all three of 'em jumped about a foot high, Dad, Mom, and Kaye. I said I'm going to take Edwardsville Baseball to levels they've never even heard of, or dreamt of  well we've been nationally ranked first time ever 8 times we were number one in Saint Louis from Illinois School 8 or 9 times, and um, we set all kinds of records, we won two state champions, we were second 39-1, lost a championship game, we were ranked number one in the nation, so, I was driven there is no question about it and luckily my kids bought into that, and they hated to lose as much as I did, and we feared no one. When we went to Chicago to play in state tournaments, it's another day. They're not afraid of Chicago, they're not - the only person they're afraid of is me. And, I was very hard on 'em, but I hugged 'em. I was a hugger. If they did good, they got hugs, if they did bad, they got yelled at, and benched, and I don't know but I think I'm smart enough to know I better be hugged than yelled at, and there's a reason for that I had two teachers that were like that and I learned that from them. And I better be hugged than yelled at, and definitely would rather win than lose. And my little Edwardsville kids, and I had little kids, 130 pounders that would go up against these Chicago kids had buy a sense they looked like Atlas, and we'd thump 'em, beat ‘em 10-2, 11-0 because we were fearless. And that's the way you win the state title. You can't be afraid of anybody. SG: So how did you become so knowledgeable about coaching baseball, and football, and basketball for that matter? TP: [laughs] that's a good question. When I was a kid, I worked on the farm and I asked dad there was a game of the week, there was the only game that was on TV, back in my day. And Dizzy Dean, Buddy Blackner, and ah, I'd ask dad I'd say: "Look. I will work on the farm ah, the game starts at 1, so I will take off at 1, and, til 3:30, maybe 4, so that's extra hours so I would trade with him, and Id put in extra hours so I could watch the game and I'd sit there, and I was mesmerized by the game. The purity the throw, if you make a bad throw, the guy's safe, if you miss a base, cutoff man, the guy goes to another base, if you make an error they get another at- bat, so all of that - I was - I didn't know that I was doing it, but tell you the truth I was studying it, and absolutely loved the game of baseball, but I loved all the games, basketball, football. When the Cardinals used to lose when I was a kid, 7th grade, I'd cry. When they got beat in a game in the 50s and Karl Siwaski [?] of Milwaukee hit a three-run homer and beat ‘em and that didn't mean anything because they're still 7th place but I kicked out a TV. I just went over, we had an old black and white TV, and I kicked out the whole damn thing out mom and dad looked at me didn't say a word, and then I got the bill, $75 took me two weeks of farmwork to pay for it and that was it, a new 4  black and white picture tube. So, even back then I hated to lose, I was very emotional, very passionate, I listened to Illinois basketball, they'd lose, I'd get so mad I'd throw the radio of even cry when even Edwardsville players were up there there was ah, Manny Jackson and Govon - I didn't even know Edwardsville but I knew they were from Edwardsville, Dono but no, I was very studious I read books I read every Johnny Wooden book when I got the head in basketball job at Washburn and I didn't use ‘em. I tried to emulate Johnny Wooden but hell, they got guys 6'10" 6'8" I got little ragamuffins and I'm trying to do what Johnny Wooden did with all his talent, well, it didn't work. But, some of the things I did use but I read books, I watched TV, today, on a Saturday, college football, I'll watch football from 11 in the morning til 1 at night. Every game. And I'll flip and know what's going on, in one setting with the flipper which by the way is the most important invention since the wheel, the flipper. So, ah, no I was possessed and read and studied and looked at other games, and coaches I umpired which helped me in baseball I'd see the good things coaches would do and the bad. And I would emulate the good and leave out the bad. I learned the situations and plays by umpiring and I went to every Cardinal I could go to. If a church was going to a Cardinal game then I'd call the minister and ask ‘em if I could go if a kid was having a birthday party, and I wasn't invited, I'd call the parent and say: "Can I ride down with you? I won't bother you I won't do nothing, I just want to go to the game." So, and I watched every move. So you know, when you're obsessed and when you you know I got a pretty good memory, and I just stored all that stuff and what didn't work for us in practice, then I'd change it, or what did work we kept. And we didn't -I didnt' like shaggin' I didn't like certain things in baseball, we didn't do em' we didn't shag. A guy would hit a ball, he'd go get his own ball. I didn't want him to be bored. I want my other guys hitting. We had 21 stations we went around we took 300 ground balls, 300 fly balls EVERY DAY. We had situations 300 ground balls a day when I played I might get 3. We had 300. Per player. And there was a system in the way we'd do it and I had a buddy come out, he snuck in and we went down and saw him standing there I thought he was spying he said: "This is unbelievable." And he was a player and he coaches some and he said: "I can't believe it. It's like an orchestra. You got a million balls going around and nobody ever gets hit." and I said: "Well I came up with it, designed it." I had an umpire, major league umpire come over from Vandalia he heard about me, he wanted to see a practice - he said: "You outta patent it, give it to minor leaguers and major leaguers and patent it." He said: "This is unreal." But we covered every aspect of the game and we had 21 stations and we'd move. I'd say: "Alright. Move." Boom! They'd move. No talking, no nothing, all work, all business because I'd pick kids that were tough. I'd rather pick a tough kid that couldn't hit and couldn't field and teach 'em but I want him tough. And I want him mean. And I want him to pay the price. See a lot of guys will keep a good athlete but he's a bad actor or he's not disciplined I mean he won't get the bunt down, they'll go, I hear other coaches, "Well we'd won another game if my guy got the bunt down." Hey! My guy's got the bunt down. How come? Well, we practice that every day and I expect them to get it down, and when they did get it down which was 98% they'd get a hi- five from the team. We had guys hit home runs they wouldn't get a hi-five but if they got a bunt down, they got they get a hi-five. Matheny, Cardinals La Russa, they both could won a lot more games if they used the bunt and steal and hit and run and all that no, wait, and a yadda who can handle the bat hit it into a double play. I get furious. I mean, hit and run, do something different be creative, think outside the box, they're like robots! They get paid $2 million dollars a year a ballplayer who's getting $40 million a year and can't hit  hit 280, ah 250, and a manager just sits there, and that's it. So I get very furious over that too, go ahead. SG: Okay. You have said that the kids love to compete when referring to the high school students, you’ve 5  been quoted saying: "I demanded a lot, and I got a lot." How did you instill that work ethic into your athletes? TP: Fear. They were, they knew I hated to lose, and they empathized that. And I had great assistance. And they hated to lose. We were all three different personalities all three different but we all three had the same objective. And that was to win. And they just didn't want to make a mistake. Because with me, they knew I wanted to win, and also they didn't want to get chewed out. With the other coaches they just didn't want to let them down. They didn't yell much but they just look at em' like they were disappointed, you let me down, you know you threw a strike right down the middle and he hit it. So you disappointed them. You made an error  I worked mostly with infield, and hitting if they made an error it just it killed me. And we didn't make many. We made mistakes but we made less than the other team and that's the key. Make less and expect failure. We you know you're going to fail in baseball, you're going to strike out, you're going to make a mistake you know, but make less than the other team. So, basically, I answered most of that question in the previous answer. SG: Yes. SG: You've also said you can't coach unless you're emotional. You might as well give up. Is that for you personally or do you believe that goes for every coach? TP: Well this is the problem why I get in trouble. I criticize most coaches and managers and they say: "Well, Tom, don't you like any of ‘em?" well in the Major League Baseball level, no. Because they are all weak they are all robots, they don't care - I mean they care, but they don't want ta, like Matheny I think is soft. He's he answers questions brilliantly, but that's not what happened. And, he's soft because he doesn't make em' accountable. He's not tough. Not that you have to be as tough as me or as mean as me, but you he's soft. And all the others they don't hit and run, they don't steal bases well I don't squeeze because he might miss the ball, and I'll be yelled at. Hey! I squeezed all the time I had 4 squeezes win the state title in 1990. Four! Unheard of! I've got 105 records that state there's a list of five. Top five. Well, I'm in, well we were in it when I left, 105 times. Um, hey, you gotta have guts, you've got to have emotion. You're got to have PASSION I question Matheny I'm just using him as example his passion and his emotion and his teaching skills and what's he tellin the coaches to do. He's got 100 coaches, and they can't bunt? They can't hit and run? They can't hit a fly ball? Something's wrong. And um, I can teach a kid to bunt in 15 minutes. I could come over and teach your kid in 15 minutes how to bunt now, to make him real good, then he's gonna have to do it. And do it. But I could teach him the proper technique and um, they don't do it. So I get upset with that. (30:13) SG: Okay. As much as you like to win, you are also known to be fiercely protective of your players and won't overuse them. Has it ever caused you any problems? TP: Three of my biggest mistakes are because of that question. Tommy Price in 1988, probably our best pitcher went to Notre Dame on a full ride which is unheard of. You don't get a full ride in baseball. But I negotiated that for him. I took him out in 1988 as a sophomore because he's throwing, he's walkin' to bunt. We're ahead 6 to 1 against Barrington of Chicago and they won the legion state tournament the year before they got everybody back, they're stacked. We got ‘em down 6 - 1, well now, it's6-3 because Tommy's walkin’ the ballyard so I take him out and then the floodgates opened. We got got beat 9-6, it 6  was semis, if we would have won that game, we would have gone in the finals and I think we would have won, so we would have another state champion. I took him out and that's one of my big mistakes, and also he pitched a lot there at the end and I didn't want to ruin his arm. But the worst one, was 1991 the next year, we're 39-0, we're back - we could be back to back state champions number one in the nation we're ranked, ah, about 5 or 6 things go down. I had two pitchers not a third. The third pitcher, championship game against the all-world team, Thornwood of Chicago they were all world they had two major leaguers on it, Cliff Floyd and Taylor guy, and I had to pitch little ragamuffin weighed a 130lbs but he was competitive, tough, he just wasn't good enough to face ‘em, but my 1 and 2 who might have beat ‘em, they came in the room the night before or that day we went back to take a nap, we played two games Saturday, and one of em' pitched Friday whole game, and one of ‘em pitched Saturday a whole game, both great pitchers, they begged me, begged me to pitch and they said we'll split it, you know 3 and half and 3 and a half or 2 and 5 or 3 and 3 and then maybe one guy come in to finish it, we'll split it. Please, begged me, because they knew how I coached. I said no. If they blew out an arm, and then both of them went to college on a scholarship, one of them made the majors, Jason Boyd, and he made the majors if they would have not blown out an arm, I couldn't forgive myself. There's a kid from Harrisburg, center fielder, I mean a pitcher and a center fielder, and he pitched, and they won the state, but he pitched every game in through 130 140 pitches, and then he was done he had a major league arm and they pitched - legion all the time, and then his arm was like a rag. They blew him out, a kid that had a lot of talent, and um, no, I couldn't do it. But, if I look back I look back on it, maybe I could have gone 2 and 2, maybe, and that'd be 4 innings and maybe let Droskey pitch the last three and hopefully we had a league. We were ahead in that game 2 to nothing by the way, and um, lemme tell you about the first inning. The first inning I got Dean Surry kid stle 65 bases, which is unheard of, nobody steals that many. They won't steal that many if they had a four year career he's got a state record, and he broke his own record the next year with one more. He leads off, he's fast, he gets thrown out the shortstop makes a great play, son's kid. He's out that far, second guy Drosty gets a double. So it had been second and third or one one nothing. He gets a double, then we come up with ah Slimmer. Slimmer gets a double. So we're ahead one to nothing Slimmer's number three, fast, so, their catcher got hurt and all relaxin' [?] and he just start playin again, and in the sectionals. So, Slimmer's still third, so that'd give J.J. Server my catcher, more of an opportunity to take the pressure off of him, he hit a fly ball, hit a ground ball, they'd score. So I'd still third. This catcher threw a I could heard the whistle [imitates whistle noise] and they keep him right on the base, and Dave slid in to - he's out like that. So I got two outs, by under an inch. I can't believe that he's out, but he was. I'm right there, I mean, both calls were good. And, ah, so, and then J.J. hits a home run. See, but I'm aggressive, was I mad at myself? In that situation, sure, ‘cause I could have had three runs, and if Dean - if Dean's safe, I could have had four runs, we could have had four runs, first inning. And I got Boyd Blaski pitchin' and anybody who could attack on a couple more, it had been a whole different ballgame, but, we had two quick - we had two outs, and both of ‘em, were great plays on their part, and um, and then Droskey ran into trouble second inning, he got ‘em out 1,2,3 in the first. But um, it didn't work. So if I had a do- over I might have pitched 2 and 2 to answer that question. Maybe! I don't know. SG: You have the nickname "Moto" - how did you get that name and what does it mean? TP: Well I got that at McKendree I can't tell you, my wife doesn't know, my kids don't know, and the only guy that knows is dead. Ah, he died he was a roommate of mine at McKendree he died and he gave me the nickname and him and I is the only knows really - well, there might be a few at McKendree know, 7  but I don't even know if they know. And I just stuck with me, lot of people think it's "motovator" "Moto- mouth" ah, all kinds. It's not. And it's not that big a deal, but it's kinda fun, nobody knows, and he's dead. And it's gonna stay that way. SG: Not only are you considered a great coach, you also won teacher of the year honors at both Washburn High School and Edwardsville High School. What was it like and what do you think made you so great? TP: Honesty. Integrity. Character. Consistency. I treated everybody the same I don't care if they're an all- American ah they were treated the same. Ah, if they're a straight "A" student an honors student, they're treated just like a guy that rides his motorcycle could care less about school. I think consistency was the most thing and honesty. And plus, I taught as a storyteller outside the box and they enjoyed my class. Nobody slept, ever. And, um, they knew better. One guy kinda dozed off and I threw an eraser at him, hit him right in the head. And ah I've thrown guys out of a second story window at Washburn, I pinned them up against the wall, I ripped their shirts off, they knew that you don't mess with me. I don't care how big you are, or how bad you are, and they didn't mess with me now they say "Oh you couldn't get away with that today..." Bullcrap. "Kids are a lot different today." No they're not! Maybe the teaching methods are different because of mandates and that's bad but you gonna tell me I'm not gonna grab a kid every coach I know grabs a kid and then if they don't like you as a coach or they wanna get rid of you as a coach, you don't win as a coach they'll get rid of you so you grab somebody. Well, I got away with murder because that's just the way I was, and you wanna fire me, fire me I don't care, because I really didn't and ah, so I was I didn't care, I taught my way, I got in trouble all the time by the principals, administrators, but ah, hey, I did it my way, and the kids liked me and that's the bottom line. Tests... oh you gotta teach to a test. I'm not gonna do that. You gotta teach from the book, one guy even administrator said "Tom you need to teach like I used to." And I said: "Why? Put half of ‘em to sleep?" When I'd walk by his class, and half of ‘em are asleep and he'd read to them out of the book, I said "hell they can read a book! Give ‘em an assignment to read it at home when they're not gonna do it anyway, but give it to em!" I didn't teach out of a book, I didn't teach from a test, I taught out of, I was a storyteller, they knew my stories were good, and I knew when to how to not go too long in a story or not you know make it a little more information and stuff I would tell things that they would never hear in a history class. Lot of stories that I would read somewhere I was a big reader and I shared my knowledge with them and tried to make it interesting, fair, and I was consistent in my discipline. I didn't write referrals. Ever. 31 years. I'd just put them out in the hall, like a little kid, and then, next day they'd come in class and I'd say "uh huh, you're not you're out in the hall, man, where you belong." and I said "Now, if you want to apologize to me, they'd talk in class or something, and I would say, um, "You apologize to the class to me and don't let it happen again, I'll let you in." And one principal goes - "You can't put ‘em out in the hall, what if they go home and stuff?" I said, "Well, so what?" "Well, they might have an accident." You know they always lookin' as - it might happen it might do this they might do that. Bull. So I was controversial, and I was lucky I had a community behind me, a lot of the big hitters in Edwardsville I taught their kid. They knew where I was coming from, I either coached ‘em or taught ‘em, and I had some big hitters that are not going to - well matter fact I really got two principals fired, for incompetency. But that neither here nor there. I helped they weren't very good and they're gonna go. SG: Okay, you coached 10 players who were drafted and played professional baseball. Quite the accomplishment. How do you feel about that? (40:58) 8  TP: Well, actually it was more than that. Because, if you go to minor league team, that's considered professional baseball. Now I put ah actually it was three and then Tommy got a cup of coffee with the Dodgers, so we got three in the majors out of a little town like this is that's a tribute to our program, and it's a tribute to the kid. I mean that shows that they they wanted it and they were talented. And we had some talent, but really no more than most other Belleville's got talent, O'Fallon's got talent, back in the day, Collinsville not so much now, they had some great baseball teams and we're a hotbed of baseball even the little schools like Columbia, Waterloo, my God, they play good - ah Freeburg, they play great baseball. Matter of fact, a lot of cases they were better than the AA schools half of ‘em and they played tough baseball. We played Gillespie a couple of times and man they come down to compete. Ah, you played Jerseyville who's half the size of us and had a great coach, and um, they complete boy, you had to play tough to beat ‘em, Alton-Marquette, you know, why I like those two programs they only had one coach really. I had an advantage in 1987 we turned it around to become the best program I think because of we built a field and we built for a practice facility and we thought it was the greatest field in America. Well, my god, Florida's got 6,000 fields little league fields better than ours but it was OURS we BUILT IT there was NO MONEY, ah I raised the money we had the support was just phenomenal from the community and the kids and we had some fundraisers and one time, we weren't rushing, you know we was the first team to go to Russia to teach and play. And um, ah J.J. Serbo's a freshman I think, maybe a sophomore and we're setting there and the reason we got beat in one of those games, no lights we had to go to the Leclaire. And I said, man, if we had lights we would never lost that we would have won about 72 games in a row and he says well we'll never have lights here. I said what? He said we'll never have lights, well, we had ‘em the next year. I said that's J.J. we'll have ‘em up next year before you come to practice. And I wanted ‘em for practice, late, and for games later, and also I built the field and several others I built the sophomore and freshman diamond field and the girls’ softball and gave money - baseball money we had some left over to the football program, and ah, that whole thing came about because Dick Ford who I coached football with and he's asking if I want a baseball field and I said yeah, and so we built that and so it was quite an accomplishment and ah, but it was more for practice and that's when we really got good. We had our field, I had cages I had 9 pitching machines. I didn't have any when I took over I had three baseballs that were any good and I had 6 others that were torn. I had no bats, we had no budget I only had an $1800 budget to run a whole baseball so I had to raise more money in the Busch Stadium game which I started with some other teams, in 1981 gave us some money. I bought my first machine, we got a dollar kickback per ticket Joe Cunningham called me and said do you want to go Busch Stadium I said are you kiddin? Are you kiddin? And he's a player you know, major leaguer, I said we'll walk down there or hitchhike, YEAH we're comin! So we were 1 of 6 teams ah three games ah now there's like 65 they got colleges comin in and we started that and ah he said oh and by the way if you sell 1,000 tickets you'll get a dollar back. I said are you kiddin? I said we'll sell and we were the number one seller for 17 years - us and my other team. I said are you kiddin? I'll sell 1,000 tickets myself. And um, I bought a machine with it, it was a big event. Little things like that were big events to ya. SG: Yeah. And that baseball field that you built in 1987 received a $700,000 make over in 2008 and was named after you in a beautiful ceremony. What was that like? TP: Was it $700,000? SG: I think so. 9  TP: Or 70? SG: I think it was $700,000 TP: Well you might want to check that and make sure, SG: I will. TP: But ah yeah that's and that's a tribute. That's a tribute to Timmy who played three years for me in 1988, 89, and 90 and tough little ballplayer, wasn't very big, tough. Good ballplayer and um, he took over after me and he's done a good job with it, but it was in place the practice facility and he kept Waldo which was important and so you know and that's good. Um, ah the ceremony yeah, it was awesome, it was great, but Hightower had a BIG part in all of Edwardsville, I mean this guy, you either liked him or you didn't. He was kinda like me and we both had big egos and we both think we're all world and we both are. But the thing of it is, he was driven for some reason and man he turned this thing around he got better coaches, he got better band people, or his band people he gets a track coach from Herron that won, now they finish first, second, first, second, they're first this year, unheard of, two seconds two first track from from Herron he gets Doughtery he brought Dougherty you know Dougherty was part of it and now he's got Martin, does a good job our coaching - and Laurie Blade which was a big deal for girls, huge. And um, so I started it kinda, and made Edwardsville on the map, but then Ed took it to another another level too. And um, so we started this field and they put a lot of money in it. Now it's got ah a new ah but the hired it done. You know, we did it piecemeal which was fun, I mean now you raise the money - see I raised over $400,000 dollars, the lights and then when I got lights then the girls want lights well they get ‘em school buys ‘em, and then football field wanted new lights. They had the old ones from the old high school, poles that had woodpeckers in ‘em and termites but they got the new lights so it was all part of it. The school was built there because of the complex that came along. The complex came along because of baseball, you see it's a lot more important than you think all that developed from a little old baseball diamond and then football was developed and Coach Ford has nothing out there his name doesn't appear anywhere out there and it needs to be out there somewhere because he was the dude that did it when it was the AD. Dell Keller I call him up on a Sunday and I said Dell, I want to cut out a baseball field so he brings out an earth mover he works sunup sundown, didn't pay him a penny, I don't know how much fuel he used  he said what about the other diamond I said yeah let's dig it out, Freshman diamond, Sophomore Diamond, Girls Diamonds and um, course girls were down in a low place and they couldn't use one of ‘em so they had to take one fo the baseball fields so ah now they got astroturf at one of ‘em, and they got astroturf football field. I coached football 8 years. Hey, we had nothing. We had a football field that was 98 yards. We had a 440 track that was 410. Or 415. I mean and we had to practice at the Leclaire school when I came here we had the worst facilities and the smallest school in the southwestern conference and held our own. We were second one year we won first and we were second with no facilities except a good basketball gym. And we've come now where we've got the second largest school about 90 behind O'Fallon we've got facilities you won't believe we've got band uniforms, we've got a band looks like the University of Wisconsin. I mean you know I mean they're UNREAL! I went - I know Ed came in and said well I'm going to get a new band director I said oh. He said well we finished third in a 5 man deal and Collinsville even beat us and so he says I'm going to put him in the junior high and bring in a new one. Three years later I'm in a ballgame, my God I thought Wisconsin was down here. It was UNREAL! We got an orchestra. We got drama, we got Kate Motley's all-world we got some skilled people up there, and um, I think that's what 10  draws a lot of people in. Sports, and the extracurricular, now I don't know about the academics I know when I went out, 7 great teachers went out and I don't know if it will ever be replaced. But um, 8 of us went out and 7 of ‘em were the more popular teachers and they were very good. And usually, you're popular because you're good. You know they just don't like you because you gave me an "A" well, I might have been a little more popular because I was so easy. I didn't I mean I was really an easy teacher. But I didn't want to be hard. I don't care, as long as they learn. SG: True. So you and Mike Wald, ah your pitching coach have always had a very special relationship. Can you tell me about that? TP: Well that's funny, Mike was in 1980, he was a volunteer for Coach Funkhauser I took over for him in 81, he was my volunteer I had another coach and he volunteered well, he was so much better as a coach it was in his blood and he was good he had a lot of strengths he has a couple weaknesses he's only coached two years, but had a lot more strengths than weaknesses so the next year 1982 I hired him full-time as my assistant. And I had him and then in 1986 or 7 I had a freshman coach Darryl Butler and I got diabetes in 86 and I was tired I'd get more tired than I normally would and I'm going to give 100% or I ain't playin’. Well, I fell in 87, I'd get tired and I maybe didn't give them everything I wanted to give them, so I hired Darryl, and we paid him. So we start winnin’, that's when we turned the tide. We won, we won 20 every year but now we start turning the corner. Darryl Mike and me, we got three coaches that are all good! And um, and then all of a sudden the other coaches - well look at Pile he's got three coaches they only had an assistant well I paid him. Rather than lettin’ them pay assistants they said well we gotta get rid of Darryl I said no. I said no. Ah, and so I fought for him and we got him in and he wasn't going to get paid - he couldn't get paid that's what it was. So he we couldn't pay him but um, I mean that's how they thought they always thought that way. Rather than do something good, and positive, let's go the other way. I had a dirt dirt road down there to begin with I had a guy that was gonna give us free gravel, they said no. School said no. No free gravel well we'd have to maintain it and pay for it. Didn't want anything because you'd might have to maintain it and pay for it. And see when Hightower came in he was just 100% opposite, yeah, let's go let's get it for you, very progressive, the others would look at the negative and it was gonna cost us money. Well, and the grounds crew was spread thin and they wouldn't take care of my field and I said I'll do it, well no then it was a union thing, and so I had a lot of problems early. Lot of stress, grounds, um, you know controversial, umpires were you know, I think to be honest with you I thought they would call two strike zones, one for them, one for us, of course, I'm always partial to the umps but I had a lot of stress I had a lot of problems and um, health wise I was fainting in 98, Darryl wanted me to continue on, set a state record, in wins, and if I could have, I figured it out the other day the state record is 950 and if I was still in it today and just coaching and not teaching and having Darryl help with me and Mike, Mike's still there he's been there 120 years and um, the thing of it is - oh I don't know about him, his energy level he coaches basketball and baseball head basketball lot of stress and then he does baseball I mean he's done it for 230 years both. And the thing of it is, um, I would have ah about 1200 wins. In 16 years less than the guy that's got 950. 16 years less. So. But, I would be dead. And not getting the head basketball job I reflect back on, I'm still mad, but I'd probably be dead with a heart attack. I'm too emotional too passionate, and when we lose it just take everything out of me. I mean we'd lose in baseball and for two months, three months, all summer it'd affect me. Not good. So I got some bad things going on, it also made you good. SG: So after the perfect 1998 season, then you retired. Then the position went to Tim Funkhauser he was 11  really young at the time but he had also played under you? TP: Well, Timmy was lucky in that he went to Western, and played, and was captain and did a good job, but right out of high school, college, excuse me, he went to Triad and was the head coach so he got a bunch of wins there. I think Timmy will set the state record in wins. There's no question about it, if he stays in it long enough cause, I'm 38 I won 509 games in ah from 38. He started 22 or 3 and so he's gonna shatter my record in Edwardsville which he's already done us for wins, in one year less because everything was in place. I had I won 24 I won 24 twice and 20 once barely won 20 one year and one kid went [whoosh] I didn't want to be the team to lose you know only win 19. But and when I'm developing all this we're still winning 20, 24. And that's pretty good. But, like I said when it turned, we had the field. We had Darryl. Darryl helped. Mike's more experienced. I'm better, Mike's better things that didn't work the previous 6 years the couple little things we made them better. And every year we progress and made a better practice and it got better and better and better. I think Funkhauser and Porch who's my freshman coach ah used my stuff I think they still do, but they also improved on it. It's like Thomas Jefferson he didn't write the Declaration of Independence it was the British and the French he used it, their words, tweaked ‘em, and came up with the Declaration of Independence. So, we all copy everybody it's just sometimes how much do you improve upon it Declaration of Independence, great document, he improved it. Those words. But that's the way it goes down. You know, basketball you're running other people's stuff, it just how much do the kids buy in, how much do they believe and how emphatic are you how passionate are you? How emotional are you? I mean in this little old interview, you can tell I'm in it, man, I'm passionate and I'm emotional. SG: This is true. Okay so in 2014 you were inducted into McKendree's Hall of Fame. How was that? TP: It was a great honor. You know anytime I'm in the wall of fame in Winchester, Illinois the first charter member in my high school, my God, they got teacher that are rolling over in their graves because I'm a charter member of the lot of great people in a little town like that. I'm one of the top five. I mean, c'mon. Ah, McKendree I didn't play - I played a little baseball and I had the inducted and one of the guys came a friend of mine Tom Wheeler he was a I told him in the speech now there's a guy it was a starting shortstop and starting point guard and I wanted to be both of those and he did it. And um, and now I'm in the hall of fame I came in with the track team that won the Nationals when they were there. I invited 21 people to go to dinner and they said Tom your speech is unbelievable and I don't know why I just I didn't prepare for it much, but I just told experience about how McKendree changed me meeting different people, ah, blacks, Jewish, different ah, Orientals. You know, Winchester I've never seen those people. And then I look they're like me. They like to have fun, they like to you know do things, play flag football go have a beer, and so that's why McKendree was very important to me. Very important because I learned. New Jersey! I don't know New Jersey people and how they act, we had great times you know Long Island, guys from the South, religious people very religious a little mix in there and it taught me all those different things. Which helps, when you teach, because you get all kinds of people. SG: Yes. Over the years, you received not only 70 coaching honors for your baseball accomplishments you earned National Coach of the Year accolades from several organizations and were a three-time coach of the year honoree by the Illinois High School Baseball Coaches Association and the American Baseball Coaches Association. Six times you were selected as a Saint Louis area coach of the year by the IHSBCA you were also recognized as the area coach of the year 6 times each by both the Belleville News- 12  Democrat and the Alton Telegraph, you've received numerous honors and awards from local organizations as well including the Paul Ray Award from the Saint Louis Baseball Writers Association in 1998 and the Special Achievement Award from the Missouri Athletic Club. That's a lot of awards. Does it ever get old? TP: No I wish I was still getting them. No, ah, I got a couple others that are in there that are very important to me, ah, baseball writers when I met Mark McGwire and there was 2,000 people down there and I got his picture, it was funny Bob Kostas was the announcer and I got Mark McGwire's autograph and then I gave him one of me, in one of those old ugly pictures high school pictures and I signed it to Mark, Love Moto. By the way, he married one of students, one of my girl basketball player. You see, and to, it's a passion with me because you don't coach freshman girls’ basketball unless you love it. You don't coach sophomore basketball, JV, I mean, I coached ‘em. Ah, I put everything I had into it and I learned a lot in football, 8 years of football never coached it came here and coached it. Played it, loved it, matter fact football is my favorite sport to play, basketball is my favorite sport to coach and baseball I just like the purity of the game. I mean, you gotta right on or you don't win. But um, no it doesn't get old, and I've got some other Silver Awards and I've got an award from somebody coach of the year in Franklin Life, Coach of the Year in a bunch of ‘em ah, 6 in Alton, 6 in Belleville. Belleville, well, they didn't give me a lot of ‘em, I think I deserved because they were giving them to me all the time and they had to pass ‘em around a little bit you know, give ‘em to a Bellville coach a Bellville newspaper. Alton Telegraph has to give it to somebody else and um, yeah I think there should have been more. But, that's me! That's how who I am you know, um, I got a lot of awards but there should have been more, yeah. SG: Great. That's all the questions I have for you is there anything you think you should still state for this interview? TP: Not really I've been very lucky, I've been driven, I had a wife. That was very important she went to almost every baseball game my God, she doesn't even care, she went to - think of how many games I've coached, she's gone to basketball games, she's gone to football games, she's seen me throw cottage cheese when I got beat, two weeks after we lost my first regional in 1981, we were playing an all-stater and I got a kid throwing up three times got the flu, and as my first year we'd go 1 nothing they beat us one to nothing and we had a ball hit a runner, we would have won it, but that's first and last time a ball ever hit a runner of mine but we would have won it we had the bases loaded with two runs would have scored and we went beaten an All American from O'Fallon and I came home, and didn't say a word. And then about two weeks later something happened and Kay and I had a tiff or something I don't know kid did something wrong, just got a big thing of cottage cheese and I just picked it up and rifled it and it's all over it's in the crevices and woodwork took me about three - four hours to clean it all up, but um, yeah she had to put up with stuff like that. Broken lamps, ah you know and ah, she'd been a trooper but she's got a different personality and thank god she's got it. If it was like mine we'd have been in big trouble she'd take it she knew who I was how passionate I was how much it meant to me Cardinals. She watches the Cardinals even now I think because I'm so passionate about ‘em and I'll come in she'll have it on. She'll have it on rather than some cooking show or a flower show, but Kay's been a big part of it. Kids, they had to sacrifice it's hard you gotta be a grandson you wanna be the best grandson possible. You had to be a son and spent time with your parents and you demanding mom especially and then you had to be a father you had to be a husband, you have to be a friend, then you have to find some time for yourself, and to do that all that and to teach 154 kids every day and then you gotta go out and coach and be good? Think about it. You wanna be good in the classroom 5 times a day and then you gotta go out and driven nobody come up 13  to me no principal or kid came up to me and said hey you gotta do a good job, I just did it on my own. Then I gotta go out and coach 3 -4 hours and put everything I have in it. It took a lot of energy and luckily my prep period I took a nap. I did - Darryl and I go down Darryl taught history and we'd go down and pass out both of us he was an excellent teacher and Mike ah to his credit he had a different position where he would put people in jobs and stuff it was quite so demanding and he said that he told us he said I don't know if I could do what you guys do if had to teach history everyday Honors and AP and traditional I don't think he'd still be coaching. 14 
MadisonCounty;Jeff Halcom;1960;2017;Jeff Halcom 1960 -  2017  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Jeffery R. Halcom Oral History Interview Phil Schneider, Interviewer July 11, 2017 Phil Schneider (PS): This is a oral history interview with a Jeff Halcom. Interview is taking place on July 11th, 2017 for the Madison County Historical Archive. My name is Phil Schneider, I'll be conducting the interview. Jeff can we start off with your full name? Jeff Halcom (JH): Jeffery R. Halcom PS: What does the R stand for? JH: Ray. PS: Ray? So you've lived your entire life, or most your life in Madison County, correct? JH: Correct. PS: Tell us what it was like growing up in the county? JH: Well I grew up- in a- on a farm. A 300-acre farm about ten miles outside of Edwardsville. So we had a pretty simple life. We raised our own livestock had our own garden. You know, we- my mom didn't work, my dad was a carpenter and he farmed. So we just lived basic, we lived off the land. And that's about what we did, we farmed and did what we could to make ends meet. And that's what we did. PS: Ok. So I should have asked this first but what year were you born? JH: 1960. PS: 1960. So you were- you lived in what town as a kid? In Edwardsville you said? JH: Edwardsville was my address. PS: Your address. But you lived out in the-what out in the country? JH: Out by- yeah- out in the country, out by Holiday Shores. PS: And so you said your dad was a carpenter? JH: Carpenter by trade. PS: Uh huh, so he'd get up and do- so how how did that work [mumbling]? 1  JH: He'd get up and go, he'd get up and go and farm or go and work cause from 7 to 3:30 and he would come home and get on the tractor. And go out and plow and this and farm. PS: Wow. JH: And then my mom would take care of the livestock. And the garden and us kids would help with whatever they needed. [Talking over each other] PS: [taking over each other] Ok. So there was- you had a brother or sister? JH: I had - I have one brother. PS: Ok. So what was it like growing up with kids on the farm? JH: Well we just had each other to play with cause our nearest neighbor was a mile away so we just played outside and did our jobs. You know it was really a pretty simple life, we didn't really have a whole lot but we were happy because we lived off the land and we just did what we needed to do. And you know. PS: So what- you used to live off the land. And just beyond farming did you do a lot of fishing or hunting? JH: I didn't hunt myself, my family did. They deer hunted but we, you know, raised our own garden. Had our garden for all our own vegetables, canned. Then we raised our own livestock, pigs and cattle. Butchered all them. My mom had one time cured our own meat even, smoked our own hams and everything. We cut- we had a wood furnace, we did not have, you know, we didn't have air conditioning. We had a wood furnace, we cut wood every weekend. So that's how, you know, what kept us going. PS: So it seems like you had a busy life? JH: It kept us pretty busy. There was always something to do. PS: Mhm. But as a kid did you have time for fun? JH: Oh yeah. I was always playing in the sand pile or building toy guns or playing army or mowing grass, whatever my dad- my dad always a list for me to do but we had- we enjoyed out life. We had a good life. PS: So you said you had a busy life in the farm but you guys had fun. You- were in the summer times, you had more chores to do or what? JH: Yeah. We paint buildings and stuff. And then when I was a little older I worked with my dad in construction, you know, doing gopher stuff. Stripping forms, setting up forms, digging up basements, pouring concrete. Pretty well whatever they needed done. Then I made a little extra money, I think I made two dollars an hour [laughing] or something like that. PS: That was back in the seventies? 2  JH: Yeah probably. Yeah probably like in the mid-seventies. PS: So you'd go and you'd work a full day? JH: Yeah, yeah I'd go to work with him and come home with him. PS: Yeah. So you think that's where you growing up on the farm and then working those kinds of jobs early on, you learned how to be a hard worker? JH: Yeah I guess. I mean that's my whole family, always been that way. We always, you know, work all day and sometimes- we never really went on vacation. I mean we'd butcher 12 hogs and we'd just all get in and do it. The whole family would do it, our whole, you know, my mom's brothers and sisters and- we'd all get together do it. And get it done and everybody got something out of it and that was- I never took a vacation till I was 18. PS: Where did you go? JH: Florida, which- with some of my friends- which I got really sick cause I got really sun burned. And I would never do that again but. PS: It was an experience? JH: Yeah it was an experience. Never been out of- [clears throat] Well I think I was 16 when I went down to De Soto, Missouri. Been to the Springfield Fair, De Soto Missouri, and then when I was 18 I went to Florida. But I had never been anywhere else. Not, no other state or anything. PS: ‘Cause you didn't have time? JH: Well- we just didn't have the money. We just didn't have any extra money. We just- didn't, you know, we did what we could do. PS: So- were there a lot of farms in the county at that time? JH: Yeah, about everybody. You could have a small farm back then. Yeah, it ain't like the big farms now where everybody one guy farms 30 or 40 didn't properties. You know, we had a small farm with 300-acre farm but 140 were tillable. My grandpa farmed 600 acres and there was a lot of smaller farmers, you know, farm 200, 300 acres. You could do it back then, but things have changed a lot. PS: Ok, so that's a, so what's changed or what- what caused things to change? JH: Well everything, I guess, progress. We quit farming 30 years ago. And when we quit farming, they told us, we rented that farm, and they told us we were not progressive enough because we didn't have the large equipment to you know do 3-400 acres a day. We just wasn't fast enough, and it's just that's the way it's gone with technology and everything. All the tractors and everything have gotten bigger and the equipment has gotten bigger and it's just spread out and that's why a lot smaller farms folded up. ‘Cause they just couldn't keep up with the- and then the cost of machinery went up and it just made everything more difficult, you know. 3  PS: Did you- when you were in school did you plan on continuing farming? Like was that your plan? JH: No, I did not plan on it because it was a struggle. You know, you work a full-time job and come home go out and plow till one or two in the morning, then get back up and go to work again every day. And then you had to buy your machinery and your seed corn and your gasoline and your diesel fuel for the tractors. And you know, and like we had some bottom ground cleared and then we would pick up that we had that cleared. We started planting, well the first two years we lost all the crops because of the ground wasn't- it had not been farm, it was timber ground. So then, you know, that just really- we couldn't even get anybody to buy the corn, it wasn't good. PS: Ok I feel like we're jumping around a little bit. Let's go back  we'll talk about being a kid and going through school. What do you remember about going to school? You went to the Edwardsville School District? JH: Edwardsville School District. I mean, I had a learning disability, so Edwardsville was a good school to go to because it took care of the problem. But I mean, I went to three different grade schools ‘cause I went to Morrill for first, second, and third. Midway for fourth and fifth. And Hamil for sixth. And then I went to Edwardsville to the junior high and then to the senior high, which is all changed now. PS: Yes it has. JH: I mean it was pretty good. I mean, school was school was not easy for me. And being a farmer, I didn't really see that I needed all that higher education [laughing] you know. To me it was just, you know, I like working with my hands and as long as I was doing that I didn't really, you know, but- I mean it was pretty good. I mean we had a good school district, and it seemed like everything went pretty well. We always managed to make it work  I ended up graduating so there's something to be said about that. PS: So as you were growing up in your teenager, I'm sure you- did you have any other folks around you that had more money? Maybe a little more well off. So what did you and your brother do? So how did you guys enjoy yourselves as teenagers when some other regular things like going off to the movies and spending a lot of money wasn't an option for you? JH: Well didn't really mind. Mostly stayed at home and worked in my woodshop and then I got involved in church. Went to church youth group and that. And just, you know, whenever I wasn't doing that, I was either with my grandpa because he had a farm or working on our farm or, you know, trying to make a little extra money here and there. PS: What was it like going to church back in the late 70's maybe early 80's? JH: I enjoyed it. I started going, I went to Sunday school as a child and then my mom got sick for a while, so we quit going and then I kind of got back once I started driving. Started going back to church and I enjoyed it, got involved in the youth group and doing stuff and I spent a lot of time at church. And I enjoyed it. I thought it was a good experience. PS: What were some of the things you guys would do? 4  JH: The youth group we'd go to Six Flags and we had a stand at the Bethalto Homecoming. You know, we'd go to concerts, Christian concerts and stuff like that. PS: You ever play any sports in high school or in? JH: No I did not. PS: No? JH: That wasn't- I just was never that coordinated to do sports. PS: Did you do any recreational sports like with the church and what not? JH: I did church basketball at one time. I tried church softball but that- I could do ok at basketball but I couldn't do very good at softball, so I didn't even mess with it. PS: Was it just you did basketball for the fun of it or did you enjoy the competition? JH: just for the fun of it. I'm not a real competitive person. PS: So you know you weren't going to go into farming? JH: Right. PS: So what was your plan then? Like going into high school and after highs cool. JH: When I was in 9th grade I decided I was going to be a machinist. And that's what I put my mind to and so that's why I became a machinist. PS: How did you decide that? JH: Well I took a shop class and then I liked it. And I'm mechanical so I started reading all the books the teacher would sell me, he would sell me the old textbooks and I'd read all about machine work and I decided that 9th grade. And then in- I took another shop- more shop classes in 10th grade and then I went to a vocational school in Collinsville for the last two years of my high school. And then I got a job as a apprentice machinist at a high school. PS: So where was your first job at then? JH: Madison M&M Machining Gear. Yeah. PS: Now soon after that you ended up moving didn't you for a while? JH: Right. We had the big snow of '82 and it shut everything down so after that I was laid off. So I was working at gas stations and wherever I could find a job. And I had met my wife and she's from Pennsylvania, so we ended up moving out there and I got a job at a knitting mill and then I got a job at a place that made automotive drive line parts. And then I got a job at an aluminum excursion facility, 5  PS: Sounds like- so where those just- you were laid off a job or found a better job? JH: Well I started at a knitting mill driving a fork truck and then I found the better job. And then I worked at that job and then I had been trying to get in at the aluminum mill and then I finally got in there. So then I quit there to move back to Illinois. And take a job at Granite City Steel. PS: So what was it like working at the Steel Mill, was- is and keeps going back and forth- a big part of Granite City, what was that like working there at such a volatile place? JH: Well the place I was working in - in Pennsylvania was a really nice shop and then I interviewed at Granite City Steel, but I didn't tour the shop. And then when I- the first day I started it was like stepping back in time to the 40's because they were - they just weren't doing things, you know, very modern. Everything was antiquated and stuff like that. So that's what ended up, you know, but I fit in there, so I worked there for almost 12 years. PS: You ever get laid off while you were there? JH: Nope never did, not one time. Cause things were pretty good right then. PS: You said that the shop there was antiquated, is there a reason why think the one- why you think the shop here in Madison County would be antiquated compared to the one you experienced out in Pennsylvania? JH: Well I guess it was just the way they had set it up and ran it for all them years. And the steel mill had a bonus system and it was a really odd system the way they had things set up. And if you had used smaller tooling to get a job done then you would make more bonus so the guys was always trying to invent ways to make more bonus, you know. To make more money. And it was just, I mean, it was standard machine equipment, but it was just not up to the standards that we had at the time, you know. It was all pretty far back to the 40's and 50's, you know, just like- literally like walking back into a book. PS: What was it like working there? Like walk me through a day at the steel mill. JH: Ok, you'd clock in, go to the locker room and get changed into your work clothes. And you'd get a job, just depended on, you know, sometimes they had emergency jobs they - you had to get done. Then sometimes you just had follow up on a job that was already in progress or and you'd just- or you'd sometimes get a new job you'd have to get the print. They'd give you the print, you'd go find out how much material you needed, you'd go out and saw it and put it in the lay of the mill or whatever you had to do. And machine it and, you know, most of the time you'd you would follow it through till the end, it just depended on the size of the job. PS: So you worked in the shops and you were- so what was your responsibility as far as the overall picture? JH: My responsibility was to make and fabricate like crane axles. They had these things called crest tong bits that they picked up those slabs with. Boar crane wheels, boar locomotive wheels, make locomotive axles. Boar couplings to go on the end of motors and shaves that drive- a coupling would drive it and it 6  was set up so it would be a little flexible. So in case it didn't match perfect. We worked- we did- we machined these things called bottom rolls it went into the galvanized line where they coated the galvanized material and it was a big stainless steel roll that went down into the vat of molten zinc and the sheet would run around this and that's how it'd get coated with the galvanized. We would work on them just everything, work we did- work on electrical motors. Just whatever they needed. Sometimes we'd go out in the field, work on stuff just depended on what they needed. PS: So you were like a- you didn't work on a finished product you were working on support for the mill itself? JH: Yeah, yeah. We didn't work on the- we worked on the equipment that made the finished product. PS: Got you. JH: So like, you know, we'd work whatever our capability was. Some of the stuff was too big for us but most of the stuff, you know, like we worked on the overhead electric cranes. We'd worked on those crane wheels or the blocks and tackles that were on them. And the crane blocks or the drums, the electric motors for them, stuff like that. The fork trucks, we'd work on fork trucks parts, stuff of that nature. PS: So what- what was the biggest jobs you might have done there? JH: The biggest job I ever done there weighed 14 tons. It was a big bearing capsule for the hot strip. PS: So how would you handle a job that big? JH: We had 15 ton- no was it 15 or 20. We had a big crane, we had a big overhead crane that you would handle it with. Set it up on boarding mount with. PS: When you worked at the mill when you came back to Illinois the Granite City Steel Mill was behind the times. Did they ever update that at all? I mean it's been years now. JH: Yeah well I was there, I just kept asking them to get newer- some newer tooling and stuff of that nature. And we ended up getting a newer keys heater that was a lot better. Keys heater cuts keys ways and stuff, internal key ways. We got a boarding mill, half million-dollar boarding mill. And new saws. A nice bridgeport milling machine that had a digital readout on it, none of the lays had anything had any kind of electronics on it, you know. Everything was still from the - all these lays were from the 50's. PS: Uh huh JH: So. PS: So what was the- the digital allowed you to get more precise? JH: Yeah more accuracy, easier, you know. PS: So how'd you convince them that- I mean- cause you said before that bonus for using less tooling you get more money right? 7  JH: Yeah, well what happened was that they stopped that program and they went to a fixed bonus. So it made it more fair that way. So then, since we had a fixed bonus those guys wasn't pushing for that anymore. So we - that way it made it more fair so then, a lot of the old time guys wouldn't even still- use the digital read out. They would refuse to do because they- it was something new, you know. And they didn't want to do it but. PS: So what they would either what - they would pass that job to somebody else? JH: They'd pass it on or just not use it, you know, just do it the old way. Look at, count the dial revolutions, do it the old fashion way like they'd been doing it for 30 years, you know. PS: They contend it was better or they just? [Talking over each other] JH: They just weren't comfortable doing it. Cause when I hired in there there was probably 8 guys that were headed to retirement. So then we got a new group of guys in so everything was turning over so it made it better for- to, you know, get things updated and stuff of that nature. PS: So how did you go about getting- it seems like you were the driving force behind getting new stuff? JH: Well I was kind of, yeah I was kind of- I just kept asking and telling them if we had this we could do this, you know. We could do this better and we could get more jobs in because a lot of the jobs at the Steel Mill would get contracted out and we was always trying to fight to keep them in there. So we would have more work. Well to do more work you had to have more equipment, you had to have better equipment, you know, to compete with the outside people. PS: Yeah JH: So one time we did. We had a contest with Linhart Tool and I and ourselves and we beat LinhartTool. PS: So what was that contest like? JH: Well it was a big job, it was a big slab of steel that started out, I think it was 8 inches thick, 3 foot wide and we had to machine these slides out of it. But we ended up getting it done before Linhart. PS: Was that before the equipment upgrade or after? JH: That was after. PS: So this was about what year? JH: Oh my this was, probably 97, 96, 97. PS: So the Steel Mill had already contracted a job out to them and you just wanted to do it to prove to the bosses or? 8  JH: Well yeah we wanted to prove it we could handle it. And we did, we showed them that we could do it. PS: So you guys were trying to fight to get more work? JH: It was a constant fight to keep work in the shop- in the mill because it would get jobbed out. Which Linhart Tool and Dye is now out of business. PS: So you said that when you were there the mill like you never got laid off but there was kind of struggle to keep the work going? JH: Yeah. I mean to keep it in house, to keep it you know. Cause there's a lot of times they'd send the work out and then- they'd comeback in and it'd have to come back to our shop for us to remodify it because it wasn't right. PS: So they'd be paying the first contract and then paying you guys to fix it? JH: Yeah. PS: So when you were working at the mill your- you'd come in- you said you'd get emergency jobs. What might an emergency job be? JH: Oh if they had a crane down that would be like in the hot strip or in the coal strip or something that had a bad coupling or bad barring box for the wheels or something like that. And they needed it in a hurry and all. What would happen was is the bearings would go bad and they'd usually- by the time they found out there was nothing left. I mean it was in bad shape. So you know, the longer that stuff was down it was costing the Steel Mill quite a bit of money because of the time down you know- shut the stuff down. PS: So your job was to keep the mill running basically? JH: Kind of yeah, part of it, yeah. PS: Ok. So you worked there for over 12 years, why did you leave? JH: Because I got a chance to go to work for a company called Dow Jones and Company. They print the Wall Street Journal as a machinist there. And I was gonna make about 150 bucks more a week, so that's why. And it was a good job, it was in air conditioning. The Steel Mill was not air conditioned, I worked straight afternoons of 115 in there in the summertime so pretty hot. PS: Yeah. So ok, so part of it is increasing pay and better conditions. Do you- was the steel mill was it all bad or was it a positive experience to work there? JH: Oh it's a good place to work, it's a dangerous place to work. I worked in a shop and a lot of people worked out in the where the slabs are it and the coils and that. And when you'd go out of the shop boy you'd have to really keep watching because there was them big haul trucks and everything. And I mean you can get run over real easy. I mean they had machines that could pick up 400 tons of slabs up at one time, that's a lot of weight. A lot of weight. 9  PS: So do you- you moved to your new job, it was a safer better condition, better pay, did you like it better- is it a job? JH: I like it. It's a good job, I miss machining full time. This is more of a maintenance job where you repair and, you know, something breaks you repair it. And machine goes down you figure out why it went down, then you repair it. Ink line blows off or one of the ink pumps on the printing press goes bad you repair that. And then sometimes you have other things. And we fabricate stuff, guards, shields, make stuff like that. PS: You now work in more a maintenance base job. So what does your job entail now? JH: My job entails now is when I'm working afternoons when we're printing paper, to make sure the press stays running. Make sure the paper goes out the door, that's the main concern. Make sure that the equipment- if something breaks down get it fixed so we can keep going. That is the main what I do now. When I'm- then when I work days there I maintain the equipment. I do preventative maintenance, grease bearings, lubricate stuff, change filters, ah, stuff of that nature. Plus also there's also the department I'm in now also had buildings so sometimes I have to do building maintenance and plumbing, things of that nature, painting stuff, you know. Take care of the water, air, ink, stuff like that. PS: So you went from the steel industry which was doing ok when you left JH: Right PS: But has since had some tough times to the newspaper industry which is now entering into some tough times. What do you- why do you think that is- what do you think is affecting? JH: Well everything is going digital. So that is why they thought- they've been pushing real hard to go digital, which they have done a lot. But then they found out that a lot of people still want to read the paper, they want to hold the paper. They, you know, they don't want to look at it on the computer screen where they gotta scroll every time they wanna look at something instead of just opening the paper up and looking at the whole page and they can see whatever they wanna read and read it, ya know. And right now, the paper revenue is greater than the internet revenue. So that's another one of the reasons, they've downsized a lot things but it's still, you know, ah- the papers still we're still printing it so that's the main thing. Hopefully I can retire from there with that. PS: I mean how many years left do you have to go? JH: 8 years. PS: So you've been there now almost 12 years or 15 years? JH: 17 years. PS: 17 years ok. JH: Yeah 17 years in August. 10  PS: So what have you noticed in 17 years, you've worked there now more than you worked at the Steel Mill. JH: Right. PS: So what have you seen ah change in the industry? JH: Oh, a lot more the Wall Street Journal used to just black and white. And they had, what's it called, spot color a few adds. But now they've got a lot more color which generates them a lot more money because the color ads are more money. So that is one of the things because we put in a lot more bigger printer presses with more color capability to be able to print that color. So we can print more color than most of the newspaper in the general area. PS: So do you only print the Journal at your press? JH: Right. Right now we print the Journal and the Barrens. The Barrens is a weekly financial publication. PS: So in your life you went from working on a farm to you being in like the heart of industry to where now you got more of a- I mean still you work with your hands but it's more of a polished like a polished job. What are- when you look back at your working career what do you miss what have you learned? Like what the state of the steel mill industry now, what are your thoughts about? JH: Oh I think it's a shame. I do not agree with the politics of some of the things that have happened in the past, you know, because I'm not a big proponent of greenhouse stuff. So I really don't think, I think the Earth- everything revolves, you know, and changes after a while. It changes and it just repeats itself, and I think that them closing down the Steel Mill and getting all this foreign stuff in is really bad. But I know that the company I worked for was National Steel and right after I left it went bankrupt and US Steel bought it. PS: What year was that? JH: I left in ‘99 and I think US Steel took it over in 2001. And they changed things a whole lot. US Steel's like one of the biggest steel companies in the United States, maybe the world. But they changed things a lot but I know it seems like the steel industries, the whole time I worked there, you know, it's like it was a struggle. They was always having a struggle making money. But I don't know, you know. Granite City division always made money, it was the other two divisions in Indiana and up north that kind of drug us down. That's one thing I will say about any place I ever worked, in Madison County they're hard working people. They are- most of them have a good work ethic, and they can get the job done, you know. We always made - we always had a really good result at Granite City Steel. PS: So if you were- ok, we- we talked about your career a lot lets switch to your personal life. So you left for Pennsylvania cause you got married and that's where you wife was from. JH: Right PS: And then you guys came back, came back with one kid? 11  JH: With one child yeah, one child PS: So you came back and you went back to the Steel Mill, right? JH: Right. PS: So what was that like working- I- your dad you said worked a full time job and farmed. And now you're working a full-time job, you're workin' ... was it an 8 hour or 10 hour shift at the Steel Mill? JH: It, most of the time it was 8, sometimes I'd work 16. It just depended. PS: So you had one kid when you came back and then soon thereafter you had two more? JH: Right. PS: What was it like then, you know, you switched jobs to the- working at the press, right, it had better hours and stuff. Was it better for your family? JH: Well kinda it was but the only bad thing about working at Granite City Steel was is that I worked straight- straight afternoons or midnights. And I didn't like midnights. so I worked straight afternoons so the only time I really seen the kids was my days off or, you know, if I'd get up before they'd leave but yeah I worked 4-12 so I didn't always see them before they went to school. I mean it's a little more difficult that way when you work shifts work but that's just part of the industry. The job I have now I work days and afternoons and all my kids are grown so I don't see, you know, I see them whenever they come over and that. But I don't... But that's the only bad thing about you know industry is you gotta work off shift so that makes it a little harder on your family. That's about it on that. PS: And then you've been- you've had two significant injuries, right? You had an eye injury, was that soon after you came back to Illinois? JH: That was a couple years after I came back. That was actually helping my grandfather, we were putting logs- he had a sawmill and we were putting logs on a trailer and chaining them down. And the chain binder slipped and struck me in the eye. PS: Were you off work for that? JH: For 5 weeks. PS: And then you had an issue with was it your foot, your ankle? JH: My left ankle, yeah. I had to have it fused. PS: And so with that one there you were of work too, right? JH: Yeah I was off 9 months for that. It was pretty rough. 12  PS: So what was it like, cause you seem like a pretty hard working guy, worked your whole life, what was it like then to be off work for those extended periods of times? JH: well I'm very fortunate in the fact that the company I worked for has short-term disability. So on the 9-month deal, I got paid for 26 weeks of the 9 months. And then I was just kind of toughing it out for the last, you know, months. Then I finally got back to work. But it- it's tough when you don't, you know, don't have no income. PS: Yeah. Is- is your experience seem pretty normal, [mumbles] you've worked with a lot of people. Is that experience pretty normal to have that kind of safety net at your work or? JH: Nah, I wouldn't say so. You mean as far as the short term? PS: Mm-hmm. JH: Yeah, I mean the better jobs have it but some of - some places don't have it all. So you're, you know, it just depends. But I'm pretty fortunate to have. PS: Yeah. If you were at the Mill would you have had that? JH: Yeah they had a something on that order, but I can't remember exactly how long it was for. They had some form of a short-term disability. PS: So then you've raised your kids in the same county, different school district, right? JH: Bethalto, yeah. PS: So how's that like, mean it's been many years in between there. But you grew up in the county and you've raised your family in the county, is- was that a conscious choice or just kind of happen that way? JH: Well I wanted to stay around close to my mom and dad area. I mean- it just kind of happened that way. I thought about trying to get the kids in the Edwardsville School District but it just didn't work out that way. I found a house in- outside of Bethalto, which is in Bethalto School District. So that's what I ended up doing. Which, all of my, two of the three kids didn't have any problems. But one of them, he, my boy, he had a little bit of trouble but for the most part, it worked out pretty good, I mean. But I have two other girls and they- they didn't have any trouble like my son had but it worked out. I mean, we got it done so, it seemed like it worked out ok. PS: Mm-hmm. Do you think, you know, have the schools changed a lot since you went through? JH: Oh yeah. PS: And how have they changed? JH: Well the schools, all the schools have got away from the more of the blue-collar stuff and they're leaning more towards the white collar stuff. But you have to have blue collar, I mean cause a computer can't fix everything, a computer can't fix itself if it physically breaks down. So I mean, you gotta have the 13  blue collar stuff which the school stopped doing that kind of stuff and it's kind- I think it's bad. I think our country's in a shortage right now with that stuff. And, you know, I think that that is one of the things that has changed lots since I was there. And I wish they would reinstate it but I don't know what, you know, will happen there. PS: Because your whole career launched off your shop classes? JH: Yeah. My senior year I only had- my senior year my whole time I was in shop except for one half semester which was consumer economics, I had to take that. But the rest of the time it was shop classes and I was also shop assistant teacher, you- they had a program were you get a credit for helping the teacher with the other kids. So I did that for my junior and senior years I did that for two teachers. PS: And you graduated back in uh- JH: 1978. PS: Ok so your kids went to school in what decade roughly? JH: Boy. You ask me a hard question. [laughs] What, in the 2000s? PS: Ok JH: Yeah I guess. PS: So about twenty almost- 25-year gap there? JH: Yeah, oh yeah. PS: And you think that you've observed that shift away from shop and trade-based classes, they switched more to the higher ed Edwardsville stuff? JH: Yeah, computer stuff. Which a lot- you know, most everything is computerized now but you still got to have some mechanical stuff in there. I mean I think it would be a good option for people to have if, you know, not everybody's a computer genius, ya know? [laughs] PS: So you've raised your kids in the county and now your kids raising grandkids in the county. JH: Right. PS: Do you- see how much it's changed so far do you, I mean, looking back it's a good to keep raising family? JH: I think it's a good area. I like Madison County, I mean I grew up here and I, it seems to be like a pretty stable place to raise people. There's not a lot of crime. And it's a good area, it's a big area. But I think that it's a great place to raise kids because you know everything is pretty laid back and not a lot of crime or anything. I mean you're going to have that in some respects everywhere but, you know, not like it is over in Missouri. 14  PS: Mm-hmm. So besides like from work and family you've been a part of the community for a long time. I mean particularly you're involved with the Bethalto Homecoming. What part have you played in that? JH: Our church made- started back in it's over 30 years, we started making ice cream. When they started out it was making it from scratch. And then they started out and then we got a chance to buy some five- gallon ice cream mixtures from Meadowbrook Fire Department. We bought them and we started doing it that way and we just been selling homemade ice cream and cobbler up at the Bethalto Homecoming for 30 something years. And me and my wife are a big part of that for a long time. PS: So being part of that, like that one- you know year after year you kind of watched that whole thing kind of change and evolve. Like what are some of your earliest memories of the homecoming? JH: Back when I was 18 we would go up there, I can't even remember what we were selling, I mean things have changed a lot, there used to be a lot more crafts and stuff up there, you know. And stuff like that, more like homemade stuff that you could go and demonstrations of different things. Wood splitters and just pots and pans. Just all kinds of things were all that's kind of phased out now. And it's all just mostly food stands and the carnival stuff. And just for, just the celebration for people to get together from what they started years ago. PS: So the, you guys make, it's a homemade ice cream? JH: Well by law you can't- we can't make it anymore, you know. So we buy the mix Prairie Farms and we make it in the 5 gallon ice cream mixers. And then we premake it, and then we freeze and then we serve it up there. And then we buy cobblers and make them as- because of Madison County health code. And bake them and then we serve them with the ice cream. PS: Do you feel like that's a, you know, it's a homemade process ice cream. JH: Yeah right. PS: Is that- is that an important thing- that old-fashioned feel to it? JH: I think it does. People love it, they come back up there for it, just for that. I, you know, it brings back old times of what people used to do. Cause some people, some kids nowadays haven't seen an ice cream mixer, they don't even know how the salt and ice reaction works to make ice cream. PS: How does that work? JH: Well when you put salt on ice it lowers the temperature to 19 degrees. There giving you a quicker freezing action than if you just used regular ice in the mixer. It makes a saltwater solution, and it freezes the ice cream quicker. PS: And these mixers you guys use, what kind- are these just standard mixers or are they something special? 15  JH: Well they're kind of special because they're White Mountain 5 gallon. I estimate that the original ones were probably 40 or 50 years old, maybe older. They're quite large and they're just- they're quite expensive to buy a new one now. So if you gotta buy a new one you lay out some money. PS: These are hand power? How are they operated? JH: They are motorized. They have been motorized. You can crank them by hand if you have the willpower to, but that's- we have motors on them and gearboxes. and then that way it gets things going a lot ‘cause we make- we make 250 gallons so that's a quite a bit of hand cranking. [laughing] PS: Now they came that way or did you have to? JH: They came motorized, just modified them. So. PS: So that's where your machine comes into play, even though you don't do that at your job now. You still- JH: Yeah I still, I have equipment at home I can use to modify stuff or fabricate whatever I want mostly. PS: So what are your biggest memories of just life here, like if you were to talk about living in the county to someone whose never been here what are the biggest things that stand out to you? JH: Oh just this is a nice area to live. It's ah its farmland, most of it, ya know. Nice little towns. It's flat out here, that's for sure after living in Pennsylvania. Man, I didn't it was very flat out here until I went out there and then I realized you can see where you're going out here, where you can't out there. But, you know, they have the fairs and the things like that and they're always enjoyable to go to. And I like to go to the tractor shows and stuff like that. Just nice area to live in I think. And I don't really, I mean, I grew up here and I just like living here. I mean that's just, I moved to the house I grew up in when I was 6 months old. So I lived there 20, well I lived there 18 years and then we moved off the farm when I was like 18 or 19. And then we moved across the road a built the house over there. But it's always been, you know, a pretty good place. So I always enjoyed Madison County. PS: So you mentioned earlier that a lot of people here they're hard-working people. How do think those people have responded to the crisis in the past, like the flood of '93? JH: It seemed like they really pulled together. Pulled together and took care of each other. I mean, we were - I was fortunate, I didn't have anything, I didn't live in a flood zone so I didn't have to worry about it. But a lot of the people that did, seems like they helped each other. People, they're resilient after a flood, they seem like they clean it up and rebuild it and get back to it until we have the next one. PS: So you, now that you're an adult you got a little more money in your pocket, what are the things that you have done for fun since, you know, leaving the farm behind? You've got a little more space. JH: Oh we travel. Me and my wife from Pennsylvania so we travel there once a year at least, maybe twice. Or up to Maine, we enjoy that. Work in my shop, I have a wood shop metal shop. I enjoy that. And 16  then, of course, the grandkids. We have grandkids, we love them and try to spend time with them when we can. PS: Do you remember your own grandparents? JH: Oh, yeah. Yup, I sure do. One grandfather lived till he was 94, didn't retire from farming until he was 85. And they were all wonderful people and I, you know, I can really say that I enjoyed them quite a bit. PS: So you're one grandfather was a farmer, what was your other grandfather, what's his job? JH: He was a millwright. PS: What's that? JH: A millwright, like a machinist, makes the part, the mill ride puts it together. PS: Oh ok. JH: Or, there are different classes of millwrights. There are some that do like work on bridges, put in pilings, do a lot, millwright is a very diverse person. So they do a lot of stuff like that. PS: So what- he lived here in the county as well? JH: He actually lived up in Jersey County, I think. I think he lived right over the border. PS: So he had more of a technical job, and your other grandfather lived nearby- he's the grandfather you'd help on his farm? JH: Yeah. Right. Yeah. I mean the farm life, you know, they had 40 milk cows, 2000 chickens, 600 acres they farmed. So they were quite busy. PS: That was your dad's dad? JH: Pardon? PS: No I'm sorry, that was your dad's dad? JH: Mo, that was my mother's dad. PS: Oh your mother's dad. Ok. JH: Yeah you know, cause you got to milk cows twice a day and you gotta gather eggs from chickens twice a day so. It can be quite- quite taxing, you know. PS: Did they ever hire any help or was it just family? JH: It was just my grandfather and his son. And then my grandpa's son-in-laws and grandkids would help. When they needed extra. 17  PS: So what happened to them, when he retired from farming did someone else take it over? JH: Yeah. He had rented the farm for 45 years. And one of the big farmers when my grandpa retired, then one of the big farmers took it over. PS: So he didn't own his own farm, he rented it? JH: He rented it also. Well the back- the terms we had, like on our farm it was a 300 acre it was 250 dollars a year and a third of the crop. That was to live in the house and farm the land, you know. That was like a sharecropper almost. PS: Yeah. JH: Which nowadays is totally unheard of. You know, you wouldn't- nobody does that anymore I don't think. PS: So is that, would you say that was a, you know, you're living on the farm and you pay for that privilege with part of the crop. What would happen if you had a bad year? JH: Well everybody lost out, sort of. I mean, most of the time it panned out, ya know, cause you'd get two-thirds, they'd get a third. And hopefully, it worked out for you. But there were times, like whenever we had to do bottom land it didn't work out too good. So, you know, that's just the year that they didn't make out so good. PS: Did, do you ever have any dealings with the owner of the land? JH: No, the owner- the people actually owned the whole parcel of property, which is I think 600 acres. These people were wealthy, and they owned- so they had, back in the day, they would come down and visit. But they after they all got older, they had a bank man do it. PS: Ok. So you'd have to, would you literally give them the crop or did you'd have to take it to market and sell? JH: You took it to market and sold it and they just got a check, we sent it right to them. PS: Oh okay. Is that- was that a nice way to live, you think? Was it a simple way to live to pay for it that way at the end of the year, end of the harvest? JH: Yeah, I mean, that was, you just basic- you know, 250 dollars a year to live in the house. And then a third of the crop off a 140 acres, I mean that's that's a great way to live I think. I mean, compared to nowadays it's really something. PS: So do you-you had a busy childhood working on the farm but do you think your life now is any less busy? JH: No, my life's more busy now because I got a regular day job and work all shifts and that. I mean, you know, the farm life it's a great life. You work hard but then you also have slack times sometimes, you 18  know, in-between crops and stuff like that, that you don't have to be, you know. You get your daily chores if you got animals and stuff like that. But where, you know, you got like a regular everyday job you gotta go there five days a week and do it. So that- I think it's a little busier cause were the farm life, you know, you do everything you do at a regular house but then you'd have your animals to take care of. And you, you know, your crop to tend to. And you know, if you had wheat you had to get it in. and if you wanted bedding for your animals you had to bail the straw from the wheat and then the beans, you know. And then, the growing season has changed some too because whenever we used to have to wait for the ground to freeze sometimes to get the corn out. Were now the- genetics has changed the corn to shorter season corn. So they can get it out earlier. PS: So your corn you'd plant it when? JH: We'd plant it in spring. PS: You'd harvest as late as, what, October November? JH: Sometimes December. PS: Really? JH: Yeah. Yeah. you know, we was talking- my son was telling me we were talking about harvesting crops one day and I said yeah we didn't have a cab on our combine, we didn't have a cab on anything. And he said you're kidding me and I said no, I said you'd sit there in the bean dust and wheat dust, corn isn't so bad but the- everything used to be open, you know. There was caps on stuff, that was a luxury. PS: But you had mechanized equipment? JH: Yeah we had mechanized equipment, we had a combine, we had a corn picker before we had a combine. But then we had a combine, so. PS: Did you own your combine, or did you have to lease it? JH: No we owned it. We farmed with older equipment. I think some tractor was from 1950. Other tractor was from 1960 and the combine was probably from '62. Because you buy it, you get it, and you just take care of it and fix it as you needed. That's another thing, a farmer's mechanic also- well some farmers are, some farmers aren't. I mean, it depends, on the older equipment you just, if you could you'd just repair it yourself some people couldn't so they'd have to hire it. PS: Right. Is that part of where your love for machinery came from? JH: Yeah I guess. I just love- I just like machinery and working with my hands and fixing stuff and... stuff like that PS: Are you in charge of repairing equipment on the farm? JH: No my dad did it most of the time. I mean, when I got older, I helped him but then we were off the farm by the time I was 18. But I've always- I'd help when I could. 19  PS: And you've been around for over 50 years now, so you've seen lots of changes and technology and such. Looking back at life and what technology you grew up with, do you think we're better off now? JH: In some ways I do, in some ways I don't. Because if anything ever happens to this country that the computers crash, everything is run by computer now. The printing press I work on is run by computer. Most of the time when it goes down it's a computer glitch or a computer problem. I- back when I was a kid, we had one phone in the house and that's how, you know, we didn't have to be in constant contact with everybody all the time. So I don't know, I think it's good in some ways and not so good in others, ya know. But- PS: Do you think it's, you know, that kind of technology has some- increased a sense of community or folks know more people or do you think back in the day when you had to be a little more interdependent and rely on your neighbors? JH: Oh I'm sure people know more people from being on the computer and that. I think that we're over sensitized because everybody tells everything they do now, which is not always a good thing. Things were more private when I was your age, you know. Things were more personal, and you didn't tell everybody everything, you know. So that's why I don't think it- I think it's good in some ways and not good in others. But you know that's technology that we live with right now so we will see what happens with it. PS: You use technology yourself, right? JH: Yeah I have a cell phone and a tablet and. PS: And you grew up in the era of telephones and letter writing? JH: Right, yeah. That's- I would call, when my wife lived in Pennsylvania, I called her and wrote her letters. But that's what I did because I didn't call her very often because the phone long distance was high. So, you know. PS: So you wrote letters? JH: I wrote letters. PS: How long did you guys do that for? JH: 6 or 8 months. PS: Before you got married? JH: No, before we met. PS: Oh ok, so you met through writing letters? JH: Yeah, we were pen pals. We met through a mutual friend and then we started writing. We were pen pals for a while. 20  PS: So you think that we're missing out on something by not using [mumbles] JH: Well it's a slower time back when I was, you know, everything is so fast now. Everything is instant, people want everything instant. And I just don't think that it's the greatest thing all the time. Our worlds move pretty fast, every things in a hurry so. PS: Is that always a bad thing or is? JH: Well, I mean it just depends on what it is. I mean, people lose their patience pretty fast anymore nowadays. And I think we need to have more patience and stay with the older values of things. Instead of everything being just, you know, just because I don't want to do this or that I should be able to do it, you know. There's right and wrong and everything, and I just I feel like the computer internet and all that stuff, it's nice I mean but it's going to take us down a different road than what we're used to. PS: So do you think that the next 50 years for Madison County are going to look anything like the 50 years you've been through so far? JH: Well I think it's going to change quite a bit more, but it just depends. I mean, it may not change a lot. I mean things kind of leveled out now. I mean you got to figure the past from 1900 to 2000, that 100 years was one of the most progressive years in, you know, technology and that. I mean by grandpa was born in 1906, in Madison County and he started farming with horses and he went to, and when he retired, he was farming, he was using one of the newest combines on the market. I mean, he went from horses to mechanized, total mechanization with a cab and air conditioning and a radio, I mean. That's the thing, I mean, things have- cars and everything is computer based now so we'll just see what happens. And see what, you know, happens in the county and see how things go. PS: Alright. So you've lived most your life in the county, what are the- think back to your childhood, your teenage years, and coming back as an adult from Pennsylvania, what do you thinks the biggest changes to the county? JH: More modern roads. You know, the roads we used to live on was oil roads. Now them are most concrete. Of course, higher taxes. PS: Are the roads worth the higher taxes? JH: Yeah, for the most part I mean they are. I mean Illinois itself is not doing very good right now, which I don't know if it's misappropriation of funds or bad management or what it is but I would say we need to change some things up there but that's another story. PS: Well Jeff I just wanted to thank you for your time today. JH: You're welcome, it was privilege talking to you. 21 
MadisonCounty;Sally Burgess;1954;2016;Sally Burgess 1954 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Sally Burgess-Griffin Oral History Interview Scarlett Kitchens, Interviewer Studio Gaia, Edwardsville, Illinois October 13, 2016 Scarlett Kitchens (SK): Scarlett Kitchens interviewing Sally Burgess, the executive director of the Hope Clinic, in October of 2016. So, to start, I do want to know about your background, your education, where you're from, stuff like that. Sally Burgess (SB): Ok. The correct pronunciation of my name is Burgess. SK: Ok. That's a good start. SB: It's fine. [laughter] So, Sally Burgess. I got my B.S. in occupational guidance from Mesa State University in Grand Junction, Colorado and I got my M.B.A. Fontbonne University in St. Louis, and took a couple of semesters of masters of public health in P.h. at SLU but ran out of steam so I didn't finish the M.Ph. And my background prior to getting into abortion care, I actually, out of college, got into the media, so I was in TV and radio news for almost a decade, and then I was hired to be the director of the Hope Clinic for Wom- um, sorry we're talking about that. Uh, the Utah Women's Health Center in Salt Lake City, Utah. So, I moved from Grand Junction, Colorado to Salt Lake to take over that job and I was only there for about a year and I was contacted by the owner of Hope Clinic and asked if I would be interested in applying for the job of Director of Hope Clinic and I had no intention of moving to the Midwest, but it sounded like exactly the job I was hoping for. So, I thought I'd come out here for a few years and see what that was like. Um, accepted the job and took over as director in April of 1990. So, 26 years ago. SK: Ok, wow. Um, what made you interested in the Hope Clinic? You said it was what you were looking for. SB: Well, my first job in this field was actually as a part-time counselor at the Grand Junction Women's Clinic, which was owned by the same people who owned the Utah Women's Health Center. So, when I was in the media, I made really poor money and I needed to make some additional money and I found a job as a part-time counselor at the local clinic. Loved the work. Absolutely loved working with the patients in that particular environment, we did a little bit of everything. So, you would counsel your patient, you would likely do their lab work, you would be with them in the operating room, then you would be with them in recovery, and so that's an amazing relationship to develop with people who are in this situation. So, I absolutely fell in love with the work and was disenfranchised--or disillusioned--with a lot of what happens in the media. There was some things that I loved about the media and other things that didn't suit me at all. So, when the Utah Women's Health Center needed to replace their director, their director at the time knew me, and they contacted me to see if I would want to interview for that job and I did. At that particular point, I got the job, I moved to Salt Lake, loved the experience except that there were some internal politics that made it difficult for 1  me to really make an impact so I used that job. I just learned a ton. I just went through the files and I saw how things were organized and learned as much as I could about the field and how my predecessor had put things together because she was an amazing, amazing director. So, when Hope Clinic called, it was almost like I'd done the on-the-job training at the Utah Women's Health Center and I was ready to hit the ground running when I got out here. SK: Ok. So, at the Hope Clinic then, since you've been there, have you been held as...I think you said were held as the director the whole time, right? That's what you got hired for? SB: Yeah. I was hired as director and one of the co-owners was still alive at that point. She was the executive director when she died of cancer and after that happened, I got the promotion to executive director, so I was in the top Physician and I held that position until 2013. I stepped away from the day- to-day responsibilities of Hope Clinic in December 2013. SK: Ok. Um, so, I'm trying to process all of this now. So, what has your job then been? Like, what do you have to do, whether it was closer to then or now? SB: So, at the Hope Clinic? SK: Mhm. SB: When I first got there, they had a lot of things in place, in terms of their policies and protocols and it wasn't as heavily...um... as heavily weighted in terms of...um...medical regulations. That's not exactly the way I want to say it, but we had our physicians on board and we complied with state regulations and we were part of the national abortion federation that also had some policies and protocols in place, so we needed to comply with all of those things. There wasn't as much of the medical bureaucracy around abortion care that there was other health care at that point in time. So I was well-qualified for the position since it had a ton to do with finding out the strengths that the various staff members brought to the table and making the most of that, leading the team, ensuring excellent patient care, making sure the staff was happy and the patients were well taken care of, making sure we were in compliance with state and any national regs, you know any regulations that apply to us, dealing with the media, dealing with law enforcement because when you're in that field, you're going to have relationships with the FBI and the local police department and the federal marshals and all of that, working directly with the owner to make sure that the way they wanted things to roll out was the way we were doing it, and then ultimately, the building that we were in when I got there was a small building that we were outgrowing and it wasn't serving us well, and so a huge part of my job became doing the work needed to determine that we needed to build a new building, working with the owner to set a budget and then hiring the architect and getting all that put into place and then overseeing the project. And so, I don't know if you've ever been to Hope Clinic but it's in a big, lovely building and that was kind of my baby when I was there. I got to see that through from start to finish. SK: So, is the Hope Clinic solely based on going there for abortions or is it just women's health? What do they offer? SB: The owner of Hope Clinic was a physician who lived in Peru for the first many years of his life and he knew that in the hospitals in Peru, women were dying of botched abortions and in Peru, there 2  would be like 2 or 3 women in one hospital bed. So what he was was deplorable. When he came to the United States to do his residency, he just felt a huge commitment to making sure that, if in fact, it became legal in this country, because it was not when he first got here, if in fact abortion care became legal in this country, he was going to provide safe abortion care because he knew what it looked like when it wasn't safe. And so, Hope Clinic has always been proud of and focused on providing top-notch abortion care and they started doing the earlier procedures and then worked with the state to get permission to do later procedures. There is a need, at time, for the later procedures, so they just kept pushing the envelope. How do we make the care better? How do we make sure we're extending the care to the patients who need it? So Hope Clinic has always been laser focused on providing abortion care. SK: Ok and this is where my history is off. I remember hearing the date or the year. When did abortion become legal in the United States? SB: 1973. SK: And then when did the Hope Clinic come out? SB: 1974 SK: So, he really was on it right away. He really cared. SB: Mhm SK: Ok. That was fast, wow. And then, later on, after doing research, I did find that there were certain issues across the United States, beyond just the Hope Clinic of dangers being posed to people who worked or went abortion clinics. I found stuff on bombings. I think one was in 1982 and there was something you had said about that about raising security around the Hope Clinic in Granite City. Did anything, like can you talk about that a little bit? SB: Before I arrived and I believe 1982 is the correct year, it was a really rough year at Hope Clinic. Um, the early--I think it was early in the year that the clinic was bombed and about thirty percent of the building was pretty well destroyed, and so they had to figure out how to very quickly get that taken care of so they could resume seeing patients. The phones never stopped ringing, they just um--they were put out of commission for a while. Later that year, I believe it was in the summer, the owner of the clinic and his wife at that time were kidnapped from their home and they were held at gunpoint by anti-abortion zealots for about a week and then they were released unharmed. Eventually, I think, there were three men who were the perpetrators and eventually all three of them went to prison and I believe they have all three gotten out of prison by now. SK: And that was the doctor from the Hope Clinic? SB: Yes. SK: Ok. What did you say, that he was the lead physician at the time? Or..? 3  SB: He was the owner... SK: The owner. SB: ...and lead physician. Yes. SK: Ok and, so did security go up after that or was it... SB: Yes. SK: How? SB: Um, they made sure that there were no windows you had to be--we had a security guard sitting at the--armed security guard sitting at the front door so nobody, including the patients could come in without being on the patient list and getting passed the security guard and then there was bullet-resistant material in the inner-door, so that if somebody happened to get into the lobby, they couldn't come in the rest of the way without being buzzed in. Um, in that building, it was challenging to make it as safe as they would want it to be--just given the structure of the building  but they did everything they could to ramp up security right away. SK: Did that doctor come back to work? SB: He did. He was released by the kidnappers--I'm not sure what the day was--and I think it was two or three days and he was back to work. SK: Wow. SB: Yeah. SK: I feel like if it were me, I would probably be a little scared to go back for a while. SB: He was terrified to go back because at that point the people who did the kidnapping had not been brought into custody and so he didn't know what to expect, but he was just so determined. SK: Ok. So, then, beyond that, was that at the old building then? SB: Yeah, that was the old building. SK: Has security been the same way with the new building or..? SB: The new building we got to design with security in mind and so we met with the architects--we actually had the architects come to the clinic on a Saturday when we were surrounded by protesters and took them outside and said, "this is what we deal with on a regular basis. This is what you need to protect us from." And, so in the new building, we were able to, first of all, have windows, which was really wonderful after years of having zero windows. All the windows are on the second level. They're all bullet-resistant glass. Um, there's a little attached...um... security room and that--you have to get into the attached security area to be able to access the roof because one of the things anti-abortion zealots 4  were doing back then was getting on the roofs of clinics and pouring butyric acid or other chemicals and things in the heating and air conditioning units. They were doing anything they could to knock the clinics out of commission and so you had to go through that to get to the ladder to even get up to the access, to access the roof. Um, we have doors that lock in two or three different ways, like we don't have the same kind of lock on every door, and we have doors that separate one area from the next area so if anybody was able to get in to the clinic, they couldn't get very far. So, yeah, we designed the clinic specifically to provide maximum level of security for the physicians, also for the staff and then as much as we could for the patients as well. SK: Yeah, sounds like it would be better for the patients because, like if I were in that position, I would feel kind of more off-set by going into a place with no windows, already like feeling dark about it and then doing that, so I mean, I bet the windows make them feel a little bit better. SB: Yeah, they made a very nice difference. SK: Yeah. Uh, so then with the...so, I was reading, because you were saying the protesters being outside. I don't know if it was this clinic, but it was something about a van that's normally outside and it's there on a regular basis, if it's not every day. I don't know if it was in the past. Is it the Hope Clinic, that it's there? SB: That would be Angela and Daniel Michael from Highland. They made it their lives' work to come to the clinic. They were there when we were at the old building and the old building, on Saturday mornings we have, like a six-foot or higher fence that we would close off wherever we could to give the patients some barrier between the parking lot and the protesters, but the protesters would do things like, you know, get right in the patients face or get right in the face of the person bringing the patient and typically partners, parents and partners do not do well with somebody getting in their face when they're there to take care of their patient. And so there would be altercations and the protesters would call the police on the patients and it was just crazy. So, yeah, they have their van and as far as I know, they still bring their van to the clinic-- I'm not there on a daily basis now. And they actually at one point--I'm not sure if they're still doing it--but at one point, got a hold of an old ultrasound machine and if they could, they would lure patients into their van to get an ultrasound and then they would, you know talk to them about, "you don't want to go in there," blah blah blah. But, yes, that uh--I know exactly who you're talking about. SK: Yeah, I remember reading that--yeah that--I forgot about the ultrasound thing, but they would bring them in, they do that and give a whole spiel on, from what people said, that "oh, well this is a life. Do you really want to do this? You can have this option." And I also read that they would hand out pamphlets... SB: Yes. SK: ...even to people just kind of walking around the area, not so much going into it, which I found really interesting. Um, but I didn't know they were actually going up and screaming in peoples' faces at all, like I didn't... SB: Oh my goodness, yes. 5  SK: I mean I could imagine, but, I mean, I never really thought that. SB: So, there is a program that has been offered through Missouri NARAL. I forget what NARAL stands for these days, they changed it a few years ago. National Abortion Rights Action League was the name a few years ago, but Missouri NARAL trains people to be patient escorts and when the escorts show up at the clinic, typically on Saturday morning, or other times during the week if there's expected to be higher level of protesting. The escorts put on a very brightly colored vest and it says "escort" on it and the patients know that when they pull up, people wearing these bright vests are going to approach their cars so that the escorts can surround the patients and provide a buffer between the patients and the protesters. SK: Mhm. SB: Because the protesters, if they can get right up on the patient, they would absolutely do that. SK: Have the protests been large? Like, how many people normally show up? Is it just like the few people, like the husband and wife, I assume that's what they are? Or is it up to twenty or thirty people that are surrounding the place? SB: I can't tell you what is going on currently, I can tell you that during most of my tenure at the clinic, on Saturdays we would have a minimum of twenty or thirty people. And often, buses would show up and a bus load full of people would join the regular protesters. Angela and Daniel were typically there with their kids, so they would have five or six kids there. They would also advise the kids to run up and try to come into contact with the patients. Um, we would literally be surrounded by protesters and it happened on a regular basis, typically once or twice a year, there would be some sort of national effort from the anti-abortion folks to surround certain clinics and ours was certainly a target of that. So, um, boy I'm forgetting the names of some of these people, but protesting was a huge issue for us. SK: So back to the security with the protests, another thing that I had read was uh-- after the bombings and stuff, it was requested to just have more of a police presence beyond the security of the building. They said that it wasn't even that they had to do it, it's that a lot of them chose to do it and that they would just drive by. Has that made a difference or have they come in to make sure everything is ok and does that make a difference? SB: Um, the police, at the time I was at the clinic, knew that Saturdays were going to be hot and typically did make their presence known on a regular basis and I think that was very helpful. The protesters didn't hesitate to harass the police if the police were called to the clinic. We made every effort to be a good neighbor and not call the police unless we felt it was absolutely necessary and we had armed security guards. SK: Yeah. So, I want to go more into the history of the clinic itself again. Um, or more in depth. So, I have the mission statement and I was reading into more and the last sentence of it says, "Hope Clinic is committed to providing the highest quality medical and emotional care with dignity and compassion." How so, with the emotional care? Because if they come--like do you provide anything else besides them coming in and doing the procedure and leaving or what do you do on an emotional stance? 6  SB: I am very proud to say that a patient can come to Hope Clinic and leave without having a procedure, but she very likely is not going to leave without having one-on-one counseling session. Hope Clinic is actually nationally and somewhat internationally known for our counseling program. A previous staff member, by the name of Anne Baker, wrote one of the first books on counseling. It was actually a book that we used at the Grand Junction Women's Clinic when I first got into the field. That was my training manual that was written by Anne Baker from Hope Clinic and she, I think she updated that book a couple of times. So, she was a regular speaker at national conferences, training people how to do counseling  and at the Hope Clinic, if you visit our building, the new bigger building that we have now, there's an entire wing that has counseling offices, specifically so patients can talk to someone who will be completely be nonjudgmental and no bias and find out what is going on with them, make sure that it is their decision/that they’re not being coerced in anyway. Um, I mentioned that I started as counselor, a part-time counselor, at Grand Junction Women's Clinic and I was working with a patient one day, only to learn that she had been told that she and her partner really wanted to continue her pregnancy, but she had been told by another provider, that due to some pre-existing conditions, she probably couldn't carry the pregnancy to term. So, I asked her if she would like to have a second opinion from our physicians, our physicians are are OBGYN doctors, and our physician met with this patient and said, "here are the risks, but very likely, you have a higher percentage of being able to carry to term than there being problems. If there are problems, here's what they're going to be," and that woman left and contacted us some months later after she had a healthy baby and that is what happens in counseling at abortion clinics. We find out if the patient is really care about her decision and if there's any, any information she needs to make the decision and feel really comfortable with it, and if it's not the decision she wants to make, we see if we can help her go in the direction that she really wants to go. SK: Ok. So it's not just go in, get it done and leave, which is good. Um, has that-- has your counseling or that process changed over the years, like when you first started? Or when it first opened, which would have been before you got there, did they still have a high counseling protocol or did that get more influenced and used later on? SB: Um, my understanding is that counseling was the key component of Hope Clinic very early on and once Anne Baker arrived on the scene, she really fully-developed that program. Frankly, counseling is very much iatrical part of what Hope Clinic offers now, but the sessions aren't necessarily as intense as they once were simply because we know more about abortion care, we know more about um where women are at in their lives and women are in a very different place. Women of child-bearing age today are in a very different place in their lives than fifteen, twenty, thirty years ago. SK: Yeah. SB: Does that make sense? SK: Yeah. So, then, going into the straight abortion, and this would be for anyone listening, beyond just the historical part. I mean, I'm not too familiar with it, but I know there are certain ways that it can be done. Do you offer every way that it can be done or are there certain...certain ways you do it for certain points in the term of the pregnancy? SB: Yes. Um, the options have expanded in the past several years and that would include a medical 7  abortion for earlier pregnancies, which means a woman takes a series of different pills and typically can have the abortion or spontaneous miscarriage or induced miscarriage in the privacy of her own home. So, that's a medical abortion, that's available these days that didn't used to be. There are various medications that allow procedures to happen with less instrumentation that we did for a number of years. The main procedure that any clinic has ever done would be the first trimester procedure. That's the majority of our patients and the typical method would be dilating the cervix manually with a series of smooth metal rods and so it would be a small one, a large one, and the large one would get the cervix dilated to the extent it needed to be and the evacuation of the pregnancy would happen. There are medications available now that soften the cervix and it is more prepared for the procedure so there's less instrumentation in many cases. And then there are the second trimester procedures that require typically more than one day. There is a medical...uh... don’t even know how to name this, it’s a product that is called luminaria. It is very thin and you can take a few luminaria and insert them into the cervix and it’s gonna absorb the moisture of the woman’s body and expand, and that gets the dilation procedure started for the later abortions. That might happen over two days and the procedure might happen on the third day. It really depends on the woman, how many pregnancies she’s had, the condition her cervix is in and the physician is able to access all that. Additionally, early on, abortions were not provided under the guidance of ultrasound, and I think these days, virtually all procedures are guided by ultrasound. SK: Ok, so has...over the years then, have you offered as many ways as you possibly could and then just adding them as they come along with medical advances or did you just...do they kind of pick and choose with the doctors there or directors there approve of? I guess you'd say. SB: Yeah, typically the directors would only weigh in if they gathered information from a colleague that a colleague was trying a new way and then it would be the physician who make (?) decision about that. And when you think about it, when abortion care first became legal, there had only been illegal abortions, there had been very few legal abortions, right? SK: Mhm. SB: And so, it wasn't a very well-developed medical procedure. Most abortion providers learned by doing and took that experience and figured out themselves how to advance the field and there have been, all along, there have been those medical providers who just were so committed to providing safe abortion care that they were constantly figuring out what medications can we use, what instrumentation can we use, what can we take out of the picture. So, the medical advances happened amongst the providers themselves. They were the ones who were pushing the envelope because they knew it needed to happen: self-educating. And as one provider would discover a new way of doing the procedure or a way of doing the procedure a little farther in the pregnancy, then typically that information would be shared with other providers. That's how the options grew. SK: Ok. So, then, it would be like a "yeah" to the Hope Clinic trying to have as many options as possible. Do the women choose their options? Obviously based on what term they're in, it seems like they have a few options for each one. Do they choose or do they, do the doctors choose based on what they think is best for their pregnancy? 8  SB: There are certain qualifications that would make a woman a good candidate for medical abortion and there are certain things that would make her not a good candidate for a medical abortion, so there is going to be some medical history that is going to come into play. Anytime the woman has the ability to make the decision, we want it to go that way, so if she could just as easily have a medical abortion or surgical abortion, we really want to make sure she's making the choice that she feels most comfortable with. When it comes to the later pregnancies, typically that’s going to be the medical provider. Typically they have fewer options at that point and the risks are greater and so, typically we're going to--I think abortion providers have done the best job over the years of informed consent and letting the woman know "here's what we're gonna do, here's how its gonna go, step by step by step, here are the specific medications, here are the specific risks, etc. and, you know, here's the outcome that we're looking for." So, typically when you get to the later cases, the physician is gonna need to make that decision. [Interview interrupted by phone call and customers from 32:23 to 34:10] 9  SK: Ok, so back to what we were talking about...um, after the abortion, like I've known people who have done it, and even after, they have a big emotional toll on them, do you offer counseling even continuing after they do it? SB: Um, typically we make sure a woman has resources before she leaves the clinic. So, the clinic isn't really set up to do counts--at this particular point in time, the clinic isn't set up to do counseling post-abortion, but there are people in the community and certainly in the country who do offer that specifically and so, we're always looking to make sure that the woman has those resources when she leaves the clinic. SK: Ok, so instead of doing it for them, you just prepare it then? ...Like you prepare them for it with someone else instead of...so they have someone. SB: They have someone to go to and if they call us and say, "I'm really struggling, can you help," we're going to do what we can to link them up with someone, have a phone conversation with them trying to get a better sense of what's going on and then make sure we are able to hook them up with someone. SK: Ok. Um, I'm trying to think about everything you've said, and one of the things that really still sticks out to me is security aspects. So, has anything--besides the doctor getting abducted or worries about something about a bomb like the one in Atlanta--has anything worried you even since security, has anything caught you off-guard, maybe a little bit before you could fix the security system or anything like that? Like, do you ever still have concerns, or even, say if somebody recognizes your name in public, do you ever think about that, by chance? SB: Well there are so many different kinds of threats that providers have dealt with. For instance many of us, myself included were at one point, I don't know if it’s still out there, but there was a website called the Nuremburg Files and protesters would put up the names of providers or people who worked at abortion clinics and claimed that, at some point, abortion would be made illegal and we would all be put on trial for murder. And so, there was the Nuremburg Files. If a physician was, we've had physicians murdered. You're aware of that. A dear friend of mine, George Tiller from Wichita, was murdered in his church. Um, and there were other threats. There was the butyric acid. On Saturdays-- there were a couple of Saturdays--where protesters released some sort of scent, it smelled strongly of skunk, that I guess was used for hunting or something, I'm not sure, but they would do that outside the clinic doors just to try to, you know, disrupt things. Bomb threats, so that you would need to contact the police and have them come search the facility. Um, at one point in time, there was a gentleman by the name of Neil Horsely who was--he actually was arrested for some action--I don't remember what he was arrested for--he escaped from jail and he went on a spree around the country terrorizing providers and he was saying that he was going to be outside of clinics. His plan was to be outside of clinics around the country and murder whoever happened to be in his path. If you were an employee, if you were physician, if you were a patient, it didn't matter, he was just going to come after us. SK: Talk about pro-life. [laughs] SB: Exactly. And there was also the powder. At one point in time, there was a particular, like, politicians were receiving envelopes that had a powder in it that is very toxic and Neil Horsely was sending those kinds of things also to clinics. He didn't have the actual powder. We can find out what 10  this powder is, I'm not remembering at this time. But he would send envelopes with a powdery substance to the clinics and if you opened that, then you had to call the authorities, everything had to be shut down because it was so toxic. It was like an environmental disaster, right. So, that was terrifying. Those were terrifying days. If you thought Neil Horsely was in your community, you just didn't know what to expect. There have been countless things that they have done over the years. SK: And did he end up getting caught? SB: He finally got caught, yes, and is back in prison. SK: Ok. And then you said you knew somebody that had gotten murdered and know of someone getting kidnapped. Do you know anybody else that had been harmed or came across someone's path, where maybe nothing happened to them necessarily, but they were put into that type of danger? SB: Well, another friend, although I haven't seen him for many years, Gary Romalis, was a physician in Canada who was, one year, shot through the kitchen of his window and he was critically wounded, but he survived. And then, a few years later, he was stabbed and also survived that. Uh...Let's see, I've had friends who have been followed home, have been protested at their home, I've had protesters show up their kids--the abortion providers children's--school and trying to, you know, make problems for the kids. SK: Wow. SB: Yeah. SK: That's a lot to take in. That people get that angry about it and will harm other people, but their idea is to try to not do that--try to keep life going. Um, that's just awful. Um, I'm trying to think more on that. Then, looking forward, for your company, the clinic--the company as in the clinic, not here--and then yourself and the women, do you have any specific goals in moving forward or, especially for the clinic, because it's still and probably always going to be trying to make abortion illegal again, do you have any goals moving forward for any of those? SB: I'm thrilled to say that the clinic is now under the leadership of Dr. Erin King, she is the executive director at this point in time. She and Hope Clinic have recently been featured in a documentary that debuted a couple of months ago, The Stories Abortion Patients Tell or something like that. Abortion Stories...you can find it out there and portrayed in a really positive light. She is a lovely human being. There's just this new group of physicians who have been committed for this practice for the longest time and they take it so seriously as mainstream medicine and from their perspective, that's what they're doing. It's not political to them. They know there's a political piece to it and they know they are at risk because of the protesters but from a professional perspective, it is a medical procedure that they take pride in and they are doing what they can to make it the best experience it can be for the patients. So, I think that is hugely positive. In terms of what to do in the future, I suspect that abortion will always be needed. There are fewer abortions provided in the country now than there were ten-fifteen years ago. It appears that women have more options in terms of protecting themselves against 11  pregnancy, it seems that younger women are delaying sexual activity longer than they were at one point and they're making sure they're protected when they're getting into relations and so that's really positive. If women didn't have to have abortions that would be awesome and so a lot of effort continues to be made in that education. Then, just also, making sure women understand if they need a procedure, It’s a medical procedure, it's mainstream, we've got the providers who can take care of you, hopefully helping them get--there may be an emotional component, there's not always, some women are just so very clear with what they need to do, but for some there will be an emotional component they don't need additional stigma on top of that. One of the claims that you'll often hear is that women need 24-48-or 72 hour waiting periods to think about whether or not to have a procedure. You've got seventy-two hours in Missouri now. That is such crazy stuff. Women think about nothing else the minute they find out they're pregnant. If they think they can't carry the pregnancy forward, they think about nothing else. They start talking to friends, they start talking to advisors, they start figuring out what they need to do for their lives. They do not need anyone imposing on them: laws, or attitudes or harassment. SK: Mhm. I completely agree with that. So, then with the clinic, moving forward as well, has there ever been any talk of making more? Yeah of course there's abortion clinics all over the country still, but do you ever, or has anyone ever considered just building another Hope Clinic and doing things just the same as they do there with the counseling? Whether it's just in the area or somewhere else in the state or anything? SB: No, at this particular point there are fewer clinics in the country than there were probably ten years ago because the number of patients seeking abortion care has continued to go down. So, at this particular point in time, Hope Clinic continues to focus on our one facility and caring for the patients that need our care there and we don't have any plans of doing any expansion at this point. SK: Ok. Fair enough. Since it's just Hope Clinic--not a Hope Clinic, an abortion clinic--it's not like you're looking for more patients as if you were a doctor's office or anything. In the research, I think I found some stuff on court stuff and whether its--like I was trying to read through it and I don't know if something went wrong or maybe someone sued because they didn't want it done if it was their kid, like it was their husband, I don't really know. I was really confused by it all. Have there been any court cases that you've been involved in? In those type of situations. And obviously if you have, would that be something you'd look forward to in the future? To try to be less involved in that or have less of those? SB: There haven't been any court cases for many years, I am very happy to say that. At one point in time, one of the things that protesters would do would be to get into contact with patients and encourage them to file lawsuits against us and, in some cases, they would find people who would-- they would provide them with an attorney-- and we would find ourselves in a lawsuit. Occasionally, there has been the case where a woman did experience a complication of the procedure and then would wind up hiring an attorney and filing a lawsuit. So, we've dealt with that as well. Most of the lawsuits that I was involved in when I was involved with the clinic were frivolous lawsuits, typically perpetuated the protesters. Every once in a while there was a lawsuit was like, "Ok. There's legitimate concern here, so we need to follow through." There haven't been any court cases in many years, so I am delighted to be able to say that. SK: Okay that’s good. I just want to know overall, throughout all the time that you spent there, what 12  were your biggest advantages or disadvantages or awards in your opinion, emotionally or any other sort of way. Do you have any of those? SB: At Hope Clinic, the thing I loved most was working with the staff. The staff was doing the hands- on work with the patients and then I was doing the hands-on work with the staff and I loved that. I loved it when we would be in a staff meeting or we'd be in a leadership team meeting and when you get that synergy going, one person suggests an idea and the next person builds on it and then pretty soon there's just this excitement about the progress we see happening. I absolutely loved that. That really lit me up, and I am proud to say, on a couple of occasions, given a plaque by the staff for my leadership. I really appreciated that, that was very valuable. The other thing that I found deeply satisfying was serving on the board of the National Abortion Federation and serving as chair of the board of the National Abortion Federation. That was a very gratifying thing as well. [Interrupted 49:48-5:00 from door opening] SK: As for any disadvantages, did you find any of those in working there? SB: The thing that caused me to feel the need to step back was the growing bureaucracy, having to do with being a medical provider, not specifically abortion, but it seemed like at a federal and state level, there were more and more surveys that we had to fill out and documents that had to be completed and paperwork that had to be done, that didn't do anything to actually improve the quality of care we were providing our patients, and it drove me crazy. So, I would say it wasn't fun dealing with the protesters, but it was important to do that. So, between the protesters and the bureaucracy, and just the medical environment, and again, not just having to do with abortion care, but just the direction the medical environment has taken. Those were the things that caused me to think I wasn't the best candidate for the position anymore. SK: Okay. Because you said it like that, I know you said you're not as involved anymore, but then you are still considered an executive director then, right? SB: I am the person that the executive director reports to and I report to the owner. SK: Oh, okay, so you're above an executive director? SB: Yeah, so like I am an advisory capacity at this point. SK: Okay, and that's why you spend less time there? SB: Yes. SK: Ok. That makes more sense then because all of the paperwork I had said that you were an executive director and didn't say anything further. And then for the women, lastly, looking forward, to wrap up, do you want to see--what do you want to see moving forward? Do you just want to see more options for women? As in whether it's medication that they may take or like the medical options to abort or just--like what, overall, for the women who come in, do you have any hopes for them, future ones or ones that have already come in? SB: I do. I hope that our country can get back on track so that girls and women have all of the 13  education and employment options that they should have available to them. I feel like a lot of women who wind up seeking abortion services these days are economically disadvantaged in many ways and need to seek help in pain for their procedure. They're in a situation where they may have kids that they're struggling with or know that they can't have a child because it would be so difficult for them financially and one of the ways lowering unwanted pregnancy rates is advanced education. SK: Mhm. SB: Not advanced as education around sexuality but women having more opportunities and so, on the larger scale, that's what I would really love to see. There aren't as many--education is not as solid as I think it needs to be at the earlier levels and the opportunities for girls and women, I think, are less than they used to be, so I would love to see that change. I would love to see more employment opportunities so that girls and women can look forward to maximizing their potential in every possible way. Those would be the things that would make me so happy. SK: Okay. And then for the women that go, do they normally bring someone with them? If they go into a counseling room, do they go with them? Say, it would be the father of the baby or the mom? Do you allow them into the counseling rooms? SB: Most patients, virtually every patient, is going to have somebody with them. We really want them to have a driver. Sometimes its friends, sometimes it’s a parent. Typically, if it’s a teenager, it's a parent. That's another misnomer that teenagers are sneaking around and their parents don't know about it. Most of the time, the parents are involved. SK: Yeah. Isn't that a law too, in Illinois? I know there's some in some states. SB: There's parental notification in Illinois. That doesn't mean that the parent has to be there. SK: Oh, okay. SB: So, just means that the parent has to be notified. But I think those laws are difficult for a lot of reasons. Also, the boyfriends or the husbands, aunts, uncles, grandmas, any configuration you can think of. If, when the patient is first called into counseling, she's brought in by herself. She's going to be talked to alone and then if she says at this particular time in the process she would like to have her escort join her, then that will happen. We never want to have a situation where the patient isn't able to be forthright with the counselor because there's someone sitting there that might be coercing her one way or the other. SK: So, to them, they must be alone in there first and then if they say... SB: Yes SK: ...they want someone then...ok. That's fair enough, because I do hear a lot about people that they want to do it and they are talked out of it and then they're stuck with something they don't want or they shouldn't because of medical situations. And again, like I mentioned, even myself, the person I had known. It was someone in high school and her boyfriend was just like, "oh no, don't do it," and it was a long, unending process with her then. It was very hard. 14  SB: Mhm. SK: Finally, really to wrap up entirely, we already talked about advantages and disadvantages, but do you have one thing that you are, no matter what, very proud of and content with in your whole time of working with the clinic, one thing that really sticks out to you there? SB: I would say the courage of...gonna get a little teary here... SK: It's ok. SB: The courage of the staff and physicians. Sorry I just never know. When you think about what it's like for your colleagues to be murdered, when you know that your colleagues' clinics are being under siege, when your clinic is under siege, when you come to work and you're being yelled at every day, it takes a hell of a lot....of commitment to get yourself there every day. The people that I encountered every day at the clinic, the staff members, and the physicians were just so committed to those patients and we always knew the patient was having a worse day than we were. Regardless of how many times we got yelled at on our way in the door, the patient was having a worse day than we were so we needed to surround her with as much TLC as we could. That is the thing I am most proud of. SK: Sounds very rewarding. It sounds very hard, but very, something to look back on when you're older, retired, something that you can sit there and say, "I did something good for people." SB: Absolutely. SK: And that's something to be proud of. So, thank you for letting me interview you on the Hope Clinic. I really appreciate it, but that is all I really have to ask about. SB: Ok. Thank you very much. I am glad you took it on. 15 
MadisonCounty;Phil Smith;1949;2016;Phil Smith 1949 - 2016   Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Phil Smith Oral History Interview Lesley Thomson-Sasso, Interviewer October 19, 2016 Edwardsville, Illinois Thomson-Sasso (TS): This is Lesley Thomson-Sasso interviewing Mr. Philip Smith, October 19th, 2016. Mr. Smith is a long-time resident of Venice, Illinois. So Mr. Smith, where were you born, and how did your family come to reside in Venice?  Phil Smith (PS): Okay I was born in Granite City, Illinois. We were at that time living in North Venice, Venice being divided into two parts: North and South. North Venice was actually in the Madison School District where I lived. Um, and uh, they—I went to school there, called Blair School and that was first grade through sixth grade and then when we completed sixth grade we moved to Madison, ah, Junior High School, that was for seventh and eighth grade, and ah, my father was a police officer in Venice, but it was a unique situation because North Venice was, as I said in the Madison School District, and we received our mail from Madison, we had a Madison mailing address, but our fire and police protection were Venice. So it was kind of a unique situation there. Ah, as I said we lived there until I was probably—well, I was probably maybe 2 or 3 years old and then we moved to a different address in North Venice, and then we lived there until I was probably 12 or 13, and then we moved to ah South Venice so...  TS: Okay  growing up in the 1950s and 60s was certainly an exciting time, such political figures like Stevenson, Truman, and Kennedy all passed through Venice, ah, at some point in their political career. Can you recall any of these moments when they were in Venice or like a memorable time when they were there?  PS: Oh absolutely. Absolutely, another memorable name was Paul Simon, who I recall coming down ah, but yes, I believe I was a senior or junior actually a junior in high school, and the high school was adjacent to the American Legion Hall. And, ah, President, ah Kennedy—candidate Kennedy came at that time ah, and travelled through the entire area, stopping off in Venice. And we were allowed to leave the school and walk across the lawn to actually see him, and ah, and listen to his speech so it was very exciting at that time, and ah, Venice at that time, being very, very political was more or less the political hub of the county, ah our ah, the Madison County Democratic Chairmen [clears throat] excuse me, was from Venice so he orchestrated lots of events, and ah, and had a lot of influence throughout the state with that.  TS: Um, now you mentioned that your father was a police officer in Venice, so what was growing up, um, you went to school in what would be considered Madison, but can you speak to a little bit about the climate that he dealt with as a police officer in Venice?  PS: Well, when he first started I’m sure a lot of what he dealt with was the uh uh was the gambling 1   activities in the taverns that were located there on Main Street in Venice. Now Main Street was just as you come across the McKinley Bridge and as I recall, and this was even before my time, that it was a gambling mecca along there with lots of taverns, and people would come from Saint Louis, ah, you know come over to Venice so it was quite popular at that time. Some of the bars don’t know if you’re interested in the names, The 316 Club was one, ah, Norma’s was one, 700 Club was another, so it was—it was quite an active strip down through there at that time.  TS: Do you remember um, when you were growing up in Venice, like did you ever go to that Main Street or was that like, you know, not allowed, like did you parents allow you to go down there or did your dad see kind of like the vice the area and say “this isn’t good” or...?  PS: No, yes ah, I do recall going down there. There was a gentleman by the name of ah, Bill Smith and that happened to be my father’s name. Ah Bill Smith was associated with ah, ah a gangster named Buster Wortman at that time, and Bill ran this 316 Club. Ah, and I’m sure there was gambling that went on there late at night, but they also would have meals on Sunday afternoon, and as a child I can recall going with our family and having dinner there. Ah, so yes I do remember that, that was ah, that was something and then ah, even as I grew older, it was still—there was still lots of bars along there, and then in addition to that, was the office, for the bridge—the McKinley Bridge office was located there—and ah, so I would go down there, and actually on Saturday mornings, ah, people would congregate there, just as a little meeting place to talk and visit, and there would be a lot of politics discussed at that time as well so.  TS: Um, so you mentioned that this 316 Club—it was interesting because in part of my research I actually found a ah, magazine article that highlighted the gambling in Venice in the 1950s, um, what was your—I guess—it’s interesting cause if your father was a police officer, you still had dinner with this you know, prominent family that was associated with ah organized crime, um, what was that dynamic like between your dad and the organized crime that was there?  PS: Well I think they were basically friends. You know, I was young so I didn’t know a lot of what the dynamics were other than the fact that they were friends, and uh, I recall as a as a child, this—they called this other Bill Smith “Bad Eye Bill Smith”—is a name they referred to, and I recall as a child that he came ah, to our house in North Venice in in a I believe it was like a 1955 red Cadillac, and I was just astounded because I had probably never seen a Cadillac you know, let alone one that was almost a block long, but ah, I recall it was a beautiful car, and he was a very short man in stature, very little guy, but he was he was very nice, and gentle, but he was ah as far as I know they were just friends with my father.  TS: Your dad was never put in a compromising situation where he would ever have to like arrest or ticket any of these um, you know, clubs or anything like that?  PS: Ah, I would assume so, but I really couldn’t—couldn’t say for sure, I have no evidence of that but I would assume being in the in the position he held, yes, I’m sure there were disturbances there that they would be called to, and they would have to squelch certainly.  TS: Yeah, that's an interesting dynamic, um, and ah, I grew up in ah, in New Jersey so like Atlantic City and you know the same type of you know vice that's down there so it's interesting to see um, on this side. Um, now, you mentioned when you said that there was ah a meeting outside of where the McKinley  2   Bridge is that Venice becomes this like political hub, um, from your memory what do you call of it being this political hub? Like what do you mean by that?  PS: Well, they had at one time, and this was at—I was a little older, ah, they had an organization called the Venice City organization, and basically what it was was just a group of men, meeting at the bridge office ah playing cards, and ah at that time, ah they would take turns providing a meal. For example, one month, the Venice Fire Department would the firemen would get together and prepare a meal, ah, the next month maybe it would be the police department, the next month it might be the school board members, ah it would be the city workers one month, ah, so with the variety of people you had all the different people providing ah very good food too, I might add, ah, and then as I said we’d eat, play cards, and then ah, just ah, ah, socialize. And ah, they would have politicians come, candidates come and speak to this group, ah as well, so yeah it was fun, as I recall as a younger guy, ah, there was a gentleman named "Buck" Simmons, Walter Simmons, who was our county Democratic chairman, and, ah, I guess as a result of me being associated with this, and this was before I went to college, so, and ah, there were lots of jobs coming out of Venice going to Springfield, and for state jobs, and so I was fortunate to have gotten a job ah, ah, with the help of Buck Simmons, and I went to Springfield and worked for Secretary of State Paul Powell at that time.  TS: Right. About how many people ah, were a part of that, like organization—the organization that you had mentioned?  PS: Ahh  TS: Because it seems like a pretty big number.  PS: Yeah how many workers?  TS: Ah, how many people were a part of that organization where like they would bring them meals? Was that most of the pop—Like, most of the guys in Venice?  PS: Ah yeah, we would have probably have 25-30 guys at each gathering, and it was held on Thursday nights if I remember correctly, but ah, it was kinda big deal, because it gave us you know as I said gave you an opportunity to get together and socialize. Also, as a youngster, not a youngster—but as a young man too, I was involved in the Venice Lions Club. And that was that was prominent and I think from that stemmed some political stuff, because it was the same people Venice being a very small place you had a lot of the same people who were members of both groups, so that was ah that was interesting, and they did a lot of good, as well. Ah, I remember when I was president of it as a young man, we had a Eagle Scout from there, named ah ah Tommy Hooks who had gone to Washington DC on a conference and was diving off of a a board at a swimming pool there and paralyzed and became paralyzed as a result  and the Lions Club got together along with the help of the city organization, and we threw a series of barbeques, ah in fact we had 5 of ‘em ah throughout Venice, Madison, and Granite City and we raised like $5,000 dollars to give to the family, so just another thing that just sticks out from you know, from being part— growing up in Venice.  TS: Yeah, wow, and that’s a surmountable amount of money for sure at that time.  3   PS: Yes, it was, yeah, exactly.  TS: Um, so when you were in the Lions Club that was during your high school experience in Venice?  PS: No, I was outta high school at that time. Yeah, that was probably, I would say that was probably around the 1970, maybe 71.  TS: Okay, Um, well, going back a little bit, um, I wanted to talk a little bit about the climate of Venice High School in the 60s. I know that in 1962, they began to re-route the busing, and therefore little by slow, schools would become um, integrated. Um, because in 1954, schools across the country were desegregated based on Brown v. Board. Do you um, remember how ah, now you said you graduated in 61, but do you remember the climate at this time as schools began to make the shift to integrate in Madison as well as in Venice?  PS: Yeah, I do recall a little bit of that, but I think actually when that integration took place was 1964, or possibly 65, so it was after I had you know, I had ah graduated from—from the high school there in Venice, but, ah, as I recall, Lincoln school was the other high school in Venice, and ah, as I recall that was a newer school and that's where the blacks had gone to school, and ah, that was a newer school, and they had you know, a good basketball team, as I recall back then, and ah, you know as far as I was concerned, as a youngster, I mean it was just the way it was you know, they had their own school which was a lot newer, and better than ours, but everybody seemed to be happy in the early 60s.  TS: Yeah, um, one of the things that I noticed was that Venice had a railroad that came through it, and so, on the other side of the tracks were the Lee Wright Homes, um, would you say that even in the 60s, did you have much integration in Venice, or, was it um, still somewhat segregated?  PS: Uh, North Venice was integrated before South Venice and that’s where I had lived. Actually it’s a unique situation you had Madison on one side of the tracks, then you had North Venice, and that's where I grew up and that's that was white to a certain point I think the street was ah well I don't remember.... Weaver.... Weaver Street at one time and everything on the other side of Weaver Street was West Madison, so—it was kinda unique the way it was all cut up, but West Madison was all black, and North Venice was white, but then in the—probably late 50s ah, North Venice then became integrated, and then later on in the 70s, then South Venice became integrated.  TS: Um, so as far as like growing up for you, you didn’t feel any racial tension in Venice at all whatsoever? Like one of the things that surprised me was when I was researching, Madison schools in 62 or 63, um, had a Klan presence and they had burned crosses on the front lawn of the school because they were protesting integration of schooling, and so I had wondered, you know you had mentioned your dad was a police officer, um, if he was still working at the time, or you know, looking back and reading newspapers like were you shocked that this was happening in like such close proximity to where you grew up?  PS: At one time I do, I don't remember any specifics about it, but I think that it was probably in the I was married in 1967, so I think it was between 1967 and 1970, there was one time that yeah, that there seemed to be a little uprising between the blacks and the whites there but I don't remember the specifics on it, I just recall I lived on the street there, that that kinda connected North Venice and South Venice so much of  4   the traffic would pass by our house, and I do recall a little bit of some uprising but not specifics, ah, however I do recall, as I said because I grew up in North Venice, I had an older brother, 4 years older than me, so he went through high schools in Madison, and in the 50s is when they really had serious problems, at Madison, and that’s when that was integrated, probably ‘54, ‘55. Ah, but Venice wasn't integrated then like I said until like 65 til about 10 years later.  TS: After graduating high school where did you attend college?  PS: I went to SIUE, in Edwardsville, actually I recall, ah, when they built the campus, and ah when I started I actually attended classes in East Saint Louis, that’s where SIU classes were being held in, so my first year I went there, and then ah, I went one year, and then ah, didn’t go back, didn’t finish, didn’t stay in college and started working, and worked for a while and then once I got married then I went back and attended SIUE in Edwardsville.  TS: Um, what was campus like in East Saint Louis? Because coming from Venice it seems that everybody that I’ve talked to that lives there um, you know, says it’s a very tight knit nice community the park, you know was a beautiful place to go and everybody seemed to know their neighbors, and so, coming out of Venice and going to East Saint Louis, and college can you talk a little bit about what the climate was like there?  PS: Yeah, basically it was just—I went there, attended classes, and came home. I didn’t spend any time on campus down there, ah, I even recall back then, believe it or not I had one class that that was on TV, so I would go like once, ah maybe once a week or every two weeks and then you’d watch the rest of your classes on TV which was you know, for going back that far, was rather unique, but, ah, ah, other than that I don’t remember a whole lot about the campus down there. It was called, they called it 10th Street Tech and it was right the Old Rock Junior High School in East Saint Louis is where the classes were held, ah, but yes, you’re right about Venice being close knit—we did we had beautiful park and it was called Lee Park and it was named after Dr. Lee, who was the Mayor at one time, and then his son became mayor later Dr. John E. Lee Junior, but yeah, it was a beautiful park, the land was donated by the Lee family, the Lee family lived there ah, for a long time, you know, until ah, they they've actually died off.  TS: So after you left college what did you do for work?  PS: I immediately as I said earlier to you, I graduated like in June or May and started teaching immediately summer school in Venice at the Venice Grade School I think I had 8th grade students and they were—I believe they were all black at that time, it was a small class, and it was good, there was a gentleman named Mr. Vickers who was Superintendent who was a very nice man, ah, he was very good, he did a good job down there, in Venice. And I started teaching there and I taught a summer school there, and was fortunate enough to ah get a full time teaching position in Granite City, as an elementary school teacher.  TS: Um, now you mentioned that you also worked for the Secretary of State, Paul Powell, so, that happened after the first year you completed ah campus at East Saint Louis, you said you went out to work, so is that who you were working for at that time?  PS: I believe it was yeah, I’m thinking that was probably—I went to SIU, ah, well in the summer, I 5   graduated in ‘61 worked at Laclede Steel in the summer, then went to SIU in East Saint Louis, and finished that first year, and then went back to Laclede Steel worked there for a while, ah, then I’d left there, and I think I worked at Tri-City Grocery Company that was a grocery company in the Tri-City area in fact they were all over the area. I worked there for a while, and then left there and I guess that would have been about ‘63 or 4 that I left there and went to Springfield and worked for Secretary Powell.  TS: What was your job for Secretary Powell?  PS: I worked in the driver’s license division at that time to renew your driver’s license you would just fill out an application mail it with a check, ah, and then I was in the office where we received those checks, I had ah 9 people work for me, who basically just opened the mail, and ah, sorted it, and ah, ah, I just supervised that department. But one thing unique about that is that when we would get applications in from people in the state of Illinois, and it would be a celebrity, for example Cassius Clay, Muhammad Ali, we would see something like that, or Otto Kerner who was governor at that time would send his in, of course everybody would pass it around and that was kind of a neat thing to do at that time, you know.  TS: Who was, ah, the most famous driver’s license that you had to?  PS: Probably one of those two... yeah yes, absolutely. I mean we would see other people who are local people, but ah, any time the big names would come through like that, ah, that was interesting—you know—we’d alwa—everybody pass them around look at their check, look at their signature on the check and uh yeah, kinda neat.  TS: Sounds like it. Um. Paul Powell had a huge influence on the State of Illinois, um, he was even dubbed the “Democrat even Republicans voted for...” um because he had this larger-than-life presence, so ah, working the licensing division how much interaction did you have with him? And can you speak a little bit about his character, um, the time that he was alive? and you know, being in the state, you know his influence?  PS: I—I actually the position I held was ah a small position compared to him. I don't know that I ever actually saw him, other than when—I think I got the job when I went up there, but, I ah never really saw him, the only thing I do recall at Christmastime they would come around and take a nice collection from everybody for a Christmas gift for him, and so I’m sure with that department being as large as it was, that was a very nice Christmas gift that he received, ah, also, I think you alluded to a little story about the shoebox, ah, I guess I can talk about that as well.  TS: Sure  PS: And ah, John Rendleman who was chancellor at SIU, as I understand it, was his executor, and had received a call, ah, from Springfield, stating that Mr. Powell had passed away at the St. Nicholas Hotel, and uh, uh, the story goes that Mr. Rendleman then immediately drove up there, parked in a no parking zone in front of the hotel, and went upstairs to I assume retrieve some shoeboxes that were stored in a closet as the story goes, and uh, started taking those down to his car, and putting them in the trunk, and then, ah, on one of the following trips down the car was gone. Ah, and the city of Springfield, I guess police department somebody had had it towed, so that was I recall that story vividly, and how quickly they tried to—he made some calls and got the car back, and I assume only assume that all the money was  6   in it, I don't know.  TS: Yes  PS: That would make interesting you know, story.  TS: Um, yeah you’re right, that is you know, part of the story was that you know Powell had over $800,000 dollars that he had received you know um, which you wonder now [laughs] like if your collection at Christmastime was a part of that, um, but you know, when he died in 1970, um, Rendleman’s ah accounts of the money, and where it potentially could have come from, it didn’t come out until about the following year. Um, at this time were you ah, still working in ‘71, for the licensing department or were you, back teach—were you teaching?  PS: No, yeah, I—fact I—I started my teaching career in 1971, so I was no, I was long gone from Springfield at that time.  TS: Yeah, so could you speak to the climate of, um, when these reports came out, and you worked for the State Department, and even though you never really interacted with him, did it, like what was your opinion? Was everybody in Illinois shocked? Were you know ... cause he seemed like such a beloved political figure...  PS: Yes, I think probably a lot of ‘em were, but maybe the insiders knew more, and they may have known sources that money may have come from I don’t know other than you know, other than as I said, we they collected from us for Christmas gifts, and I guess birthday as I recall whatever it was, so it could have been some of that, but I don't know—ah I would say yeah, the people you know in the outside little people, like myself, we were shocked at it, but ah, I don't know about others.  TS: Um, so after working for Powell you returned to teach in Venice. Um, what was the school district like at the time you returned in the 70s?  PS: Well, it was a very good school district actually, as I recall, ah, Venice was one of the higher-paid districts because we had ah union electric plant there we had railroads there, so they had a lot of revenue, ah, as opposed to some of the other districts, so it was was one of the higher paid districts at that time, and like I said I only taught there ah during the summer session but ah you know, living there, after I got married I lived there for seven years, my wife and I did. My father owned some rental property, and it kinda we moved into one of those houses and kinda got our start, so we lived there seven years, but it was a very good school district, and there were noted had a good basketball team—as well having gone to states and won state, so yeah, it was a good school district it the-the teachers had done a good job, some of them, were still there ah the ones that I had had were still teaching at that time so...  TS: What, um, eventually motivated you to move out of Venice?  PS: Well my wife was from Collinsville, and uh, it was it took an arm and a leg to get her to move there, and one of the reasons was there was no stores, no shopping area, because if you lived in Venice, if you did any shopping at all, you’d go to Granite City, or even back then you’d go to East Saint Louis, because East Saint Louis was was very vibrant at that time, and there were lots of stores there. But, ah, we lived  7   there for seven years, kinda got our feet on the ground, and gave us a start, but she wanted to be back closer to her mother and her family, so we moved to Collinsville in 1974, so...  TS: When you left Venice, were a lot of other families um, leaving as well and moving out too? Because the dynamic shifted quite a bit in the population. Um, now it’s I think 80 I'm sorry 98 percent African- American, um, so did you see some of that change over time that you were there?  PS: Uh, yes it was, it was the beginning of it actually about the time we moved was the beginning of the of the change, ah, they were you know, kind of moving into the area, so uh, I recall ah guys that I graduated with a lot of ‘em left they didn’t stay, ah I guess we mainly I stayed because ah, my father had the rental property and it was you know, we would pay rent when we could, and when we couldn’t he wouldn't throw us out or evict us, so ah that’s why we stayed, but yeah I—a lot of the young people as they graduated, they ah they would leave, ah some of ‘em would go off to college and not come back, but ah, there were a few my age that stayed, as I recall.  TS: So, when you left in um ‘74, you said, um, what—your father stayed in Venice or... did he eventually move out too?  PS: Well my father—my actually yeah, he was—yes—my parents my father actually passed away that year, but yeah, they were still there, they remained there and then my mother remained there for a few years after that, and then, she and my sister moved out of there, ah, I would say probably, you know ‘70, 1970 around that time, so...  TS: So, working for um, the school system, what changes have you seen over your career in education as far as Madison County’s school system is concerned?  PS: Oh, gosh, um, I mean technology of course is one of the big things that I’ve noticed, ah-the schools— Venice of course if we’re going back to Venice, if that’s what we are talking about—got—you know got much smaller, ah, and then eventually ah the high school closed, as you probably know, ah, and ironically me working here at the ROE [Regional Office of Education], I was instrumental in doing that—and it was it was kinda personal that I had to go down and actually go through the building—you know, a high school that I had attended, and ah, you know, be a part of the demolition, but ah, ah, that as I said Venice was always good in sports, ah, and ah, as far as the education of Madison County in the schools, I guess technology being the biggest change we’ve had.  TS: Venice’s High School closed in 2004, I believe  PS: I don't remember the exact date, but that sounds right  TS: Um, and so, what was it like um, what was the process that closed the high school exactly? Because now from an administrative angle um, what is it that exactly closed the school?  PS: Well, I don’t I don’t really know, other than the fact that the enrollment was down, you know, but ah, I don’t know specifically what the reason was they did they did that I just knew at that time I didn’t have anything to do with it as far as being part of this office, but ah, I know that it was they were in financial  8   trouble and they just didn’t have the students or the revenue anymore to operate the high school so... And merging just wasn’t ya know worth it—with Madison it was very difficult to try to get that done, anytime that you want to merge school districts I mean you got school board members that would have to give up their seats, and they’re not willing to do that. So...  TS: What um, what was it like going back through the high school knowing that it was closing and you graduated there, those years back, what was the condition, had it—had some things stayed the same, had some things changed? Um...  PS: Yeah, there were—it was basically an old building, and a lot of it, was pretty much the same as when I had attended there, it was especially interesting even going back into the office I recall climbing up in one of the closets way in the back there were boxes of what I mentioned we still have some of that, but, I actually came across old ah grade cards, from my class that had my name on it, and we dug some of that stuff out—but I was surprised that the school district you know, they didn’t retain any of that ah, and I guess by the law they don’t have to I don’t know after so long a time, but ah, what I could retrieve and save I did, and then brought here, and now we retain it here in the regional office. But yeah, it was it was interesting just to go back as I'd walk through the halls and have the memories that I had and ah, and see the things. There were two buildings and they were connected by a corridor, the one building being the grade school, which was newer than the high school but ah, even in when I was in high school we would have a class or two we would have to go over to the grade school building ah, I think I did for math and speech you know, but it was kinda interesting just to to walk through there, and just see what it was like, and ah, ah, yeah it just brought back a lot of memories.  TS: Um, when Venice merged with Madison, um, what were the biggest challenges to the community? PS: Ah, the school district you referring to?  TS: Yeah  PS: They didn't really merge with Madison ah, I mean Venice still has their own separate school district TS: Okay  PS: And Madison has theirs so the- they’re not really a together they did not merge TS: Um, when Venice High School closed then, those students now go to...  PS: Well, I’m not certain, where they you know, they some of ‘em may have gone to Madison, but ah, I don't know that legally they could have a Venice address and attend unless they pay, I’m not exactly sure how that works, but some of ‘em may have gone to East Saint Louis, or Lovejoy, but I don't really know the specifics on that.  TS: Mmm. So, after the high school closed, um, did you ever like you went back to have to go through the building, you found some of the records and the old history um, and then did you notice at all, when you were back there how the climate of Venice had changed from what you remembered when you left in the 70s?  9   PS: Well, the time ... I mean it was it was already ah, integrated almost fully integrated at the time the high school closed, so yeah after the high school closed, no it pretty much I think has remained the same ah, they still have the grade school there, I think grade K through 8, ah, which is I think they’re doing quite well, you know, ah, Dr. Cullen who used to be our assistant regional superintendent here is now superintendent there, and ah, I think they’re doing a very good job in the school down there, ah, I’ve been down there several times, ah, as part of my duties here I go out and inspect buildings and ah, so I go through and inspect the school and ah, everything seems to be running well down there. In fact, ah, several years ago, ah, I even went down there and substituted as a principal a few times when they were in need, so ah, and I found that very interesting, you know, but it was it was pretty much the same as, I had subbed as a principal in the Granite City schools as well, so it was basically the problems were the same, you know, it was just smaller down there than Granite City.  TS: What um, so even as a former educator, what type and I’m just curious what type of problems would you say um, are prevalent in, like you mentioned Granite City and Venice, Venice just has its smaller...  PS: Ah truancy was one, you know, a big one, um, cooperation from the parents as far—helping the children ah you know, and ah, ah, that type of thing were the big things you know, discipline as much as anywhere I guess, and then, when you'd have discipline problems getting hold of the parents many times you couldn't you know, ah, I mean I've had instances as a substitute principal that - where ah, a student ah, would be left there not picked up after school, so I'd have to stay ah I've stayed as late as like 6:30 before waiting for parents to show up to pick up their kids, so ah, pretty much common problems like that.  TS: So school um, maybe has changed a lot since you went to Venice High School like being on the other side, you know as a teacher, and even as an administrator um, but, you're involved in um, the Venice Historical Society, and part of um, from what I understand, their initiative is to kind of preserve this history of Venice, as well as the experiences of high school, that um, everybody had, um, so what types of things are you hoping that are preserved from your memories or the collective memory of Venice?  PS: Well one thing I mean the people, and the the closeness of the people, and that was the big thing in Venice, ah, growing up there, everybody knew everybody, you know, and ah, it it just and again it was as far as politics it was predominantly Democratic there, I mean, very it was always a joke that there was one person voting Republican and they spent lot of time trying to figure out who it was, but ah, it was predominantly, Democratic, ah but ah, the closeness is the big thing with Venice and I hope they can let let that continue—I mean those memories continue on, ah, I do know that we had a church there Saint Mark’s church, and I just received word yesterday that they’re going to have their last mass at that church. I attended about a month ago, what I thought was the last mass, but, now I understand officially it wasn't - and now they've got it scheduled for the, 20th of October maybe something like that - and uh, no it wouldn't be the 20th, be the, I don't know in a week or so, it's gonna be the last mass, officially and then that church will close so, ah, a lot of things like I said, you know, the closeness of the people, and the church and the school and that I hope that we can retain those memories a lot.  TS: How large was your classes in the high school, like when you talk about the closeness of the community, um, like how many students do you remember in your classes, or how large was your graduating class of the high school?  10   PS: Okay, as I recall, when I attended high school there, but the entire population of four year high school was about 125 students. I graduated with 25 students and I think the class the year after me there were like 20 or 21 so it was even smaller so, yeah it was very small, the classes were all small, and uh, that probably part of the - is why people became close, and you know you knew everybody, but ah, yeah, I'd say that I'd probably knew everyone in the high school there may have been 1 or 2 students that maybe were new or something, but everybody kinda knew everybody in the whole high school at that time. Ah, so, but it was ah neat  neat place to grow up.  TS: It sounds like um, such an interesting experience, because everybody that I've talked to has always said that it was kind of like a "Happy Days" scenario [laughs] and that everybody really just, you know, ah, got along, and you know, um, really enjoyed their high school experiences, um, when you attended, um, do you - like what were some of the, were you involved in any sports or clubs, or things that Venice offered and then, coming back to it in the 70s did you think that anything had changed because now, I don't know if there is still that same community feeling that there is.  PS: Going back and looking it’s something you said there that made me think, when I was in high school, it was like I said the town was so small and unique, we had a grocery store called Kavner's Grocery Store which was a block from the school. I would actually leave my study hall, and go to Kavner's and they would have bags of groceries with people's name written on them, and I would take and pick those up, and take their car, and drive round Venice and deliver those groceries, and you would just walk into the house, you'd maybe knock on the door, the understanding was you just walk in and set it on their table, and I recall doing that for a long time, but I was actually doing it during my study hall, ah, as far as activities in school, I was not involved in sports but I was a part uh I was president of the student council, and played a part of the student council for two or three years when I was in high school, and ah, remember one year actually, getting to go to Chicago on the train for the student council convention was a big thing for a little boy from Venice you know, but ah, yeah, it was all those things played a part and it made it a lot closer, you know.  TS: When do you think the dynamic of Venice changed?  PS: Wow, I would say, um, when the - probably - when the integration took place at the high school because as I understand, and I was gone then, that it became overcrowded at that time. And uh, I think that's when a lot of it - a lot of change - the classes were much larger, and uh, I think that's when it was, and that probably would have been oh, I guess that would have been in the you know, well, ‘65, was the first year it integrated and then any time between ‘65 and ‘75 probably was when the major changes took place.  TS: Um, what type of ah, now what type of changes? Is it just the integration of new people, was there any industry that was closing? Or jobs that ah, were beginning to move out of Venice and into other areas, um, you know, was the bars on that main street were they still open? Um, were there more problems that were maybe coming out of those areas?  PS: Ah yeah, I think, ah yeah the Union Electric was a big factor I think when it when it first closed down and the railroads ah there was a place, Dow Chemical Company was actually in North Venice, or in the city of Madison, which you know, also, I think there were lots of jobs there Laclede Steel was a big  11   employer at that time in Madison, ah, probably, I'm trying to think I left Laclede Steel I worked there after - I worked the summer I graduated from high school, went to college, came back worked again, left, and then came back ah, and worked at Laclede in the accounting department until probably 1969 when I went back to college but ah, yeah, I think that's when a lot of things changed when the jobs left.  TS: What did you do for Laclede Steel the summer after you graduated?  PS: Okay I worked just as a laborer, in the plant, real eye opener, you know - coming from high school into a steel mill and working, you know, ah, some of the rough jobs, but I enjoyed it, it was paid well, it helped pay for my college, and ah, then, as I said I went to college one year, came back, and worked again as a laborer but then left there and then went to I think I worked at Tri-City Grocery Company as I said, um, but ah, then when I came back later, I came back and worked in the accounting department and figured bonus on jobs and did a lot of that at that time, so...  TS: Do you remember what um, what year that was that you came back to work in accounting was that the late 60s or...?  PS: Well, let's see... ah, I started college I think in ‘69 so, I worked there - so I'd say about ‘65, or ‘66, is when I came back and worked at Laclede Steel.  TS: And you worked there until you started SIU again  PS: Right, until like ‘69 and then I just quit and went back to school full time.  TS: One of the things that I had found in a lot of newspaper reports at this time was that between ‘67, ‘68, and ‘69, um, groups like CORE and the NAACP were coming into Madison and Venice, and in particular they were interested in um, knowing how many like black workers were able to acquire jobs in Venice and obviously in Madison, so I was wondering if, you know, on the accounting side of it, um, if you saw, like any of that disparity or could speak to any of the claims as to why they might have been there?  PS: No I don't even recall an NAACP group down there, ah, in Venice by the time that I lived there, I do know that there were they were always been black police officers on the police department and fire department working for the city, I can always recall that, um, as far as the teachers in the school, I don't recall- I know I didn't have any ah, even even when I went to school in North Venice in the Madison school district there were no black teachers but I think when the school integrated there were a few black teachers that came from Lincoln and they worked there – ah, there, there as far as I know there were blacks always employed there, and at Laclede Steel as well when I worked there.  TS: Um, do you remember, because that was the claim, was that they weren't getting I guess like maybe equal opportunity for jobs, but at Laclede, um, do you remember at all, like was it, ah, like ah you know you had like 50-50 population wise or you just knew that jobs were available to black workers that wanted them.  PS: Right, yeah yeah, I don't recall that ever having been a problem down there or an issue, ah like I said I don't remember the NAACP or black groups in that area, it could have been after I left, then maybe they became a part of it, ya know.  12   TS: Yeah, um, it was interesting because you know, when you mentioned um, earlier that scuffle that - racial scuffle that you weren't really sure, it actually involved in 1969 a black police officer that was accused of like I guess harassing um, the black communities of the project homes Lee Wright and in um, Venice Homes, and I didn't know if you remembered, so apparently that night, 30 black youths came into Venice and like firebombed part of the town um, from where I understanding geographically cause like zoning has changed and things like that it was in the park that was by where Mayor Lee used to live um, so I didn't know how close in proximity you were to that, or if you remember any of that happening or maybe that was the scuffle you had thought.  PS: Now what year would that have been? TS: It was ‘69  PS: ‘69 no...  TS: And there was one flash in a newspaper...  PS: Yeah, see, I just I lived, ah, actually I lived there at the entrance to the park which is just down the street from Dr. Lee, and uh, I remember a small skirmish but I don't remember anything that would probably made the news, and as you're describing it, I don't remember that being a big issue and ah, ah I would have because I lived there  that was my back yard was actually you know, part of the park, so yeah, I was right there in the midst of it, but I don't remember it being ah, a huge issue you know, as you're describing it was in the papers.  TS: It's interesting cause it was one article, um, and it was in the ah Edwardsville paper, and they arrested 30 ah black youth, and then they were let go the next day, but from what I can kind of discern was that um, the park was then closed and they began like limiting like who could go into the park, at what hours at what time, and then the park I guess used to have like a recreational area with like um, rides, and like a carnival and stuff like that and eventually that all was closed, um, but maybe you know press brought something...  PS: I believe that was the case, you know, it just probably made for a story to sell papers, because I really don't remember that being a huge issue, I do, vaguely, as I'm thinking back maybe I do recall having seen ah, police vehicles from other municipalities like Madison, maybe the Madison County Sheriff's department, ah, they may have been patrolling the area but ah just thinking back you know other than that it just - may have been a one-time thing, ah, a one night thing and they arrested people and then let ‘em go and that was it probably but yeah and it could have been the beginning of some of the changing at that time, yeah the park had rides they weren't ah actually like carnival rides - they were just a merry-go- rounds and swings things like that that ah I don't I don't know if they're still there or not actually you know but ah but there also used to be ball diamonds there, and ah, there were buildings that had little restrooms in them, I recall that, actually my father did part time work as a handyman type thing and I recall helping him ah as a young boy build some of those back then, so yeah.  TS: Um, so, with your work on the Venice Historical Society and kind of speaking to those greater themes, asides from this sense of community are there any projects that the historical commission is working on um, in the preservation of Venice history?  13   PS: The one thing that I do recall they had something to do with a cemetery that's located in Granite City and it had - it was maybe the St. Mark's Cemetery? I don't know the specifics on it, but that was the big thing they worked on, ah, I do remember also that they brought the bells from maybe the old church and ah erected those right here in Edwardsville at Sunset Hills Cemetery. I think they're up there - ah, but ah other than that I don't attend the meetings so I'm really not up on what they're actually doing, but ah those two things I do know, you know, along that line, ah, as a young man, I was invited, I used to be invited with Dr. Lee ah, and Buck Simmons and various other people from the community and ah, that last Saturday before Christmas of every year, ah, they would go to Saint Louis, and we'd dress up and we'd all go to a hotel for lunch, and then we'd all do a little bit of shopping and then ah, eat lunch, and then just socialize. And ah, I actually had been a part of that for probably 50 some odd years, and maybe only missed like 2 years out of 50 some odd years and I now probably am the oldest member of the group, but we still have and we still do it, and we still have like third generation of kids that come and the story was back then that you'd bring your son, I mean providing he was old enough and ah, let ‘em get a feel of what it was like, and help to keep that thing going, and so we've been doing that, and I'm confident that once I'm gone that these young guys are still will continue to do this and so we don't ah dress up and go to lunch anymore like we used to but we still get together and ah, we do we do have a little food and just socialize.  TS: Does the current mayor of Venice take part in this as well?  PS: No, ah, no actually I don't recall we have had any black members, well it's not actually members, they're just people that show up, but it's just mostly it goes back to the time before the city was integrated you know  TS: Okay, ah that's interesting um, so, what's the so ah, the lunch that you go to these are members of like families that were all a part of Venice  PS: Exactly  TS: That were prominent and now you said the Lee's there aren't any more is that correct? No?  PS: There's one. Dr. Lee's son, Jack Lee is still living ah yeah and he still comes, and he has in the past brought his son, ah, and then we had the there was a Hartman family, in fact one of the Hartman's had been mayor prior to Dr. Lee, ah, and we still have some of Hartman's kids - grand kids  great grandkids that are still involved. Tolliver was a very big family down there we have ah still have the Tolliver's come ah so yeah it's just a, I'm confident it'll go on and on and on and on I don't know that ah, even though the kids now, and I lot of ‘em come in now, I guess their kids were not raised in Venice but they still feel a connection because their fathers were and their grandfathers were and this is something that they had done and they want to be a part of it so, ah, I'm confident it'll keep going, you know, long time after I'm gone I hope –  TS: yeah, that's a great that's a great tradition. Did Mayor Lee - did Dr. Lee start that?  PS: Yes, I believe he probably was one of the original ones that started it yeah, he and ah, I think a guy named Roy Edwards and Buck Simmons, they were probably were down the major players and I do recall one year there were three of us  Jack Tolliver, Charlie Simmons and myself and we were at the top of the  14   Statler Hotel and we're having lunch and there's three of us, and we thought are we gonna let this thing die? You know last year we had you know a lot more, and now this year we're down to three? you know and we decided we were all going to bring somebody else next year and we would build it up and it just started getting bigger and bigger and bigger we probably will have - we probably had as many as 50 guys and ah, we can still easily get 25 to 30 even now, so it's just kinda neat, neat to do  TS: Yeah. One last question, so how many people from Venice like from your generation still stay in touch with each other? That sense of community that was fostered there like you said you have this luncheon so that's a nice way to you know, bridge the generation gap, and have people become involved in wanting to know more about the history of Venice because it is interesting and unique, but how many people do you know of whether it was from your graduating class or others that still do have this sense of community and keep in touch?  PS: Yeah, probably from my actual class there's only a couple that were my age, but a lot of these guys now are younger than me, but ah, I'd say yeah we'd probably have 20 of ‘em that we do it just I may not see ‘em but once or twice a three times a year, but ah there's we just have that connect that you just you always come back you know, and at Christmas time we're always think of this and get calls from younger guys now they always wondering if we're going to do it again you know, and that's sure we'll get it together and they kinda now are taking over, so, ah, that's good to see.  TS: Nice, well thank you so much for your time I really appreciate it PS: Oh you're welcome  15   
MadisonCounty;Stephanie Robbins;1943;2018;Stephanie Robbins 1943 - 2018  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Stephanie Robbins Oral History Interview Stephen Hansen, Interviewer January 30, 2018 Stephen Hansen (SH): Okay I want to make sure that we can hear you so we can put it over here ah today is January 30th I'm Steve Hansen, and I'm talking with Stephanie Robbins and um, again, when we get done, we'll just go ahead I'll have the students transcribe this - it may take 6 weeks, before they get it done, and we'll send it to you, and you can edit it, and take out the "f word" if you want to, or insert it if you want. [laughs] Stephanie Robbins (SR): Haha. SH: So let's go ahead and um, tell us when you were born, and a little bit about your background. SR: Okay. I was born in 1943, in Nashville, Tennessee where I think my family lived for about, I dunno, a few months after I was born, so I never really lived there. And this was during World War II and my dad was involved in what was called "Vital Industries" which means he didn't serve in the military. He was a chemical engineer, and so he was permitted not to go into the military because he was needed here, and he worked at that time for I think it was called Volcom or Vultee, and what they did was they - they mined and processed the stuff used in bombs. It was like phosphates or something. I don't know exactly what it was, so most of what he did was kind of hush hush, and so eventually he went to work - we moved to Oak Ridge, Tennessee where he worked on the atomic bomb, and he never discussed that, and they were told never to discuss it, so he never discussed it, but I remember starting kindergarten in Oak Ridge, which was an amazing place, I mean it just sprang up overnight. We lived in what amounted to flat top, prefab house up on, you know, it had wooden steps. The sidewalks were wooden there, everything was made out of wood. It was muddy, and we eventually moved into a real house. For a long time we lived in this flat top thing, and the locals all said trainloads of stuff come in, but nothing goes out [chuckles], and there's a really good book called The Girls of Atomic City that I read not too long. Again that's one of the first books I've ever seen about what was going on there - what they were doing and all this materiel that came in. The only story my dad ever told about it was that they had hired people, anybody, they can get, warm bodies, and these women came out of the hills, and he had to show them how to use indoor plumbing. They had never seen - they were standing on the toilets. They were breaking the seats on them, and he had to go in and explain to them - they had never seen indoor plumbing, so that's how primitive that part of Tennessee was. SH: Wow SR: And so after that we moved various times. I lived all over the South I didn't really have a hometown, and then, um, I wound up going to college in South Carolina, Furman University, and that's where I met Walker who was going to Wofford College. After graduating we got married and went to the University of Texas to do graduate work, and then, we had finish graduate work, in about 1970. He kept getting deferments, because he had done ROTC and was a second Lieutenant, and the deal was we got 4 years to 1  go to graduate school, and then he would have to go into the army, and when he started to go into the army, he had to go get a physical at Bergstrom Air Force Base, and they kept flunking him on these physicals, and even when he was in ROTC they kept finding heart issues. I mean he would be out in the field, and they’d drag him in and take his blood pressure you know. I think they actually found something then that they didn't ... they never were clear what it was, but there was some problem, so then the same thing happened when he started to go into the army, and they eventually said, you can, if you'll release us from it's expecting your benefits, then you can get out of the army. So in 1970 instead of going into the army, he was released from the military, and we had our first child thinking we were going to have this child in the army, so we had no health insurance whatsoever [chuckles] and so it was really kind of a mess. Anyway we went to the MLA, which is the meat market... SH: Now back up now when did you go to college? SR: I went to college at Furman from ... I graduated in ‘65, so ‘61 to ‘65, but I had never lived in South Carolina. I graduated high school in Alabama. SH: What were you looking to - were you looking to pursue a profession at college? SR: No, it's like everybody else. I read a study one time that said most liberal arts majors get to graduate school by what's called "drift" SH: Yeah SR: And that was me. Now Walker was very clear on what he wanted to do. I mean he definitely wanted to major in English, go to graduate school, and be a college professor. SH: And? SR: And I didn't - SH: But you went SR: Heck, sounds good to me! SH: Did you go in English for graduate school? SR: No, I went to I went in Spanish, so I have a Phd. in Spanish from the University of Texas. So we finished up those Ph.D.'s in about 1970s, and then we had to go look for jobs at MLA. Well, we had to take the best job. First of all I was pregnant. You couldn't tell, but when I was being interviewed, you know, it was a factor - back then it was a factor. You're not going to get a job if you tell somebody you're pregnant, you know. You just weren't - in fact, once, I when I was an undergraduate, I was put up for a Woodrow Wilson Scholarship ... Fellowship, and I had to go down to Atlanta to be interviewed. I took off my engagement ring ‘cause you were not going to get a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship with an engagement ring on I mean. I mean people don't believe that, but that's true. SH: Wow. 2  SR: And um, so, he got the best job. I mean I sorta half-heartedly looked for em, but I knew I was going to have to go wherever he went. And the best job was SIU Edwardsville, and of his colleagues, he had the best starting salary, of anybody - we were all looking together. $12,000 a year, that's $1,000 a month so we moved to Edwardsville, and so I've lived here ever since. SH: And that was in? SR: 1970. SH: 1970. SR: It was the last wave of hiring for SIUE, you know. They were staffing up, and I mean they were really staffing up in the 2 or 3 years prior, but by 1970, they pretty well filled you know, their spots, and so we were in the last little bunch of people being hired, and the locals weren't very happy about it either. [laughs] SH: [laughs] We'll get to that in a minute, but what did you do then, did you teach? SR: Well, I had the baby, so I stayed at home, and there was a professor in the Spanish department named, I think her last name was, Oseik. And I never met her, but she was in Spain and she got in a car accident, so they asked me to come and teach for one, and I think they were on trimesters then, they were on some kind of odd semester system, and so I taught for one trimester or whatever it was they were on, and I absolutely hated it -- just hated it, and I remember telling Walker, I said, I can not do this for the next 30 years. This is awful. First of all, stuck in the middle of the country  and there were very few Hispanic speakers around here then  there was no way to practice  there was little chance of travel, and I mean I had been used to the really heady atmosphere of the University of Texas, which was one of the premier places to study Spanish Literature and Language, ... has a phenomenal Latin American collection, library, you know. It had everything. I mean, Octavio Paz came through there, and all the big names - in literature, in poetry and politics - all flowed through the University of Texas, and when I got here I was like oh, my God, I'm going to be teaching - first-year Spanish the rest of my life, and so Walker said, why don't' you go to law school? I never even thought of it, and I said, well, okay. [laughs] So he sold his little hobby car. He had this little MGB that never really ran very well, but he always said he sold it so I could go to law school. [laughs] SH: [laughs] SR: I used to have to go and gather up the baby and pick him up on the road into SIU because it would have stalled out there you know. [laughs] but um, but then I went to Saint Louis University. I went over to try and negotiate with them to let me go part time because I had a baby, and they wouldn't do it. They said no you can go full time or else, and at that time, Saint Louis U had done away with its night school, so there was no night option because frankly, the crime around there was so bad it just wasn't safe, and that was in 1973, I think, 1973, and so, I finally I got admitted there, and I did go full time from 73-76, and they were so proud of themselves because they had 15% women, oh, they were just so excited. It was just a landmark you know. SH: What was it like being a woman, pursuing a graduate degree, was that unusual at the time? 3  SR: There was ... no, that was not - as long as you were in the liberal arts, that was not unusual. I mean there were plenty of women in grad school, um, but when you got to the professions. That was a different story. There were very few women in med schools and law schools, and um, so law school was a whole different kettle of worms, and I was lucky because I was older. I was 7 years old than the other young women. I mean if they went directly from college to law school they would have been what? 23 or so, but I was already - I had already put in 4 years at Texas, 5 years maybe, 4 years, 5 I guess. I was a little bit older than most of em', so I was able to handle the pressure, and, you know, the you-don't-belong-here kinda stuff. There was a little bit of that. In fact in 19... - my sister went to the University of Florida. I went down to visit her, and at that time, if a woman - this would been about 1960, eh 1963 - if a woman went into the law school library, everybody would start hissing. These men would all start hissing. SH: Really? SR: They were not welcome in the library there. Now that wasn't the case at Saint Louie U, but - and that was, you know, 10 years earlier? You know from when I started. SH: Did you run into any particular prejudices? SR: Mainly from my colleagues, you know, more from my colleagues than from my professors. They were all pretty good, but I remember sitting in these big classes, and we had one teacher, Vince Emil, who just legendary. I mean he was a wonderful man, but he used a purely socratic - what he called the Socratic Method - the same one you see in the “Paper Chase.” I mean where you get called on and humiliated, and I sat between two guys, and for the entire semester these idiots would talk across me as if I weren't there - they would talk about whatever the case we were working on or whatever, and they would literally talk right across me as if I were not even there. And the way Emil operated was he would - you knew when your time was coming within a few minutes because he was going alphabetically down the rows, and we were seated alphabetically, so you knew within a couple of days when your number was up, [laughs] you know. So, the day our number was up, we had read this case, all of us in the whole room had read the case and we're getting ready to start class, and these two jokers are talking across me about me the case, and what they thought the issue was, and you know, cause they know they're going to get quizzed, and never asked me what I thought of anything, so Emil calls on the guy to my left. Ah, Mr. So and So what's the issue in the case? And he goes blah blah blah blah blah and he says - Robbins, do you agree? And I said “no,” and he moves over to the next guy who, of course, who is agreeing with his colleague and just humiliates the hell out of these two guys and all I ever said in that class was “no.” SH: [laughs] SR: I mean he saw that going on. He watched that dynamic going on and just decided to put these two clowns in their places. After that they're just all over me wanting to know what did you think of the case? I said well, the issue was this and this and this, and ohhh ohh after that, they all talked to me, but I mean that's how, you know, that was the mindset - that I was there, I dunno, as a visitor? [laughs] So I was really pleased because when we - that class graduated - a woman was number one in the class. She aced out this guy who'd been leading for the whole two years and graduated number one. Cathy Reilly and she ended up going to work for Brian Cave, McPheeters - big firm. 4  SH: What kind of law were you attracted to? SR: Well, at the time, they had a really good EEOC clinic, employment discrimination, and I really enjoyed it because I got to go and work for attorneys working on EOC cases. They sent us out to McDonald Douglas to dig through their files, you know. There was all kinds of employment discrimination stuff, and I liked labor law, but there really wasn't you know, the chances of doing that sort of thing. You'd have to work for the government. There just weren't that many job opportunities. Because I was going to have to live here, I mean I wasn't going to be able to go somewhere else, and I also determined, after three years of driving across the Poplar Street Bridge, I'd never drive into Missouri for work. Driving back and forth, awww, - cause in my second year I had another child, and that one didn't sleep at night, and I would literally wake up in the parking lot at Saint Louie U not remembering driving over there. I mean it was that bad. I was so sleep deprived [laughs] so, when I got done... [clears throat] One year, between our first and second year... - we had a dean who had worked for Judge Moran - had clerked for Judge Moran on the 5th Appellate Court. He was from the East Side, and he would sort of look after the East Siders. Because here we were, you know, tracking back and forth whereas a lot of these kids were fairly well off, they lived in dorms, and they studied 24 hours a day. The rest of us had lives. We had other things going on at home, and/or jobs, or something, and so, he had came up with a little scholarship program where, if we would go and find the jobs, he would fund - how was it - he would fund somehow. The public defender's office could get three law students for the price of one to work over the summer. So Saint Louie U would pony up the rest of the money, and I remember he told me this. He said why don't you contact the public defender in Madison County, see what can be done, and at the time, the public defender was part-time, so Paul Reilly, was the public defender, but he was also in private practice. So, to reach him, I called his private practice. Well, he practiced with Dick Mudge  and, Dick actually answered the phone that day. I said I need to speak to Mr. Reilly about a job. “We don't need any secretaries,” he says. [laughs] This is Dick Mudge, the liberal - the liberal light of Madison County. I said I'm not talking about being a secretary - so he kinda huffed and snorted and said I'll tell him you called. I couldn't get ahold of the guy. I couldn't get him. Finally I called again and said tell Mr. Reilly I have an offer he can't refuse - just thinking that would be enough. He was notorious for not returning calls. He finally called me back. I said Mr. Reilly I can get you three law students for the summer for the price of one. He said you can? I said yeah, Saint Louie, U will fund it - so, he finally bit you know. So, I and Steve Tillery, who later became the very famous P.I. lawyer, and another guy named Clark from up around Peoria, - we all went to work in the public defender's office. Meanwhile Paul had hired Judge Moran's daughter, who was also a law student but out in Kansas, so there were four of us. We were almost stumbling over each other. It was almost like not enough work to do, but it was a great experience. Kathleen Moran and I were the first women to ever go into the old Madison County Jail to interview prisoners because they were our clients, and the jailers thought this was hilarious. They locked us up in the bullpen with about 10 defendants there. All African-American, you know. And it was us, and we were crammed into this little space with these guys, in the middle of what is really was ... looked like medieval ... I mean it was, you know, iron bars. I dunno if you ever went in the old Madison County Jail, but it was it was primitive. You know? And they left us. They walked off and left us, and so, then these guys start making snide comments, and remarks and what have you, and because they now know that we've been left there with them, and I finally just stood up and I said. If any of you clowns want recog you'll sit down and shut up and answer our questions. [SH laughs] 5  SR: Oh you a lawyer? Yes. Oh, we thought you were social workers [both laugh]. So they sat down and behaved, and it was yes ma'am, no ma'am you know, no problem. I mean, they were kinda just having us on, just having a good time with us, and finally the jailers came back and let us out, and we pretended like it was just a normal occurrence, and we were starting to cross the street, and Kathy says, “damn I was scared. If you hadn't of thought of that, I don't know what we would have done!” [laughs] I said, well, I said, it occurred to me they didn't' realize why we were there, you know, so anyway we had a good time that summer. They let us do stuff we should have never been allowed to do because we weren't licensed in any way shape or form. They let us conduct preliminary hearings, well I mean there was a lawyer sitting right next to us, there was no way we could screw it up, but they let us actually examine witnesses, and it was just really a lot of fun, I really got a lot out of it, you know. SH: So that's how you got interested? SR: Yeah criminal law was just a lot of fun, so when I finished law school, I don't know what I did about - I'm not sure how active I was about applying for work, ahm, because I had these babies you know. At that time, you couldn't get like really good childcare, so I had one that was starting kindergarten, and then this littler one that was like, what was she, like a year old, a year and half old, and, um, so I applied to the State’s Attorney’s Office, and wound up getting a job. Well, you had to pass the bar too, so you spend the whole summer... I spent the whole summer in a closet studying for the bar exam, because I discovered if I went upstairs and got went into the sort of little walk-in closet in this tiny house we lived in - the kids would forget you were home. They'd leave you alone, cause they would lose track of the fact you were still in the house, so I sat in this closet and studied, and then we had to go to bar review courses at night, and Kathleen Moran and I would go back and forth to Saint Louis for these bar review courses - cram, they would cram - they were courses, they would just cram all this, and they sort of have insights onto what will be on the exam. I don't know how right they are, but you know, and then you have to go to Chicago to take it. It takes two days. It's just a nightmare. You're organized alphabetically, so Kathleen with an M was in another entire building from me. I was up at Northwestern at the Dental School or someplace for two days taking this exam. It was awful. And um, we I finished - finally the second day of it - I finished, and we had a train to catch at about 5:30 out of Chicago, so I finished and I got a cab and went down to the building she was in, and I look in the room, and it's empty except she's still writing, she's still in there with about three people still screwing around with this bar exam, and I just shook my head because I knew we're going to miss the train, and we did. She comes out of there and now we've missed it. She says, what are we going to do? I said well, I have some Aunts that live in Joliet, so we call my Aunts. They drove to Chicago and picked us up and took us to Joliet and entertained us, and, you know, put us on a train the next day, and so it was it was just really something. SH: This was then then at the latter half of the 70s? SR: This would have been in 1976. Um, and then you don't get the bar results. You take it in the summer, but you don't get them until October. So you wind up getting a job, sorta provisionally, if you get a job. If you don't pass it, the job's gone. So, I... Nick Byron was state's attorney at the time, and he had offered me a job. I mean he didn't offer. I applied, and he accepted it, and, I thought well isn't that farsighted of him. He's hiring the first woman Assistant State’s Attorney. In Madison County. I discovered later the reason he hired me was because my maiden name is Malinoff, and he thought I was related to Kostoff and all the Madison County democratic powerbrokers, who are all Macedonian. [laughs] You know because 6  of the bar, you have your whole name spelled out on all this paperwork, so I was not the first woman Assistant State's Attorney. I was the first purported Macedonian Assistant State’s Attorney [laughs]. My dad was Bulgarian. He was from Joliet, didn't have anything to do with these folks down here. [laughs] SH: So, little digression, the Madison County Democratic machine politics you were coming in at SR: The height of it, yeah. SH: The heights of it? SR: Well, it was at its... it was gonna decline shortly after but they still lugged everybody. The lug was a big issue - the lug? SH: What was that... SR: If you ran for public office, for a county - maybe any office, you paid the party 10% of your annual salary. You were lugged. SH: And what did the party do with that money? SR: Oh, god knows what they did with it. SH: [laughs] SR: They said it was, you know, to support other Democrats, blah blah blah. Evelyn Bowles was first one to refuse to pay the lug, the very first one. This was in 1974. I was still in law school when this happened. But it was an amazing story because she'd been in the County Clerk's office for 20 years as Chief Deputy, and when Ms. Hotz retired, she says I want Evelyn to run, and assuming the party would go along with it. I mean why wouldn't you? Here's an experienced person – of course, she was a woman, you know, and the only other woman officeholder was Dallas Burke, who was a coroner. But anyway, so Evelyn announced that she was going to run. Well the party got together, and they had the screening committee, and you would have to appear before the party, and they would anoint you to be the candidate in the primary. You wouldn't have any primary opposition, and you'd get lugged too - you know - and Evelyn told me one time that Ms. Hotz actually sold her car to pay the lug, I mean you know back in the day, and she said after she saw that happen she vowed she would never pay that. And because I mean - these jobs they pay let's say they paid $20,000 you're talking $2,000 to the party. So, anyway... SH: So this committee would kinda screen SR: Yeah they'd pick the candidates. It's a bunch of beefy guys in Granite City, you know? SH: Who was it all? SR: It was all men SH: All men? But was it all kinda very ethnic in terms of - you said Macedonians, and 7  SR: Could be, well Madison was pretty well populated with Hunkies, Eastern European principally - I don't know why they're called Macedonians. They're really Bulgarians I mean, but it sounds better I guess, and there was a Bulgarian Orthodox Church. There was one. I don't know if it's still functioning, and um, so, she announced she was going to run. Well the party got together and picked a tavern owner in Granite City, Von Dee Cruse, and they put him up, and he was going to be the candidate. So now we got a primary battle between Evenlyn and the party, basically. She knocked the piss out of em. She won by so much - they were buried, just buried. For 20 years she worked in the county clerk's office. She knew every precinct committeeman. She had – there are 122 precincts in this county - each of them has at least 4 or 5 election judges. Who do you think gave the trainings for all these election judges - Democrat and Republican? Which means a bunch of Republicans crossed over and voted in the Democratic Primary to make sure she got elected. I mean it was an uproar. It was a rout. And she didn't... you know, and then, of course, I don't even think she had any Republican - she didn't have any Republican opposition. They wanted her, you know. They wanted fair elections. They wanted her, so the next time she ran in 1978, the papers were calling her saying are you going to the screening? Are you going to the screening committee? Are you going to pay the lug? And the night of the screening committee they called her house and said aren't you going to the screening committee? She says, I'm doing my laundry. [laughs] And no, I'm not going. So, now, Kostoff, the chairman, they don't know what to do. They don't know what to do, so instead of endorsing her, which is what they did, they would endorse, the candidate. They recommended her. They endorsed this whole slate of candidates and recommended Evelyn. They didn't endorse her because she didn't pay the lug. And so, I was in the courthouse when this happened, Bosworth from the - at the time he worked for The Globe, or maybe he worked for the Metro East Journal, he's in - he's from Madison originally, and he interviews Chris Kostoff, and he says, well Mr. Kostoff I've heard of recommending or not reco- I mean endorsed or not endorsed but I've never heard of recommended. What does that mean? And Chris had this very strong accent. Chris says - [in accent] that means she gonna win anyway. [laughs] I mean he was - just - the archetypal political boss. His wife had been an entertainer in her earlier life. SH: Is that a euphemism? SR: Yes. Probably. And at the end of the day, they owned - they had a tavern down there and workers would come out of the Granite City Steel and they had to put money at the end of the bar. They just shook down everybody for everything. She, Mrs. Kostoff, was always selling tickets. In fact, the Kennedys came through - I don't remember which Kennedy, was it, John? Or was it the Schreibers? But there was a big parade for them down in Granite City. And they're all sitting up there. Of course she's sitting up there cause, her husband's the boss, and she's the chief precinct committeewoman or something and they said you could see her reaching into her pocket and to try to sell the Kennedy's some tickets [laughs] you know... but most of that was kinda before I was involved - I mean I was in law school during the time period that Evelyn was running. I didn't actually even know her very - I knew what was going on, because it was the talk of the town, you know that she was not endorsed and the outrage everybody felt about how the party was treating her, and so anyway, ah, I got outta law school, and Nick... Walker and the kids and I decided we would never have enough time to do this, so we were going to make a big trip - a big - it was the bicentennial year 1976, and we were gonna travel to Canada, up through Canada, and then back down through Maine and home, and we borrowed this Beauville - Chevy Beauville box van, from my dad. The thing was huge. It got about 10 miles to the gallon I guess, maybe  loaded the kids in there. One of them was 1 and the other one was 5, and car seats? Who ever heard of car seats? We had 8  this thing that we hung on the backseat only to get Jeff up high enough to see out the window, and the baby rocked around in a playpen in the back of it - so we went all the way up to Ontario, camped out there, and then we went across to Quebec, and the Laurentian Mountains, and the temperature turned cold, and we also had black flies which were supposed to be gone by that - it was September, early September, and those black flies bit my baby - and have you ever been bitten by a black fly? They make a little almost like a little cut, and you you have a little blood mark on the cut, and I said that's it - this camping thing is over so we threw all this wet soggy crap in the van and drove to Quebec to the first motel we came to. We pulled up underneath, and Walker says we can't afford this - this guy in livery, this kid in livery comes out to greet us. I said I don't care. We're staying here. I said do you have a room? He says yeah we have a room. And I said we've been driven out of the mountains by the black flies. He goes – “ahh.. the vampires of the North” [laughs] and this, and also the people in rural Quebec were very hostile. This was right when they were doing their French only, we're French stuff, and they were nasty to us. I mean if I tried to speak French, they didn't understand. If I tried to speak English, they would go - just French, you know. It was just impossible, and he said - Walker says well if you think the people in the country are bad, how do you think these people are going to be? They thrive on tourism. They were as nice as they could be. You know? So, then we came back through Maine. Meanwhile, Nick has accelerated the time I was supposed to come to work. I think they lost somebody, so instead of having a week when I got home, he says I need you to come to work right away, so, I went to the office, and he had an office manager named Dewey Van Dyke. Dewey was an old Marine, smoked a cigar and back then people smoked in the offices, you know, and, he says, oh! And Nick goes - find a desk for her! So Dewey goes okay - and he just puts me in the steno pool with the secretaries, and I said no, that's not gonna do. I need my own office. And he said all right, all right, maybe you'll find something back here. Meanwhile at that time the State’s Attorney’s Office was in the top of the Edwardsville National Bank which has disappeared, but it's where the administration building and Purcell Street ran between the courthouse and the bank, so the State’s Attorney’s Office had one floor um, Boroughs, Simpson, a big law firm, was on the top floor, and the sheriff's department was on the bottom floor, you know, down all the way to the basement and then there was this rickety elevator. They had an elevator operator, Clem, and this sliding, you know, accordion-type door and this crank you know that would run the elevator up, so it was [laughs] it was really old fashioned. And um, so Dewey finally gets me an office, lets me have a desk, you know, and an office, and, you know, they start trying to think of stuff for me to do. Then I got sick. I was sick from that trip. I really wanted to have a week to recover from it, and so I was out for a couple of days, and finally had to go see a doctor in Saint Louis, and when I came back, I go into my office and I got no desk. Dewey had moved my desk to the basement. I mean, to like the basement like underneath the building. [laughs] Dewey I'm going to need a desk - oh ah ah well ah - I mean he did it on purpose. I know he did. And so, every morning these guys - there were like 4 attorney's, 4 guy attorneys and Dewey would be in the backroom, and there was a dart board back there, and they'd go back there, and they'd bullshit about baseball and all this kind of stuff. I was never invited, didn't, you know, join this morning coffee clutch thing that they did every morning, so one day I thought I've had enough of this. I walked back there, and they were talking baseball as usual, and I looked at Dewey, and I said Dewey what do you do with an elephant with three balls? And he went uhh uhh he was thinking this was gonna be some kind of dirty joke I guess. He goes uhh uhh uhh. I said well, you walk him, and pitch to the giraffe. And he didn't really get it, and those other guys just started laughing and they were just rolling on the floor, you know? And after that I just went back there, I didn't care about talking about baseball, but I was not going to be left out, you know? 9  SH: Did they, when they - how did they assign cases? SR: Well, they would start you in juvenile or misdemeanor. Everybody started there. So, they gave me misdemeanor cases to do, and I literally flunked misdemeanors because I wanted to try cases. I wanted to go to court. I wanted to have juries. I wanted to learn how to try stuff. So I tried everybody - anybody and everybody - including lawyers, which did not go over well. I had one lawyer who ran a stop sign. It's a stop sign that's at the bottom of, if you're going on 270, the drop off down there to get to Granite City. It used to be when you came down the hill, there's a stop sign there. I think that they've made that a little better than it used to be. Well, Leon Scroggins ran that thing, and the police stopped him and gave him a ticket. Well, of course, he just figured he'd walk in and we’d dismiss the ticket, and he says well then I need a trial. Well, it was a bench trial. We didn't actually have a jury for this. So, so I had an officer testify, put on all the evidence. It was pretty clear Leon had run the stop sign. The judge, however, found that, as a matter of law, the stop sign was in the wrong place. [laughs] So Leon got off. [laughs] We had, and then I got myself into a political thing accidentally. I was trying some hit and run case. A kid had hit a car. I mean it was property damage, and he'd left, and there was some political thing going on in Granite City, and these lawyers were all attacking each other, and I was in the middle of it. I didn't even know what was going on, and we wound up convicting - I wound up convicting the kid for the hit and run thing, and, um, then we discovered he was a juvenile. We didn't' know he was only 16. You can't try a juvenile, and this was in front of a jury! It was a massive error at the time. So, like I flunked misdemeanors. And so, there was a rape case on Chouteau Island. Two girls were at a gas station in Ferguson, Florissant on the other side of the river, and these guys haul up, and it was a couple of carloads of em, and they say hey, you girls want to go to a party? And these two girls are kinda...um, conservatively raised I would say. I mean their - I think they went to Catholic school - and they said oh, it's not very far, just follow us and then you can go home when you want to. So they said, oh, okay. So they follow them across the river, and now these guys start turning here and there and pretty soon these girls are pretty much lost. I mean they're now stuck with having to follow these guys because they don't know where they are. They wind up on Chouteau Island. They wind up in that area, you know, between, you know, where the Chain of Rocks Bridge is out in there, and then it's gangbusters. It's a gang rape. And they pull them out of the car, they rape em, they take the you know, they drove their cars doing donuts around them on the ground in the mud, you know, making... coming as close as they can with the car to them, while they're on the ground, and I mean just terrorized them. Then these guys just all jump in their cars and leave, and these girls are left to kinda pull themselves together and get home, and they manage to get back across the river, and I can't remember - I think they were so freaked out they were speeding and they got stopped for speeding, and they told the police officer what had happened. He didn't really believe them. He felt they were trying to get out of a speeding ticket, and eventually the word came back that there had possibly been a rape, but I mean these are all guys, you know. These are all cops listening to this story, and so, our side of the river went out to investigate and sure enough, they found these grooves in the ground like the girls had said it happened, and one of these jokers had dropped his driver's license out there. Otherwise we'd of had no clue. These girls didn't know these guys. They'd never seen them. They could barely give a description of them. It was dark, you know, and so we managed to get the first one I think, and I believe he may gave us the name of a couple of em, but he didn't know all of em, so the first felony case was assessed by the person that handled it at preliminary hearing, which would have been - which was Don Weber. Don Weber says no evidence, no medical, no something else. He had a whole list of all the things missing from the case. He said give it to Steph. She thinks it's worthwhile or you know, she thinks it's something. 10  Case can't be won. Give it to Steph. She thinks it's important or something like that. So they gave me this case, and I wound up with two very experienced trial lawyers on the other side and me. And I had never tried a felony. I had never tried a felony jury in my life. I'd never picked a jury really, you know, and, Judge Clark was the judge. He was the only Republican judge at the time, and he was the most...how can I put it...dignified fellow. I mean he was ex- military. Jurors loved him. They just loved him. He looked every image of the judge, you know. He really did. And um, he started trying to pick the jurors, and at one point he'd called me up to the bench and he said - don't you think you need some help? [laughs] [whispers] No, I don't need any help. Of course, I needed help you know. Anyway, I was in that trial for 10 days, and people were starting to drop in to watch it. I was in it for 10 days, and it resulted in a hung jury, meaning no verdict at 3 am in the morning, the jury hung. I mean, I just felt like I've been through a meat grinder, and it was cold. It was in February, and we came out in the street, and these two girls are with me, and they said well what does this mean, what does this mean that the jury hung? I said it means that that the case can be tried again, and, of course, they didn't want to go through it again. I'm just not sure the county has the resources, and walking and marching along behind me was Don Weber. Yes, the county does have the resources, he says, and we're going to get these guys. By now he had become incensed, you know. What he thought was a joke, had suddenly become real, and we wound up hunting down all 10 of those guys, and we sent them all to prison. Unfortunately Judge Clark didn't give them very long sentences. He gave them like 4 years or something, which was ridiculous for what they'd done. SH: Was that your first major case? SR: Yes. It was and then after that they managed to give me all the rape cases, but I started researching rape cases in Madison County, and between 1959 and 1976 they had tried 3. SH: Really? SR: 3 cases. SH: 3 cases from 59 to 76? SR: They just dealt them away all of the time, so, then I got really involved, and by then SIU had formed a rape crisis center, um. Pam Klein and a bunch of women out there raised - they got this rape and sexual abuse care center it was called, and - they didn't have that really up and running when I had the two girls, ah the first case, but they had a seminar or something out there, and they invited me to come out and speak, and they all but threw rocks at me. They all but pelted me with produce because I was explaining the prosecutorial difficulties you know, and there these feminists thought that was just bullshit - you know. Anybody should be able to walk into a courtroom and get a conviction on these. At that time you couldn't get a conviction on rape without a nun with 6 stab wounds, you know. They would drag up the girl's past, her dating history. In fact, even in this case, the one on Chouteau Island, the girls had been carrying some LP's - some albums in the car, and it was ZZ Top's Backdoor Man, something like that you know. It has all these sexual references. I didn't know it - who can hear the lyrics to those things? I can't! They said well isn't it true you were carrying, I mean they just tortured these girls with these records that they had bought you know which was popular music at the time. Isn't it true this is what you had on your mind when you went with these guys? You went voluntarily with these guys? You followed them in your car over there? I mean, you know, these were two very good defense lawyers, and they were just nasty, 11  and I couldn't protect them from that kinda stuff, and but once the rape crisis center was up and running, then it wasn”t easier, but it was easier from the point of view of dealing with the victims because they could deal with the victims. They could take care of them. They could prop them up emotionally. I didn't have to do that. I didn't know how to do that, you know. My job was - look this was the case, and this is what I'm doing, so I mean we turned into a juggernaut. AP-UP even picked it up. My cousin out in Arizona read an article and said that's Steph! We had a 92% conviction rate. SH: Wow. SR: And I tried like, over the period of three years, I tried 15 cases 13 jury 13 of them were jury trials, 2 were bench, and of the 13, probably 6 or 7 were rape cases. I mean, when you consider they'd done 3 in what, you know, like over 20 years, it was just you know, so anyway, we just started plowing through them. And then, we got the rape - there was a rape and sexual abuse committee of the State Legislature. They came down here and held hearings, and I rounded up... they said can you get us a cop, and a victim and blah blah blah - and these hearings were held at SIU. I mean we just raised the image of this kind of stuff, and then there was a police officer up in Chicago named Vitulo, and he had invented, so to speak, a rape kit for hospitals to use so that when we got them examined we would have more than a pair of panties to work with. I even got into a fight with St. Elizabeth's, which was Catholic. They didn't want to have anything to do with it. And they wouldn't ... they wouldn't take care of these girls when they came in. They thought rape was their own fault, that kinda stuff, and they wouldn't preserve evidence. I wound up talking to Sister Mary fucking Margaret who was running the place down there, and I mean I just... and then she says our position is no abortion, no abortion counseling, no nothing, but bit by bit I discovered that in the path lab there was a feminist NOW member and in the ER there were nurses that were interested, and they would call me surreptitiously to tell me that they had a rape victim there, what did they need to do, what should they do? And they would just go ahead and do it and save this stuff. Screw Sister Mary Margaret you know? And so we begin to get a whole underground network of people that would help us with these cases. One of them, one of the worst ones I had, the girl was dumped out of the car up headed up towards Staunton um. She'd been... she had hitched a ride with a trucker. They're not supposed to pick up people. She hitched a ride, 16 years old, had her cat with her. The guy had... he had tortured her. Well, he was coming from Indiana across the country going West. To throw her off the track he turned North toward Chicago and dumped her out up there. And this girl staggers into this gas station. They call... they called the police. They called the hospital. I think they even got an ambulance to take her to the Staunton hospital. They refused to treat her because she was a rape victim with no insurance. They transferred her down to Anderson Hospital, which also was gonna refuse to treat her because she had no insurance, no nothing. So I said give me the head of that hospital. I talked to him. I said do you know it is just a petty offense - there's actually a statute on the books you can't turn down not just rape vic...., you can't turn down emergency victims of crime or something like that - some little known, forgotten piece of statute. I said it's a petty offense. Do you know that a petty offense carries a fine of about $100. But you know what I'm going to do to you in the press if you turn this girl down? I said your name will be mud. And he said but, but, but. I said you will treat this girl, and of course the rape crisis people were on his ass too, so it wasn't just me, and so they treated her, and she was in such bad shape rape crisis people had to have someone with her 24 hours a day. Someone sat in her room, and they had to cover up the mirror in the bathroom because her face was so beat up. They didn't even want her to see how she looked. The guy had crammed a fusee up her rectum. It's one of those torches, you know, that they stick in the ground when they're working on a truck. You know, it was awful, and when the 12  police interviewed her - Dennis Kuba was the detective - and she remembered that he had white shoes on which she thought was really funny cause it was winter and he was he had on these white loafers or something, and he had sorta greasy hair, and you know she gave them a description. Well, of course, they're looking northbound, for him towards Chicago. Then they said well maybe let's go back towards Saint Louis because he had said he was going to Saint Louis, but he had turned towards Chicago. Sure enough, they walk into that, about where that Circle K - that truck stoppy place down by Pontoon Beach, and there's a guy in white shoes standing there, and they go up and talk to him, Well, yeah yeah he had this hitchhiker, and, no, he didn't do anything to her, you know, denied everything, and they arrested him anyway, you know. So, and then we were off to the races after that, you know. He wound up, - his name was Ed Harbour - and um, he, I don't know how we discovered this, but we discovered that he had done a similar thing to 2 girls in Florida, but they had like gotten away from him. I can't remember the whole story on it. The law on evidence is you can't introduce evidence of other crimes committed by a person - unless, you can show a pattern as part of an MO. Like he always leaves a white glove at the scene of the robbery or something like that. So I flew with one of the state troopers down to Florida, and we interviewed the two girls, and sure enough it was a similar pattern. I mean he picked them up at a truck stop and tied them up in the same manner and blah blah blah, so I filed a motion to introduce evidence of these other two girls in Florida, and even though I knew I was flirting with reversible error, and we had a 4 hour hearing on it, whether it was similar enough and blah blah blah, and Judge Matoesian finally ruled that we could introduce the evidence. Then I decided I wouldn't introduce it because I could get the case reversed, even though I had the ruling so, when we - but we flew the girls up. Harbour said he never heard of these girls, never heard anything about it. When these girls walked in the courtroom he turns around and starts nudging his attorney. He had seen them before. He recognized them. They came in and sat down, and we're getting ready to open the trial, and so in her opening statements - Scottie Mormon was defending him so everybody thought this is great, catfight, you know that I was prosecuting and she was defending. So Scottie gets up and in her opening statement announces they will hear evidence of other girls that he, you know, might have raped in Florida, but I didn't put the evidence on, but it got out, because we tricked her into telling the jury. [laughs] Anyway the guy got convicted and Karen Malorny... - his defense was, for all the bruising and battery, - it was really pretty clever, was that she had epilepsy and had an epileptic fit in the truck and that's how she got hurt because she did. They asked for her medical records and they did discover she had been diagnosed with epilepsy as a child, and so they had an expert who was going to come in to say that these injuries could have been caused by an epileptic seizure. The expert was from Washington University. So I had her examined by a neurologist at Saint Louis University, and he was a little short fireplug of a guy who had never testified in court before, and so they put on their guy, and he testified that, yes, she had epilepsy and blah. He was a very dignified medical man, you know. And so in my case I had this little portly guy who was carrying a bunch of paper when he came in the courtroom, and, he'd never testified, and so I introduced him, and “Doctor do you have an opinion within a reasonable degree of neurological certainly as to whether or not blah blah blah,” and he says - he looks straight at the jury, he hops up out of the witness box - he says not only does that girl not have epilepsy, she never had epilepsy. She was misdiagnosed and then he takes this EKG and flings it down the table, the counsel table I mean - and he tells the jurors and they're pretty much standing up [laughs]. I couldn't get him back in the chair [both laugh]. It was just - it was the most hilarious thing. I just stood back and let him go. So uh, in the closing arguments there was like a railing in front of the jury that was just about this wide, and so in closing argument Scottie Mormon gives her argument. She's laying out this EKG from her doctor that shows epilepsy, so she's got this kinda thing laying on the bench 13  there, so I get up there to give my rebuttal. So I scoop that stuff up and start putting down pictures of this girl with her face all beat up and just horrible pictures of her, and they're all just sitting there, but anyway, he got sentenced to 60 years, so Judge Matoesian was just horrified by the whole thing, and he just, you know... It was bad. In fact he got out just not too long ago. SH: How would you characterize the judges were they - maybe that's not a fair question. SR: Um, Madison County, unlike St. Clair County, was actually always very open and really, surprisingly, welcoming to outsiders. Now if I went to St. Clair County to practice law, there was a home- court advantage down there and a homeboy thing always going on. But up here they were always curious about outsiders, and they always sorta welcomed outsiders, and we had a diverse group, you know judges. Our judges were kinda different from each other, they were all Democrats, except for Judge Clark, and they . . . Judge Clark was such a dignified guy and I had so many cases in front of him, I don't know why, but at 3 o'clock in the morning he might have loosened his tie one notch waiting for a jury to come back, but I do remember one time him telling me, he says, “I know of course that I'm the whore at the picnic” [both laugh], so when they needed to put down a strike, a riot, at Shell, they would take it to the Republican judge. You know, that's what he meant. So he served the purpose. I mean, you know it was just the way it was and um, but when I first started practicing like Judge Matoesian, for example, he would say well, what should we call you? You know is it Mrs. or Ms. ? I said you could call me Doctor. I have a Phd. [both laugh], and Judge Barr who served in WWII and fought all through the Pacific as a Marine, was an amazing individual. He was a strikingly handsome man. He lived well into his 90’s, and he was utterly delightful. And, but, but, when we were in the courtroom he would say, ah, Mr. Rungy? Steph? Stephanie? He'd call me by my first name, but he'd call the male attorney Mr. whatever even though he'd probably known him 20 years longer than he'd known me, but he was such a nice - I mean I couldn't get upset about it except finally in front of a jury I said Judge Barr you've got to call me something besides Stephanie. Counselor? I said that'll do that'll do. Calls us both counselor okay, and he would, and he called the objections, sorta like an umpire - balls and strikes, so if the other guy that had two objections sustained you knew it was your turn so you could just wait for anything to happen and to object, and you'd get the ruling in your favor. And Judge Clark, he had a court reporter, who ran the courtroom really, so you had to get on her good side, and if you needed a break, you'd go and tell her can we get a break? And she would raise her hand, and Judge Clark would declare a break and we'd all go, but like I said the jury's loved Judge Clark they loved Judge Barr too, but really they had some of that kind of stuff ... You had to make them realize that they just couldn't call you by your first name because they know you. SH: Were any of the judges particularly biased? SR: I never found that the circuit judges were. They started off that way, but if you would kinda do a good job, they came around pretty quick. I just didn't find a lot of problem with them. Some of the male lawyers had trouble getting used to having, you know, women on the other side of them, you know, but by and large, they were always pretty darn fair. I never had as much trouble with them as I had with the office manager [both laugh] SH: How is it that Madison County got the label as the "judicial hell-hole?" 14  SR: Well, when I was in law school it was the plaintiff's paradise. [both laugh] Um Madison County has been the plaintiff's paradise, so to speak, because of transportation - the railroads and the barges. If a guy falls off a barge in Louisiana, his case could end up in Madison County because it's all the river. It's all part of the river. That's, you know, the same with the railroads. There're so many tracks and what have you in here that the suits were principally against railroads and barges, and the laws very favorable to the the plaintiff for both of those. I mean those are very dangerous occupations. I only ever was connected to one railroad case. But that's where these big plaintiff's practices came from. They were wired to the unions. When a guy got hurt, he was routed to a specific attorney. Now, all this kinda got more and more out of hand when we had that - remember there was a Dioxin spill down in Sturgis, Missouri. Well, it was a railroad spill. The case wound up in Madison County, even though the spill was down there, but the case wound up here. And so, it was a venue issue. Over time, the law changed on venue, and you had to have more stricter ..., but it used to be anywhere the railroad ran, you could litigate the case. Well we became fairly expert in Madison County, and we got pretty expert in complex litigation. It was asbestos...was another big area, and I think this judicial hell hole thing started during the asbestos litigation. I think that some of the plaintiff's lawyers pushed the envelope a little too far and the national - at one point the national president of the Chamber of Commerce came here to give a speech or something in the courthouse plaza there - I guess to tell us we were a judicial hell hole or something, and some lawyer got the idea we'll subpoena him. We'll take his deposition because to show something or other in some case that was pending. I don't know what, but anyway it’s frankly an abuse of process and just brought the wrath of god down on them. This Madison County Record thing here is run by the Chamber of Commerce. They set up shop right in downtown Edwardsville, and we’re going to trash this court system from now til who laid the dog, and didn't matter what happens. They would have a big headline: defendant moves to dismiss, you know. In every case, the defendant moves to dismiss. I mean that's not news, but that they, you know, they would take samples out of the motion from the defendant on what evil thing the plaintiff was doing, and they would just consistently trash the court system, and I don't know if anybody ever reads that Record, but sometimes it filters out into the general public, and then they would put out this Chamber of Commerce thing saying these are the judicial hell holes, so it wasn't really a judicial hell hole as far as I can see. Judge Barr is another example of that. There was a case - Paul Pratt was a big personal injury lawyer - he had a case where a guy was suing for millions of dollars for something, and I don't even remember what, and the jury returned a verdict in favor of the plaintiff for millions of dollars. I don't even remember the amount. And, the defense files a routine motion to enter judgment. It's called judgment NOV, judgment notwithstanding the verdict, that is the judgment is for the plaintiff for a million dollars. We think the court should override the jury and enter an NOV, a judgment NOV in favor the defendant. Judge Barr was about the most - in Spanish it's called "hombre recto," straight up guy. I mean he was a straight guy, and he got wind of some shenanigans involved in that case, and I don't even know what the shenanigans were, lying by witness or something and entered his judgement NOV, in that case. And that took guts. I mean this is against one of the most powerful personal injury lawyers in the county, and I went by, I went by the see him. I saw the attorney. He's skulking. He hadn't shaved. He looked like he hadn't bathed in a couple of days. He's wearing a jacket. He's just had a million bucks snatched away from him, and I went in to see Judge Barr, and I said what happened with Pratt's case? Me, I just ask him. He says, I just didn't think the evidence supported the verdict, you know, but something had gone wrong in there, and he knew it. You know I don't know what, but he was like the most honest guy, and he wasn't afraid of anybody you know, so, you know that's lets the chips fall where they may, so we had that kind of thing. It, you know, it wasn't corrupt really. I mean there were, you 15  know, you could get back roomed occasionally. That would happen, but basically it was a pretty darned good system I thought. SH: What does that mean being "back roomed" SR: Well, that's the judges are not supposed to have ex parte communication with either side without the other side being present, and, as Weber used to put it, sometimes we'd go to the bar meetings to protect the record [laughs], you know, because the judges would be at the bar meetings, the lawyers would be at the bar meetings. Everybody'd be drinking, and who knows you know what was going on. In fact, we would have fights at the bar meetings. There would be fights. [laughs] Everybody says “oh, lawyers do battle all day, but they are friends at the end of it.” Well sometimes that, that spilled over and you know. SH: Don Weber had quite a reputation. SR: Yes he did. Don is somewhere to the right of Attila the Hun, and I don't know why we've always been friends because I don't see him for long periods of time, but we just have this history of being in the foxhole together you know, but um, essentially he just a right winger you know, right-wing guy. I think now he's like representing Prinzler off and on. But I was involved in an electoral board thing last summer, not last summer, summer before, and Don and I spent like about three weeks involved in that. He was representing the one side and somebody else was representing the other side, but the smartest thing they did was put me on that electoral board because we know each other, and I was able to cut back on some of the nonsense that would have gone on otherwise. SH: How did you get involved in politics? SR: Um, well, I ran for ...- that's how I got fired. Dewey Van Dyke eventually got me. He got me fired from the State Attorney's Office. But in 1979, I ran for um, city council, and I was still an Assistant State’s Attorney, and so behind my back one of my colleagues in the State’s Attorney’s Office and Dewey, and probably Nick concocted an opinion from the Attorney General that said that to be an alderman and the Assistant State’s Attorney would be a conflict of interest. I mean occasionally, the AG's office issues opinions. Now, Nick had been an alderman and an Assistant State’s Attorney. Apparently it wasn't a conflict then...but you know so they came up with this opinion. Meanwhile I was running for alderman. I got elected, and between the time I was elected and the time I was to be sworn in, they issued this opinion, and Nick announced that if I took my seat as an alderman that I would be terminated as an Assistant State’s Attorney. His hands were tied you know, and so there was – ah, Weber told me this- he said there were running, what was it? The odds that I was going to not take my seat was something like 10 to 1 that I would not take my seat as an alderman. I wouldn't get sworn in because I was going to lose my job. Oh bullshit. So I went down and got sworn in, and I didn't know what the drill was, but normally after the new city council is sworn in, everybody sort of adjourned to Rusty's. They used to go down to Rusty's, you know, go down have a few drinks and celebrate. I didn't know any of that. So Mary Hildebrand and I decided we'd go visit Evelyn, tell her about it. She lived in Dunlap Lake and Ms. Hotz was dying of cancer, and Mary said let's just go by Evelyn's and tell her about the swearing in and stuff. She'd be interested in it. Like I said I knew her, but I didn't know her very well. So we stopped by, and we visited. Meanwhile, people are getting drunk at Rusty's and calling Nick at home and calling him names and how could you do that? And how could you fire her? And you can't fire her. You were an alderman 16  and screaming at him. He loses the next election to Don Weber, so we have like, one of the few Republican State's Attorney's as a result of all that uproar of them firing me. I think they fired Don too. I think he ran for city commissioner whatever they are in Collinsville. It's the same concept, it's just ... and all of this was because Dewey convinced Nick that I would run against him for State's Attorney, which I had never intended to do – would never have done, so that's how I got in politics, and then in 1994 Evelyn announced she was going to retire, and I said well, I'll run for it, what the heck. If she backed me, you know I could probably win - little did I know - I got slaughtered. I lost to a drunk. SH: This is for Clerk? SR: County Clerk yeah. And um, in fact, the night of the election these reporters are saying what happened? You had Evelyn's backing. Evelyn was also running for the Senate, but she didn’t have any opposition in the primary. And they said, what happened? You had Evelyn's backing. I said well, let me put it this way, whatever Evelyn has is non-transferrable. [laughs] And I was a terrible politician. I don't' really like people much, and I don't like smiling, and, you know, I didn't like glad handing. I was no good at chit-chat, you know, Evelyn could have these - she was amazing - she could have these conversations with people who would have sworn they had good advice from her, and all she did was making sucking noise, but they would think they had a deeply heartfelt .... and she wouldn't have told them a thing, not a thing she didn't want them to know. You know people would say Evelyn I need to speak to you confidentially. They'd come to her office sometimes, and so she'd go out in the public and sit on a bench with them. And they said well, she wouldn't haul them back in her office and close the door, cause then everybody in the place would be looking - she'd go sit on a bench, you know, and have these incredibly private conversations when they were all in the courthouse there together, but whatever she had, it wasn't transferable. Plus I'd have to be County Clerk which is a really hard job, you know, really hard, so it was just as well that I didn't win. SH: Did you go into private practice? SR: I was in the State’s Attorney’s Office for three fun-filled years, and then I went to work for Earl Vuagniaux, and his office was right across the street from the courthouse. And so I worked for Earl for - let's see - from about 79... I worked for him for about 5 years, and then in 1985, Barb Crowder and I formed ...- we determined to be the first all-woman law firm in Southern Illinois. And, we went into practice together, and then we took in Gail Bader, so at one point there were three of us, and then, I like to say, Barb left me for her husband. She and Larry then formed a practice, and then Gail left, so I wound up practicing by myself for most of the time. you know, which was fine. I did share office space with Evelyn, so that helped on the rent you know, but um. SH: And you were mostly... criminal law? Defense? SR: Well I was a special public defender for most of that time, which was, you know, they give you $20,000 to take all comers, kind of, and that means that you do a lot of juvenile work because you do what's conflict work. That is when a public defender has, say, two guys do a burglary, and one rats out the other. Well they can't represent both of them, so the special public defender comes in to take one of them. I wound up in that ... I wound up in a death penalty case doing that. And that was before all the death penalty laws had changed. For like $20,000 I represented a guy in a death penalty, you know, - $20,000 17  dollars covering all the other cases I was doing in the county, and, oh, it was a nightmare. Those things are life-altering experiences. They really are. Ah, the biggest help I got on that was from Billy Hahs. It turned out Billy had been a public defender in South Carolina, and he had done a lot of death penalty cases. I didn't even know him, and somebody said there's this guy, you know, that's new around here that's done death penalty cases. Why don’t you talk to him, but then I realized that Sharon was at SIU, and he was just a really big help. I mean he just had a lot of good advice and whay have you. I mean of course I lost, and that was the only case that I was ever involved in that there was actually corruption, actually corruption on the other side. And of course I lost the case, but... SH: Corruption in terms of? Bribing? SR: Not bribing so much as hiding evidence, um, flaunting the law, ex-parte communication, between the judge and the... and the prosecutor uh. He had ... they had each other on speed dial, you know, and, I did some tricky motion into the thing to try to ... they had us tried together. There was another guy and my guy, and it is what's called a Brady violation well is it Brady? Anyway, I should have been given a severance, and they wouldn't give me a severance from this other guy who was way guilty. I mean way guilty! They had a lot of evidence on him, and nothing on my guy, and so what the whole plan was to smear that evidence over to my guy. Well, that's unconstitutional. You can't do that. And um, but the judge was an idiot. He kept allowing them, the other side, to do that, and um, so when that was over I had to do a post-trial motion. If you don't do a post-trial motion, you often don't preserve the error for review by the next court up, so the post-trial motion had to be a work of art. I think the thing was like 30 pages long, but I was nervous enough about it, that I went to the death-penalty - there's an outfit in Chicago that did nothing but death penalty work, and I flew up to Chicago with this post-trial motion before I filed it, and talked to the experts up there, and the only addition they made was - and this was pretty cool. They said there is a possibility that you were incompetent as counsel for this guy, and I said well that's kinda hard to raise in a motion, and they gave me the wording to raise that, where you even throw into the mix that you may have made mistakes. [laughs] But the big mistake was the refusal to give me the severance. That thing went to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court sent it back like a rubber ball, you know, N. O.! In fact, the appellate defender who handled the case won an outright reversal, and then he petitioned the court to hear the rest of the issues I'd raised in those 30 pages because he said that there was a good chance that they'd repeat themselves. [laughs] And they said get outta here. You’ve won already. [laughs] So I did some death penalty appellate work, but I just ... And so when it came back, the judges who I worked for as a special defender - I mean, you're appointed by the court - told me I had to represent this guy again. And I took in all of the time that I had involved in the case. I started keeping time records, not for the trial, but from the trial to the death phase. There's two phases, and I had done $40,000 worth of legal work between those two. I took all of that in, all the research in showing that I should be paid more for this, and certainly paid more if I had to represent him again in another trial, and they said ah, forget it. And I said okay, I quit. I'm not going to be a special public defender anymore, and they just went apoplectic. Judge Matoesian thought that he could force me to keep the job. I said you can't force me to keep the job you, know. So they had to hire somebody else, and now the law was changing, and they had to pay em a fortune, and I was never allowed to discuss the case again because I went then from private practice into the State’s Attorney’s Office in 2002, and, so, they had a special prosecutor, no let's see I can't remember how it worked, but we had to create a Chinese Wall. I was never allowed to discuss it again. Ultimately the case settled for, I think, 40 years. And by then, um, Ramon, the client, had served half of that. He'd been in jail consistently since 1994, so, he'd almost served his whole term because at 18  that time you served day for day - 50% of the sentence. So he settled for 40 years, and when it was all over, the plea was entered, Dan says, I know we're not ever supposed to discuss this case, but Ramon said to tell you, thanks. He knew. He was like the best client I ever had. He grew up in the juvenile department of corrections. He was an excellent writer. He read. He was just a kid that never had a chance, you know. I mean, I don't think he killed anybody. It was a mass murder. It was the largest mass murder since the Indian raids - five people in one, you know. Oh, it was a mess, and they came up - it was supposed to be a drug robbery thing and the drugs weren't there, and the money wasn't there. They went next door to ask the neighbor and killed him. They almost killed the children in the house, but there was only one gun, and my client didn't have it, so I never did know who killed all those people, but I'm pretty sure mine didn't. And one of em is on death row. There were three of them, but you know, those things are just, you know, they're life-altering. They really are  they really are. And that's the only case I was ever involved in where - it was actually - I could tell things were going wrong behind my back, you know. SH: Um, any I don't know how to ask this question Stephanie, but from your perspective, as a prosecutor and defender - defense attorney, um, is the system pretty fair? Is... SR: It's as good as the people running it. You know? I mean you have good judges and bad judges, and it's as good as the people running it for the most part. I just happened to be in an era where we had really good people. I had all these like World War II guys, you know, on the bench. I mean there were no women on the bench, you know, um, and I admired many of them. Now occasionally we got people who were political, um, Judge Calvo, who just couldn't always separate himself from politics, you know. If it was somebody he knew, you know, or somebody he had been close to, and they were in front of him you just always felt like he would - he would do his best to overcome it, but you know, he couldn't always do it. He couldn't always forget that he'd been in the legislature, where backroom deals are a way of life. But by and large I always really liked the people that I had cases in front of. They had Clayton Williams, who was the token black on the bench. Clayton Williams was not necessarily the sharpest knife in the drawer or any of that, but he had this instinct for what's right. I mean they all seemed to have - sometimes they weren't that good on the law, they weren't necessarily - you weren't always happy with their rulings, you know, but by and large they wanted to do the right thing. Now that's in the criminal justice system. Things get a little more complicated when you're talking about money, when you're talking about people's livelihoods and lawyers, and but we had Judge Beatty, who went on to the federal bench. I mean he was just a really good judge um. We had him in criminal court for a while, and back then, you didn't have all these - all this data on these guys. They'd show up for an initial appearance [phone rings]. All you had were these little cards from the jail, if they'd been in our jail, you would have these little cards. For Judge Beatty to know anything about the guy, that the sheriff's deputy, that brought him in, would just hand him these little cards, you know, or they wouldn't have any cards. And I remember Judge Beatty looking one time, going “we don’t get many five card guys” [laughs], but I mean he had a one on one thing with these ... I mean he would look them in the eye and talk to them. You know, nowadays we do it with ... there's a TV camera in the jail and then you see them on the camera here and there's none of that. But we even had some little criminals from Granite City who wouldn't talk to anybody but Judge Beatty, personally. They didn't need a lawyer. They'd just talk to Judge Beatty, and they would take their time you know? They could get the three years they thought -gone [laughs], but by and large they were really pretty good. SH: Are there any jurist lawyers/judges that you thought were particularly really brilliant? 19  SR: Um, well James Beatty was pretty damn sharp, um. I think I'd say Judge Beatty was probably one of the most ... I mean he... I once saw him lecture a guy who was convicted of something. The whole room was in tears – “turn around and face your parents.” He made this kid turn around and look at his parents, you know, while he sentenced him, and he was really I think maybe the best one that I remember. Again, we lost him. He went on to the federal court. But Judge Clark, I tell you, he was the one that was just so funny. One time he said - somebody objected in the front of a jury- and he said “sustained I mean overruled,” and he looked straight at the jury and said “you know I always get those confused,” [laughs] and those jurors are going oh, we see how that could happen [both laugh]. He was just so but um, but mostly they were... they were mostly pretty good, you know. I never had many complaints. Now the associate bench was different. When you're like doing divorce cases and stuff, you really get on the wrong side of judges sometime. You just want to slap em [laughs] you know? But I dunno I enjoyed the whole thing and some people say well you know you had a Phd. why didn't you go on and teach law? Boring! I can't imagine anything more boring than teaching law. [laughs] SH: Well, is there anything that you want to talk about that I missed that we didn't? SR: I don't have a list of your questions, but that pretty much... I mean we've come a long way I have to say that we've come a long way for women attorneys, but you know, we still need more women judges, and, you know, that's... that's always going to be an issue. I mean we have one, - currently, one woman circuit judge who is retiring next year, and there's a woman running for that job, and I think she has a Republican opponent - Tea Party nutcake but um... SH: Do you have any perspective or insight on the big cigarette settlement case? SR: You mean the ads that they're running? SH: No, the one that was tried here in SR: Oh, the one Nick tried? You know that thing was so convoluted I never did understand what finally happened in all of that - it went up  it came back  the Supreme Court did something on it didn't they? SH: The Supreme Court overturned SR: Reversed it yeah? And I think Nick Byron was the judge, and it was a bench trial, and I never understood why it was a bench trial, I guess it was a bench trial because it was just about money, but I never understood why they went with a bench trial. I think that was Steve Tillery wasn't it? SH: I don't know - SR: I think he was SH: I think you're right - I think Steve Tillery was the... SR: I tell you a funny story about Steve Tillery. When the three of us were law students that summer, and they allowed us to examine a witness, you know, for some practice, and back then we had these probable cause hearings where the police officer came in, basically said I found him doing this, and this, and this, 20  and this is what I know about the case, and the court would find... and “we find probable cause and bind him over for the proceedings.” And they were really low key sort of things, but you got to ask a few questions. And I remember the first time we did this. Steve was going to take the lead. He was going to be the first one to examine this police officer, so we're sitting there, and the judge says “Mr. Tillery,” and Steve opens his mouth and nothing comes out, nothing. And so I said, ah, “can you state your name?” [both laugh] To this day they say this woman's voice comes out of Steve's mouth and yet he went on to be a millionaire personal injury lawyer, very talented. [inaudible] SH: Well, I appreciate the time, Stephanie, this is ah, Dr. Robbins [both laugh] this has been great. What was it like being at SIUE back in the 70s? The department - the English department was heavily male, wasn't it? SR: Yeah, well, I was only ... that one trimester I was in the language department. The chairman was Romani? His name was Romani. He’s cousin to Chuck Romani, who was one of our judges, and, the first thing that happened was the book we were using for Freshman Spanish, or First Year Spanish, was one he wrote, and I had just come from University of Texas. I knew what was out there. It was the worst book, and I'm mimeographing - back then you mimeographed – Xeoxing, bringing all of these outside materials into the class to try to supplement this terrible book, and next thing I know I'm getting called into his office about the materials that I'm bringing in, that I'm copying materials and bringing them in. I said well, sure, I said cause that book is completely inadequate. Well, but, but, but... I said I know you wrote it, but there's other books. In fact, isn't it some sort of conflict for you to be making people use your book? I dunno you know? But, but, but, but you know? Next thing I know wound up in the Dean's office, and we didn't' have the Dean. The Dean was on sabbatical or some place, so we had - the Dean was Runkle? SH: Yes SR: But he wasn't the Dean. It was somebody else was in his “place and stead”, and I'm not sure how I wound up in there. I may have complained... I may have complained about it, about the book, and we wound up there, and I said well, you know, the chairman here doesn't want me to bring in outside materials, and he's insisting that we use this book, and I don't understand why I can't bring in outside materials. Romani just started backpedaling, denying that he - Core. Core was the guy that was sitting in Runkle's place SH: Chuck Core? SR: Chuck Core, yeah, and Romani just started backing up and backing up and saying that he didn't say these things you know. I thought, oh, my god, these people are crazy. I told Walker they're nuts. SH: So you found it more sane working for the prosecutor? SR: Yes. I mean the level of professionalism was about that high you know. I wasn't used to that. I was used to, you know, really, people who were pretty serious about what they were doing and um, mmm. So, I said I can't work like this. SH: Well, thank you again. 21  SR: Well, sure. How did you guys enjoy Africa? Did you go with ah? 22 
MadisonCounty;Pat Childers;1954;2016;Pat Childers 1954 - 2016  Madison Historical: The Online Encyclopedia and Digital Archive for Madison County, Illinois Pat Childers Oral History Interview Kayla Kroder, Interviewer Collinsville, Illinois December 11, 2016 Kayla Kroder (KK): This is Kayla Kroder and I will be interviewing Pat Childers. The interview is taking place at her home in Collinsville, Illinois. Pat lived in West Alton, Missouri during the 1993 flood. She is now retired. So Pat, where were you born and what was it like growing up? Pat Childers (PC): I was born in Poplar Bluff Missouri Hospital. I lived in between Broseley and Qulin School. But I went to Broseley School. I had six brothers, no sisters. So I had plenty of work to do. KK: What kind of work does that mean? PC: Well, I had a lot of dishes. I shined shoes on Saturday. I catered to the boys I guess. 'Cause my mom grew up, you know, like old school. She thought that the boys never had to wash a dish, or make a bed, or sweep a floor or anything like that. So, I got, I had all that when I was growing up. KK: Um, you always talk about growing up on a farm. What kind of farm was it? PC: We had a farm, uh, my dad, we had cattle, pigs, chickens, ducks, about anything. We had two horses, uh, my dad, we raised a lot of cotton. But he also raised watermelons, and cantaloupes, and he would take them to the market in St. Louis. old farmers market down in St. Louis, we went down there a lot with loads of watermelons and sold them and he went a lot to Piedmont. So that's how we made most of our money, that's how he made most of our money, selling watermelons and cantaloupes. And we also, my dad, we never hardly bought any groceries out of the store. There were, there were eight of us, and uh, oh there was nine of us counting me. We hardly ever bought any groceries. The only thing we bought out of the store was like, flour, sugar, ‘cause my dad would always kill hogs, and we would, he would salt them down. We would always have meat. My mom would always can. So, we never hardly bought anything out of the store except you know, like flour, coffee, and sugar. That’s basically what we bought out of the store. Everything else, we cooked three meals a day at home. We cooked breakfast, lunch, and dinner. And, we never hardly, I hardly ever ate out until I come to St. Louis and started working when I was 18. KK: What'd you whenever you were 18? PC: Hmm, well, my, all my brothers was gone and I was the only one left home so my brother had, he was kinda like a manager at a White Castle so I came up here and I worked. I went out and I filled out my application. I worked so I never did go back to school. I only went to the 11th grade, so then I just started working uh, at White Castle. And then I met Terry and, at White Castle. And then about six 1  weeks later we got married. And we've been married for almost, be March 11 we'll be married 52 years. That’s a long time. [laughs] KK: Yeah. So, how did you end up in West Alton? PC: We'd bought a house and uh, over in North County. And then when uh, we was out in West Alton, Terry’d seen this house on Sally Road and uh, it was going up for auction. He said, "I'm gonna go out there and buy that house." And I said, "You're not gonna," it's a little brick house, and I said, "you're not gonna buy that little house." And so he went to auction and he bought that up there in auction in St. Charles. And we moved over there in 1977. We moved there in 1977. And then Dan was born, right after, not too long. I was pregnant with Dan when we moved over there. And uh, that's how we got to West Alton, and I lived there until the '93 flood. KK: So, what was the year, you know, what was ‘93 like for you? Like overall, was it a good or I mean a bad year? PC: It was really bad when the... Every day we had a, me and my husband had a catering business at that time. He ran a catering truck, and I did the cooking, and I had a lady working with me too. But anyway, we uh, the water started coming up, uh, oh in like in June it was getting, coming up. And they thought we was going to have a flood. Well, it came up and it did get in my basement a little bit that time, but by the end of the summer, then the water started coming up again. And then, oh I guess, I would, I would go down to the levee. We didn't live too far from the levee. I drove down to it, to off of Sally Road down there to look at the water about every day to see how high it was getting. And everyday we I drove, the water was getting higher. So, uh, I kept, every day when I would go get groceries, I’d say, "Well, I'm going to go look at the water." Every day, I would get a little more worried about the water, and my next door neighbor said, "Oh it's not going to be that bad this year." And I said, "I don't know." One day I said, "Lord," I said, "Just how bad is this water going to be?" and I was driving my car, and I was going down to look at the water and everything just went black. And I told Terry, this flood is going to be bad. Him and Ray were out there swinging. He said, "Nah. Ray said it's not going to be that bad. We’ll probably only get about two feet, maybe a foot in our house." And I said, "No Ray, I think it's really going to be bad," and he said, "No." So, we took some of our furniture out of the house but not all of it. Uh, Terry’s brother came up and we took, I bought a new couch and stuff just before the flood. And we took, we took some of the best furniture we had out, but we was still walking back through there staying some. And then we had a camper when the water started coming over the levee. We had a camper  we took it out and parked it over there on, behind the gas station at the Pit Stop. And, uh, so then we would walk down in it everyday to check on our house. And then we got where we'd have to take a boat over there to see about it. And we had to um, we had uh, living up there we had, we only had, I had Dan and Tim and Kevin. Valerie was already married, but she lived in West Alton too. And, Dan was a junior and Tim was in the sixth grade when we, when the flood started coming. And the boys really like the schools over there because it was just a small little school up there in West Alton. There’s probably only about 80 kids went up there from first to fourth grade, and it was just a small little school. But after the flood came they closed the school down. And they all had to go to Orchard Farm then. But uh, getting back to the water, and then so, it started getting higher. And I still never thought about where the black came, and the last boat ride we came up there when the levee broke, and the water got really high, I went back home and the water was all the way up to our roof. 2  And that’s all I seen was the black roof. Then I knew what the black meant. And that was a really hard time for me. It hurts to even think about it today. [Crying] KK: Do you want to take a break? PC: Yeah [Recording paused] KK: Okay, so, um, whenever we were talking about the uh, the little playhouse that Terry had built for Tim and Dan. PC: He had built them a little, a little clubhouse out back. And it they hadn't been built for very long. And uh, he put windows in it and doors in it. They had uh, we got them a couple years ago, before that we'd got them a tire house. A Star Wars tire house. Tim and Dan really liked Star Wars. Dan collected them but Dan would let, he would put them up and he would get out every Christmas. and they would take them down in the basement and they would set up all the Star Wars stuff and they would play with it for about a week and then Dan would pack it all back up. Put it up and wouldn't let nobody play with it. Then next year we would get more Star Wars stuff and he'd they would get that out and play with it. But, then when they got their clubhouse built, they moved, it was like an eight by ten little clubhouse that had a window and everything in it. And they was going to put benches and stuff back there. And they'd put all their Star Wars stuff out there. And uh, so, Terry told them, "Well, it's pretty high there." so he thought it would be safe there. So uh, the water kept coming up and Terry said, and Dan and Tim was worried about the clubhouse. And Terry said, "Well, it'll be alright 'cause it's pretty heavy." We had a fence around our house but then the last time we went over there, I guess the little clubhouse had floated down, the water floated it down the river. So they lost their clubhouse. Then we walked back in and after the, our house after that, after the water went down. Me and my husband was walking in it and we thought, "Well maybe we'll just rebuild it." You know, all the siding. There was a storm came after that and all the siding, the brick, a lot of the brick was off our house, and Terry said, "Well maybe we'll just redo it, 'cause the floors are still in it and stuff." We walked around in it that day. We went, couple days later we went back over there, where we was walking at, the floors had all caved into the water into the basement  the basement was full of water. If that floor would've fallen, we would've probably died, if that floor would uh, while we was walking around in there. I was, I always collected pennies. I never will forget it, and uh, I had a 2 gallon of pennies in a jar. And so I just, Terry just throwed 'em, uh on the bed there and I thought, "Why, I don't know how them pennies got out of the house." And so, we was looking through windows one day, it was really funny, we was just walking around the outside looking in the windows. So, my bedroom window was there and I went up to the window, looked in the window, and there sat the jar of pennies in the window. The whole jar was there. And it was like, it was and I told Terry I said, "I don't know how they got in the window." They was just sitting on the windowsill, as a holder. And we brung them home. The banks wouldn't even take them because the water was really bad on them. So, the bank wouldn't even cash them pennies in. They were really bad. so, we had to clean them up. but, then we had to get some stuff and clean them, but I don't know, I think there was like $68 dollars or something in it, in the pennies, was in there, and uh, but, and then we uh... It was really hard for the boys 'cause we moved place to place. We moved oh, we moved over in 3  Berkeley. And the boys was never around a lot. I mean, out there was quiet. we went, we would go to the country, we would go camping. we would never hardly ever locked a door in West Alton. My neighbors would say, "I came home and got a cup of sugar, or I got something while I was gone." I'd say, "Well, the door is always open, you know." We hardly ever locked the door over there. And uh, so then, Terry's friend had a house in Berkeley. We moved over there and there was guns going off every night. Shoot, I mean, cops was everywhere, at somebody’s house about every night. I told Terry, I said, "We can't live here with the boys." And Tim was my middle son. He was in the 5th grade. He had the hardest time of all moving. Dan adjusted good. Kevin hadn't started school yet. But Tim really had a hard time. That makes me really bad sad. 'Cause he really had a rough time. Then he had a rough time when we moved too. When we got in Berkeley and his uh, his uncle got him a little knife. A little knife just 'cause he collected, Tim collected knives. He bought him a little knife and one of those kids over in that subdivision took his knife and stuff like that and he was just even scared to get out. So, we moved there, then we moved over to uh, we moved into a log house over there by the mall. The boys could even walked to the mall. Danny and Tim walked to the mall all the time over there. And we would look for a house and we could not find a house. If I liked it, my husband didn't like it. If he liked it, I didn't like it. So we, it was just a constant battle all the time about where we were gonna live. And we didn't have that much flood insurance on the house. So we was trying to stay in it. I thought. the government, we only had like 35. that's all we could get out of it. They told us at the time that's all the insurance we could get. So they wanted uh, the government wanted to buy our house, and Ray went out there the next day and he sold his for ten thousand dollars. And I told Ray, I said, "I'm not selling my house for 10 thousand dollars." I said, "I'll just rebuild on this lot. I am not gonna do that." So I went out there, and I prayed for 3 days and fasted. I said, "Lord, we've gotta have a place to live." So we went up there and talked to this guy. So he said, "Well, we're gonna buy your house. We'll have to go out and look at it." and I said, "well, you can't get in it cause it's all fell down." He said, "Well, there's a house across the road over there that's similar to your house." And he said, "What we'll do is pay your insurance and then we'll give you the rest of it." So then he went appraised our house and I believe it was 75 thousand dollars. So I walked out of there, and I felt relieved that at least we could find a house, you know. So I went back, my neighbor Ray said, "How'd you do out there?" and I told Ray I said, "Well, I got 75 thousand out of my house." And he said, "How'd you get 75 out of your house?" And Terry said, "Well she went out there and she was really upset." So he said, "I don't know," he said, "She didn't even tell me that she'd been praying and fasting for 3 days for something to happen." So then, we got the money from that and we started looking more for houses. And so we was looking over in Illinois over here. We found a couple we liked, but none of them, Terry wanted one and I didn't want it and then, I wanted the best school district around for the boys, 'Cause I didn't want them to have any more trouble. So then and the agent, called me up one day and told me that he had a house that he wanted me to look at, it was a repo house. So me and Terry come and he said it had seven and-a-half acres and the bank owned it. So we came out here and we looked at it. We both really, we just fell in love with this house when we came here. We both liked the house but there was another contract on the house too. So, there was two contracts on this house, and I have a really good old lady friend at church. And so she said, "Did you find your house? I've been praying that you was going to find that house this week." and I said, "No, I found one but somebody else has got a bid on it." So Jenny grabbed my hand and she started praying, she said, "Lord, you let them have this house 'cause they need this house." She said, "You give the other people a better home than they was expecting for a house. Just find them a better one." So the next day, the real estate lady called me and told me that, the guy told me that we got the house. So then we was 4  just waiting on money from the bank, from our insurance out there to pay on this house. So, the guy really blessed us with this house. The house I live in now is a lot better than the house I had in West Alton, but it was just a bad time for my kids moving, especially my middle son. He had the roughest time of it, and I think today he still, he doesn't, he will not talk about the flood. And my youngest son, he was only four, and he used to go out there when the water was coming up and be swinging out there and his feet would be swinging in the water. But he'd, I mean, he doesn't really remember the flood. Tim didn't adjust. Dan adjusted, but Tim just didn't adjust and I think he still has a lot of trouble nowadays with what went on with the flood. He didn't even like to talk about it. But it was really hard on him, but he seems he's doing better. We just don't really ever talk, we don't hardly ever talk about the flood anymore. They really don't even want, I have pictures, but they don't even really want me to show the pictures or anything like that. He just says it's in the past. but I'm blessed with my kids. They are really adjusted pretty good now. It was just a hard time to go through that. One year, one year was bad, but after we got through that year it was everything seems to start coming together again. Tim’s happier now. Dan moved on. He lives in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. He teaches college down there, he's a professor. Kevin's got a pretty good job. Valerie works, so they all, the kids have been pretty blessed since we've moved over here. So we just had some rough times there. KK: So um, whenever you were looking for a house in Madison County, did you know that you wanted to live in Madison County? Or were there certain things, that you know, you saw about this county that you really wanted to, you know, live here? You had mentioned the school district. PC: Yeah, the school district. Well, we didn't, we couldn't move back to West Alton 'cause we didn't want to go back to flood again. And we didn't want to move to St. Charles because there's a lot of people. We liked West Alton ‘cause it was out kinda out in the open. You know, there's just a road. Down Sally Road there's only about eight or nine houses on that road, you know, and all the rest of it was just farmland. So, you know, it wasn't like houses just right close together. I didn't like that, being right close together. So, when we started looking, we found an acre of ground over there. but it was really close over in Edwardsville. Terry liked it but I didn't like the house, but he like the house. Then, we found another one, and the insurance... It had five acres and it was in Edwardsville, but he said that the lady that lived next door, she was really crabby. So with people going in and out, out of there ‘cause her house was there by the driveway, you know. The house sit back but you had to go right by her house. He said that she was always giving people trouble. So I said, "Well, I said I don't want no more trouble." So, we just kept looking. Like I said, then uh, about five days after that the real estate guy told me, he said he had a house that just went on the market. But somebody had a bid on it, but he said it's whoever bids the highest is going to get it anyway. But he didn't know what they bid on the house. So he said he had an idea. He told us what to bid. We bid it at, we bid it at, uh, 100 thousand on this house so, uh, was 7.5 acres. The bank owned it. And then I believe uh, somebody else had a mortgage on it but they had just lost theirs. But the bank had to come in here, redo a lot of stuff to this house. But it was really nice when we moved in it. And the boys liked it. They finally found a place they like, because they would go down to the, when we moved here it got better. Tim starts getting better when we moved here 'cause he got a stable place. We have a creek down here in the woods. We have 7.5 acres and a lot of them is just woods, but it has a creek in it. Oh, about a week, we was down there, Dan and Tim and them went down to the creek. Some of their friends that they made come over here and they got down there in quicksand. my oldest son lost his pair of new Nikes down there in the quicksand. He said, come home to get his shovel, said he was gonna get it. I said, "Forget your shoe, 5  you're not gonna get it back." I said, "It went in the quicksand." They would, they was tires down there. they would walk, they would be logs crossed the, back where, 'cause our property went over to the next street. And they would walk them logs and go over there. So but then they, them boys really like the woods when we moved here. Their friends, a lot of them come just played in the woods all the time. They made trails in there, and then they had them ropes they would cut swing from tree to tree like Tarzans. They would. They would get on them and they'd swing from tree to tree. Then they would get them another one of them things and they would cut them at the roots so they would swing on them. Them things are really strong though. Dan, Dan adjusted really good but Tim it took him a lot longer. He hated school, he didn't like school. He didn't like nothing over here. But seems like once he got in the, seems like after he got out, he went into high school, seemed like Tim was starting doing better. He got different friends, and it seemed like Tim adjusted a little bit better. But I didn't think he really ever adjusted. He liked, he liked it over there ‘cause he had friends over there. That they all, everybody's scattered, you know. For the first year you know, they had a reunion you know, and everybody went back to see everybody. And that kinda helped, but then most of everybody that we knew moved from there. So, they was just wasn't any, there just wasn't any, there was still a few people that we known but not very many. Most of them all moved. I think on Sally Road. I think there's probably, they all moved probably except two or three people's left over there, everybody else just left after the '93 flood. They just didn't want to move back. In that little town in West Alton up there, there is probably only about a third of that town left now. There's not very many people that live up there at all. They even moved to uh, the Post Office is still across the street over there by the Pit Stop. They never did move that back. 'Cause the Pit Stop never got flooded. Well, they got water around them but I don't think they ever got water inside of that 'cause it's higher over there. It was always a problem getting in and out over there when the flood came. You could go if you wanted to walk the railroad tracks. So, the water was, was bad. The only time I got my picture was in the paper in the flood. We was walking down, I'll tell you this. We was walking down, we got, this was before the water got near. Me and my husband had been, we would walk the railroad track, and we went into the house. And we walked around and we came back out. Dan had some money and he put it up and he wanted me to go get it. So I went got over there and got his money for him. And so, we went back and the water was about 3 foot under the viaduct there in West Alton, out there on 67. I said, I told Terry, I said, "I don't have no more shoes, this is the last shoes. I have no more shoes in the camper," I said, "You have shoes." He said, "Well I'll just carry you across my back." So the next morning on the paper, "Man Saves Woman From Water." That was on every news place around. "Man Saves Woman." I told Terry, I said, "You just saved me from my shoes." But that’s how the paper wrote it. They had never asked us no questions or nothing. They just snapped that. That's how news gets started though. "Man Saves Woman." Terry laughs about that today. We had pictures of that someplace where he was carrying me through that water and I was on his back. "Man Saves Woman." That was really funny though, that time though. And Terry was riding his bicycle through that, and they thought he didn't have no place to go because he was just riding his bike with Dan. That was funny. They stopped and asked if he needed any help. But Salvation Army was really good through this time though for us. And Red Cross. They both helped us a lot because the boys lost all their clothes and stuff. And Red Cross and Salvation Army, they helped us a lot with the boys' clothes and stuff back then. 'Cause we would tie, 'cause they said that we probably wouldn't get no more than a foot in the house. So, I just took bags, you know, like clothes bags that you would wrap up. I put our clothes up really high. But see how that 6  turned out. You shouldn't listen to the weather people, sometimes. 'Cause they said it wasn't gonna, well, I guess, if the guy hadn't run the boat into the levee, it would probably. We probably wouldn't have got as much water. But I don't know because, see, we lived in between, where we lived, we lived in between the Missouri River and the Mississippi River. Well, not only the Mississippi River was going over the bank, the Missouri river was running over the top of the railroad track too. So that's another, 'cause when the two rivers just met then, you know, 'cause that what's got everyone's houses then. 'Cause the two rivers, 'cause if it had just been one river, it wouldn't have been as bad but since they both was going over their banks, and they just couldn't do nothing, couldn't do nothing with it. But, I am glad that part of my life is done with. I don't ever want to move back to no flood zone anymore. Really didn't even know when we moved over there that it was a flood zone I don't think. 'Cause we just was driving, when he was driving that day and he seen that house. It was going to sold up to St. Charles, so he says, "I'm going to go up there that day." and I didn't even go with him. Well we was hunting uh, Valerie was younger when we was just trying to get into a better school district with her. She, Valerie, but when we moved Valerie over there she was 11. She adjusted really good, you know. Then after, Dan was, how old Dan was, 16, when the flood came, yeah, he was in high school. He was a junior in high school. He had just turned 16 that year. And over in, uh, that really upset Dan because when he got over here, you know, ‘cause when you get sixteen in Missouri, over there you didn't have to take Drivers Ed. You just went and got your license, you know. So when Dan moved over here, he had to take Drivers Ed. before they would let him get his license. So he didn't get to drive until his senior year. He said that, "Well I can get them Missouri." I said, "No you can't get them in Missouri because you don't live in Missouri anymore." And they wouldn't let him 'cause we moved over here in November, so they wouldn't let him take 'cause he was a junior, and they wouldn't let him take drivers ed. that year. So he had to take it in his senior year. Sometimes I think that it's better if they're older when they drive anyway. Then Valerie, she went through the flood. She had a really hard time. She lived by herself, and she only had Cassie then, who was two. She lost everything in her apartment uptown. KK: You were talking about the guy that had broken the levee. How did you find out about it and what really happened? PC: We had to take the boys to Terry's brother that night, down in Mt. Vernon. So we was gone that night, and We came back the next day. The guy took a boat and rammed it into the levee and broke the levee. 'Cause the water was really soft. Any...it might of broke anyway, but they caught him. Eventually, 'cause they had so many sandbags there, 'cause the water was always seeping through. But, when he rammed the boat, that's what flooded the house. That's why the water went all the way up to the roof. And, if he didn't do it, it might not of did that. You know, if he hadn't run the boat. We don't know. That's uh, 'cause the water was still coming up then. And, it was coming over. Each day it was getting higher. It was coming over each levee. 'Cause the railroad track there, it was coming over the railroad track and then it was coming over the levee. Over the levee by the Mississippi where we still lived. It was both coming. It was two rivers meeting together, is what it was. Usually, there, when we had got water there before, we just got water in our basement then. Not very much, but a foot or two. Anyway, see the levee didn't break that year, but water got around our house, and we had walked, to get out, to go to town we had to park our cars out. The little school up there where the boys went to school. It never had no water in it until the '93 flood. I mean, they had a flood out there before, sometime they had a flood before the '93 flood. But it never got into that little school. The '93 flood was the first time they ever got water in that little school because it sits up on a hill. Water got into the school. That was the 7  first-time water was ever in the little school. And that was on account of the Missouri river. Got that one 'cause that was on that side. And the Mississippi, we was more on the side of the Mississippi but the rivers just met there. But before the water got up, we could walk down the railroad track and then cut across, you know walk across the field that go to our house, but then when the levee broke, you couldn't walk anywhere. They would take us back to see your house, and the National Guard would take us back in the boats. And the last, that's when the last time I went out there before the water went down. I seen the black roof on the house, I had always seen. Before we went out there, my next door neighbor Ray, it was only about 3 foot of water. About three foot in my house and two foot in his house and they thought we wasn't going to get anymore. So Terry said that we could just cut the walls half off, you know, and redo the walls. And Ray, went into his house, and opened the refrigerator and the electricity was still on. I said, "Ray, you coulda died." He opened the frigerator and the light was on. And there was two foot of water in his house. I said, "Why would you open your frigerator?" I said, "Boy, somebody was watching out for you Ray." I don' know why he did that. But we never went in ours, when the two, three foot of water, we never went back until the water went down. When you go back, you won't believe the mud. Oh my gosh, you won't believe the mud. I bet you they was 2 or 3 foot of mud in your house. I mean packed mud. When you redo those houses, 'cause me and Terry was going redo it til the floors fell through. He helped, the strangers next door redone theirs and him and a bunch of them would go there. They had to take shovels and get that mud and put it out the windows. That mud is really heavy. And sometimes it would be as high as 2 feet in your house, just solid mud. Nothing but mud. There was mud everywhere. The only way you could get that out too is with a shovel. We was gonna do that, then we went over there, and our floors had fell in. Terry said, "Well, we're not moving back here." Then we thought about just tearing it down and rebuilding it. 'Cause we didn't know, like I said, we didn't have that much insurance on it. So then they offered to buy a place on it so we went up there. But a lot of people left. I say, probably, two thirds of the people's gone that was up there before, in West Alton. Almost everybody. All my friends, none of them live there anymore. They all live, some of them's in Piedmont, Missouri. Some of them is in St. Charles. They're just scattered everywhere, you know. I met a lot of nice people during the flood, that you wouldn't know. Lee Ann and her husband, she was a hairdresser, and her husband was a police officer from Ferguson. They seen us on T.V. and she contacted me and she wanted to give the boys and Terry free haircuts and stuff. And they came over and gave the boys a hundred dollars, yeah, just 'cause they wanted to help somebody. No nicer people than they was. And she said, "Well we wanted to help somebody that we could meet." And then after we got the house, I invited them over and they came and had dinner with us. They were really nice people. You met a lot of nice people during the flood. People you know, it seems they pull all together when there's something wrong like that. You know, you try help each other, I think. This is just like starting all over. You don't have nothing, you know. You just have nothing. But Terry, he, I don't know if it, I knew it bothered him. He just, he wouldn't let it, 'cause he didn't let me see him worrying about all that. All during the flood neither, you know, and what we was going to do. Because we ran a catering business. We had a catering business, and we had a big kitchen and all of our equipment downstairs. And that was just, for him too, you know, that was a big problem 'cause that was our life. That's what we did. We had a catering business. That not only took our house, but that took our jobs too for a long time, you know. But Terry, would just, he would go pick up stuff from restaurants and stuff, you know, and take and deliver 'em. See, it affected all them too because they had jobs, you know. I had friends that worked for me, you know so, they would come down and help me. So it was just different back then though. Things a lot different now. So then Terry went back, driving an over the road truck, not too long after that. So, 8  he just went driving. He didn't really like it 'cause he didn't like to be gone from home neither though you know. Least, he was home on weekends, you know, when he was driving trucks so. The boys could go with him any time they wanted to on the truck. But they went him to Chicago with him one time and they said that was boringest ride. They said, Dan said, "I don't know how you stand driving that truck." He said, "That's just boring." Too boring for him. He said he doesn't even like to drive up here from Mississippi. But you gotta make a living. You gotta make a living, you know. KK: So um whenever you moved to Collinsville, and you know, you guys had got situated, you know, boys back into school, and you and Terry had gotten another job. What did you like about living in Collinsville and Madison County? What were the things you had found after you had moved here? What did you like about it? PC: Well, it took me a long time. I mean, I like the place I lived. But, it took me a long time 'cause my place was always with, I had lived in West Alton so long, you know. And it just took me a long time, 'cause I knew all my neighbors over there. And I hardly know any of my neighbors here now. Even living here this long, you know? It's a different, um, different time. I guess, I don't know. But at first, I didn't even like here, no. We thought about building a house down in Pevely. We had some ground down there  we was going to build a house. But then, we decided that we needed a house now. Not wait for a house to be built. I like this house better than the house in West Alton. It just wasn't in West Alton. But after the first couple years, I got used to it. I like it here now, but at first when I moved here, I did not like it. And my kids did not like the school. Dan tolerated it. But they never went to a big school neither though. Like I said, West Alton was just a small school. Where Tim went, there was probably four grades. From that school there, there was only four grades, there was maybe only 70 kids, no more than 80 in them four classrooms there. Then, when they got in 5th grade, they went to Orchard Farm. It was different for them 'cause, you know, Dan went to high school here, where was going to high school over there, like with 70 kids and he moves over here and there's like 500 and something, you know, kids in the school. So, it was a big adjustment for him too. You know. And Tim, he didn't adjust, he uh, he was just really, I would try to talk to him. He just wasn't not happy at all. He wasn't happy with school. Nobody liked him. He had no friends. And Dan jumped in and made friends real easy but Tim didn't make friends easy. And he just, but after Tim was here, he more or less got, when he got into sixth grade, seemed like he might have been doing a bit better. The first year was really hard on him. But then, when he got into high school seemed like he did a little better. But, he will not talk about the flood now today. And Kevin doesn't remember it. And Dan doesn't want to talk about it neither. So they don't hardly never mention the flood. Nobody hardly ever mentions the flood. They just kinda, that's in the past. They don't even like, I've taken movies from that out there, they don't even want to play them back. You know they just don't want to. They just don't want, they don't even really wanna mention it. But Tim had the hardest time. You know, when you've been a mother and when your kids is not happy, that's probably why I didn't like it so well over here. ‘Cause Tim was so unhappy, you know. He had a horrible time in school. But it took a long time for him. He just hated it. He said he hated it here. He just hated it. He hated everything. But it took him a long time. I probably shoulda really had counselling for Tim, really, but I didn't. But I didn't think about it at the time but I probably should have. Tim probably should have went to counseling. KK: Previously, before the interview, you had talked to me about, you know, how there was a teacher after you had moved here in Collinsville, that really, you know, helped Tim through a lot, especially... 9  PC: Mrs. Barr. She was great. She was the greatest teacher. She called me one time and she said, "I know I'm supposed to say anything about who your kids are but," she said, "I know where you came from." And she said, "I just don't want to see your kids get mixed up with something, you know, with the wrong crowd." And I went to school and talked to her. So she said, "Tim just don't wanna do nothing, you know." And I said, "Well, I'll tell you what. Ms. Barr why don't you put him in the corner? I know you can't spank." [She said,] "But I can't put him in the corner neither." And I said, "I'll tell you what." I said, "You just send me a note home if he behaves and I'll take care of the punishment. Okay?" And from that day on, I never had a problem with Tim and Ms. Barr. She said he made one of the best students. And I seen her, oh, last year up where I was eating up at Fazzi's. And she asked me how Tim was. She still remembers Tim. And I remember her, she was the best. I mean, Tim had one teacher, I had tried to get him moved from her. Because you know, Tim didn't need that. But then the next year he got Mrs. Barr. And she was great. She knew where Tim had come from. So, she said, Tim was having a hard time, 'cause he couldn't connect. Because he sat around and she said he's thinking about West Alton all the time. She said that's what he was thinking about. She said West Alton, where he came from, the flood, and stuff and what happened to him, you know. And she said she could see that it really bothered Tim. So she probably helped Tim over here more than anybody. She was a great teacher. I wish there was more like her, I tell you. She's retired now. But she was really a great teacher. Tim remembers Ms. Barr. She was really, she was a good teacher. KK: After that, he started you know, improving in school? PC: Yes. After that, yeah. After he got in her class, seemed like he did better. Well, he didn't want to do better at first. But we just, like I said, I went and had a talk with her. And we talked and she said she couldn't, and I said, "Well, I know you can't do nothing." So I said, just like I told them, send me a note. She said, and when she said Tim just turned around completely, you know. And she said he made a really good student. He was really doing bad in school. 'Cause he wouldn't do his work or nothing, you know. And she'd send me notes. She got him on the right track. She had patience. She had a lot of patience with Tim. I know she talked to him a lot because she had known where he came from. So she probably give him a little more attention than the rest of them ‘cause she knew that he had a rough year that year. That year before he came here, so. She understood, I think, Tim more than any of the other teachers. He just wasn't. I told him, I said, "Tim, if we go back, none of your friends, if we build back in West Alton, all your friends are gone anyway. So they're all scattered everywhere. So there's not none of them anywhere, you know. They're gone. They've moved to St. Charles. Pevely. Some of them moved to Piedmont, Missouri." I mean, there wasn't any place else. He wasn't going to have the same friends anyway, you know, 'cause they was gone. But when you're in the fifth grade, it's hard when you have your friends and then, to stick you in another school where you don't know nobody. Tim was a little bit heavier, and he said kids would call him fat. Oh and they'd call him four eyes. I couldn't hardly get him to wear his glasses because they would call him four eyes. And he had a hard time, and eventually, he refused to wear them. He don't wear glasses today, but oh man, the teacher wanted me to go get him glasses. "I am not wearing them." I had the awfulest time with him wearing glasses. He would not wear, he did want to wear his glasses. Then when he got older he quit wearing them. And I guess his eyesight's alright now. But he hated them glasses buddy. He said they made fun of him all day long wearing them glasses. I think he broke them on purpose, knowing Tim. KK: So, um, knowing that you've lived in Madison County for a while, you've talked about how the 10  boys initially had troubles and now that, you know, they went to school and found friends and stuff that they're doing a lot better. You, yourself, you've enjoyed it now that you've been living here for a while. But, what would you like to see, um, you know change in Madison County? What are the things that you appreciate or you would like to see change? PC: I would like to see the taxes go down a little bit 'cause taxes are really getting high for people living in Collinsville, Madison County. You know that. 'Cause our taxes have over doubled since we moved here. And that's one thing that's not good about Madison County. Is the taxes. But the school district, the schools I like alright. I feel that they have good schools. Kevin, like I said, Kevin wasn't in school. He was only four when the flood came. Kevin went to school. He liked school over here. So, I had no problems with Kevin in school at all. Because, he never had to go. And I'll say something, and he'll say, "Well, I don't remember none of that." He was four. He's just, if he did remember any of it, he doesn't remember. He says he don't remember any of it. And I like being close. I am not that far from the store anyway. In West Alton, the closest grocery store for me was probably about ten miles. I had to drive when I went to get groceries. So the stores are a lot closer. I like that better. And I have a lot of friends now, over here, that I didn't have. I have made friends now since I've lived here. But it's hard, it's like hard starting all over too, you know. I think it's harder, it was harder for Terry than he let on, I think. I think it really, I think it was a lot harder on him. He would just try to not to think about it too, I think. Sometimes, things don't work out like you think they're gonna do anyway. We thought we'd live in West Alton the rest of our life. But see, different plans. You always, don't get too certain about your plans 'cause they can always change. Well like I said, I love it here now. When I first lived here, when I first moved here I loved the house and everything, but I wouldn't move back to West Alton now. After I, after the years I've spent here. Nah, I wouldn't. I wouldn't never move back now. But, ask me that about the first year, I wanted, I would've moved back. Probably most of it would have been on account of Tim. 'Cause he hated it so bad. He was really unhappy. But Dan, I worried about him more than I did Tim 'cause I thought Tim would adjust better than Dan. 'Cause Dan was a senior in high school. I mean a junior in high school. We moved over here in November and he came over here as a junior. I thought, he would have a more harder time than Tim because he was in high school. But, it worked out the opposite way. Dan made friends real easy. Tim didn't. Dan made friends with Mike and all around over here, just like, you know. He made friends real easy, and Tim didn't. I thought it would be the other way around. But it wasn't. It was harder on Tim. Sometimes you think. And Dan wanted me to get his license and let him drive to Orchard Farm every day. I said, "I'm not doing that." But after he got used to it, he like it though. Like I said, Dan made friends right away. He had friends that he hung with all the time. Well I said, when Tim, when he got in sixth grade, he had friends. They would come to his birthday party. 'Cause I give parties and stuff. I let them have parties and stuff and invite kids over. Then, they would go down to the creek and stuff. So that made it better. I just don't think Tim ever really adjusted really good to it, at all. And I don't know if something happened to him. We was just shifting here and there, you know. I don't know if he had something happen. But, he never did say if it did or not. But I don't know. He just don't want to talk about it. KK: Is there anything to else that you would like to discuss before the interview is over? PC: Well, one thing that is nice happened. Tim found a nice young lady that I really like. She's great. 11  KK: Well thank you. PC: I think she helped him out a lot. So, I'm thankful for her. KK: Well, thank you for saying that. That was very nice, and thank you for taking the time to meet with me today, and I really appreciate the opportunity. PC: Alright. Thank you. 12 