repository;interviewee;datebirth;dateinterview;text
PortHouston;William Patton;1943;2012;William Patton, 1943, 2012,  WILLIAM PATTON Summary: William Patton talks to Pat Jasper about his career on the waterfront. How he reluctantly took a job with his father and ended up heading the company before joining the Houston pilots association. He also talks about working for Dow Chemicals, how banks need to change the way they look at loans and the changes in the industry from when he started working to where it is now. 00:00:44 Born in 1943. Graduated in 1961. Tried to get into Kings point merchant marine academy. Was ready to go in August to King's point academy in New York, when found out that girlfriend was pregnant. SO had to get married and instead of Kings point went to UH night school. By 21, had 3 children and divorced by 29. Went to work for father who was in the towing business. Had worked for him during the summers and holidays and weekends. Worked for him from age 14. Went to work for him full time at 17 yrs. Worked on the boat - ran crews, ran groceries, maintenance work on boat and trades like electrician, diesel mechanic, plumber. Still attended UH but didn’t graduate as couldn’t pass a few subjects. Typing and political science. Work hours were not regular 9-5 but very erratic. 00:08:21 Worked mostly on the boat and on repairs while working with father. He worked in the office. Had a three car garage shop then. Have a younger brother and came to work at the family company. Brother started his own business with his own towboat but was killed in a road accident in 1972. Started increasing the number of boats we had. In 1968 bought some barges. Gulf States Marine and Mining Corp. Had two barges and one boat left. In 1971 were able to buy more barges. Bought them on a lease purchase deal. In 1975 single skin barges would be outlawed sooner or later. Had built a lot of concrete boxes on barges to stop the leaks. Coastguard made a surprise check once and since they were "rookies" never asked what the concrete was for. Was not illegal but was frowned upon. .Would have got a form from the coastguard which would mean going to the shipyard and have them inspect the repairs and not using the barge till the repairs were done and inspected. Thats why wanted to build double skin barges. 00:16:11 Inland OIl Transport. Had double skin barges. Company run by an attorney. Bought those barges but interest on them increased when Jimmy Carter came into power. Went up to 20%. Was paying 27% and just couldn’t make the payments so ended up refinancing. 1979 was the best year they had. After that, business went downhill. Savings and loan debacle of the early 80s. Banks changed they way they did business. Went out of business in 1991 with one boat left and was working for DOW Chemical. Health situation was poor. while in business, worked for DOW Chemical the whole time. Never  had a contract that lasted for more than a year, barges which were built new needed repair. If they are run in the inter-coastal canal, it is shallow and constantly rubbing the bottom knuckle on sand. Wears the barge out. Could not afford to keep barges anymore when banks did not cooperate. 00:22:00 Left with one boat for the last couple of years. Oldest captain retired. Crew changed. Sold the boat and paid off the loan. Got out without owing anybody anything. 1991 sold the last boat. Had hired someone from New Mexico to work in 1975. Was a staunch supporter of the National River Academy in Arkansas. Had a 22 month pilot training academy. Steering a tow boat is one of the hardest jobs there is. After 22 months, can get a license. HIs name was Robert Thompson. Came to work, went through the academy and became a captain. Worked his way up from there. In 1987 got taken by the Houston pilots. Did not want to hold him back. Robert became a boat keeper. Needed someone down in Galveston. Was hired by the them in 1991. Ended up staying there 18 years till retired. Was an engineer first and then became marine operations manager in Galveston. 00:28:20 Like any other manager, make sure to coordinate shipyard visits or schedule maintenance. If there is a breakdown see to it, get it fixed or fix it. Made sure pilots were getting what they paid for engineering wise. 00:33:33 Was captaining the pilot boat. Everytime it would break down, would bring it up to shipyard alone. Had a 100 ton license. Ran the pilot boat, operated it. operated towboats and barges and been an owner. 00:36:40 Think towboat captains are the best pilots. Before working for Houston pilots was in awe of pilots that brought the ships up the ship channel. Soon learnt that it was easier than running a towboat. 00:40:10 Local knowledge is very important. Back in the 70s when there was a gasoline shortage, was working for Synoco delivering the gasoline from pipeline from Oklahoma to Memphis. restricting stations from selling gasoline. Had a full load to take it to Arkansas to pump it off. Couldn't unload it because they couldn’t sell it off. So had to bring it back and then load some more gasoline on top of it. There was a terrible shortage but tanks at distribution centers were full because they were not allowed to sell it because govt. wouldn’t let them. 00:44:30  Started off with towboats, Dad towing Dow Chemical's barges. Mr. Baker had a benzene barge that Dow owned and would send that barge to various places to load 10,000 barrels of benzene and bring it back to Freeport. Would sometimes push shell barges for Horton & Horton. When they had their own barges, started off with gasoline and diesel fuel delivery for Texaco. Would load up at Port Arthur refinery and take it to Brownsville or Corpus Christi. Texaco entered into an agreement with Coastal refinery and Corpus Christi that Coastal would make Texaco gas to their specs and Coastal would make their gas to Port Arthur and then they swapped it out eliminating transportation and the job. 00:49:10 Barge Business. Barges and towboats are like trucks and trailers. Hauled black oil (residual fuel) at first. Barges were not available. 1978-79 business was very good. Barges cost a lot to get cleaned. Took them to Freeport and loaded them up with (Cello fluent?) oil. Stayed on that contract for 6 months. Ended up paying for the barges to sit there for the last few months. 00:52:10 was moving chemicals and petrochemicals till the late 80s. Was in contract with Synoco moving chemical out of Arkansas river down to smith's bluff, just above Port Arthur. Benzene is one of the most carcinogenic chemicals known. At 14 yrs was washing paintbrushes, even hands with it. It smells good. Now, need to have a closed facility while working with Vapor recovery system. Coastguard did not regulate shell barges like they regulated petroleum carrying barges. Cyclo-hexene is made out of benzene. 00:55:32 Would not breathe in benzene now, do not want to take any chances. But back in the day, did not know any better. 00:57:00 Regulation depleted small businesses not consolidation. attitude of the banks that financed small businesses. Can’t take a 20 year loan without a 20 year contract. Longest contract was only for a year. Couldn’t borrow money at the rate and cannot pay off million dollar barges in a year. Guessing process most of the time. Sometimes know that he is going to lose money while taking the job, 01:01:15 Couldn’t negotiate for 20 year contract. Banks did not want to understand it. Banks refused to issue a letter of quiet enjoyment which would mean they would continue to be n contract with Dow Chemicals if Patton barges went out of business. If banks had signed the contract could have worked and paid of the barge in 5 years. But bank refused to sign it. 01:04:00  Started as Patton Towing companies, some years later changed it to Patton Barge lines. Grandfather was welder for Magnolia Petrochemicals in Beaumont. 01:06:11 Got remarried in 1966. Have a child. Three children from first marriage were adopted by first wife and her husband. Son works at Kinder Morgan. First son is a water well driller. 01:08:40 Sea captain has expertise involved in their work that cannot be done by brown water pilots. Texas Chicken. 01:10:39 Retired in 2008. Inherited a ranch, from uncle and aunt. Was the chartered member of Houston-Galveston- Navigation safety Advisory comm. (HOGANSAC). Was on board of directors for American Waterways operators. 01:16:03 Biggest change has been the cleaning up of the Houston ship channel. Used to be cesspool and now there is life up in the ship channel right up to the Turning basin. 01:18:45 Don’t see break bulk cargo anymore. Single biggest change in cargo. Nothing other than container. Cheapest form of transportation. Only thing other than for liquids in pipelines. Barges carried chemicals, petrochemicals and petroleum. 01:21:21 Have to know how to use computers. Did not have that requirement 20 years ago. Most boats are computer controlled. Have technology that shows ships sitting anywhere in the world because they are transmitting satellite imagery. When started with pilots would sit out there and wait for a ship and it had a scheduled arrival time but would most often be much later than that. Now can know with a lot more accuracy when a ship will arrive. 01:26:27 Technology was developed within the last 10 years 
PortHouston;William Hennessey;1951;2012;William Hennessey, 1951, 2012  WILLIAM HENNESSEY SUMMARY: William Hennessey talks to Pat Jasper about his career starting from New York port to now working at Exxon in Bayport. He also discusses the main responsibilities of a marine superintendent and how automation has changed the industry. Aug 07, 2012 - Exxon 00:00:30 Born in Brooklyn in 1951. Father was tug captain. Grandfather was tug captain. Gave an entry into the business. Have many relatives in the industry. Had first job with Texaco on a tug boat. Left Texaco in 1984 to Maran Towing to become a pilot and tug captain. Lasted till 1988 when there was a big tug strike in NY. Then became a financial advisor with Prudential for two years. In 1990 got a call from Exxon to work at SFO Bay. Busy port for Exxon. In 2003 got a call for a shore assignment. Did harbor work and coast wise moving of petroleum barges. Had to move from Florida to Houston. Came to Houston in 2003. Quality assurance on vessels. Went to Middle East, Africa, Asia. Got on vessels and made sure quality was met. Then became Marine Superintendent in Baytown in 2010. Have 1800 barges that load or discharge from Baytown. Move a lot of petroleum products. Very close to Maritime community without sailing. 00:05:55 Marine superintendent - primary responsibility is any vessel that comes to Baytown need to make sure it is acceptable. Not from a quality standpoint but have to make sure the ship will fit on the berth. Houston is a 45ft deep channel. Maintain a 45ft depth on the berth. Some berths are slightly less. Make sure vessel size fits the assignment they have been given. Also dredge the channel because Houston ship channel has a lot of siltation. Have annual dredging operation. Means working with port of Houston and Army Corp Engineers, the contractor, dredgers. Lot of permitting. Once it starts, it lasts about three weeks to dredge all the docks in Baytown. Have a contract to go on board every ship and monitor the load and discharge and cargo operations. 00:09:22 Exxon does own and operate some vessels with an affiliate organization. But most of the vessels in Baytown are third party and will be chartered by the customer to either bring product or to purchase product for their customers. So they are all chartered vessels, spot chartered or time chartered. Have crude ships, time chartered and most of them spot chartered. Export different chemicals on cargo sales. 00:10:55 Import a lot of crude, domestic production has increased. Also export product. Largest part is for domestic use. Just want to make sure barges are loaded and unloaded and discharged efficiently and safely. Every vessel has to be sampled for product quality. Tanker men meet the barge and are responsible for load and unload.  00:13:20 Import and export is a growing business, Exports are increasing daily. Growth means more jobs, expanding facility. Strategic asset - limited number of refineries over the world. Baytown complex is made up of a number of companies. Complex largest in North America. Makes 200 million barrels. Huge asset. Competitive asset. Big expansion with chemical plant. Driven on domestic production of crude. Good news not just for Baytown but the whole ship channel. 00:15:40 Baytown has a long history over 90 years. See a lot of family relations in the industry. Many different talents and skill sets. Education is very important. People with many different backgrounds. 00:17:41 ONly marine person at the site, gives an unique view. Start in the industry, came up through the ranks, through opportunity and hard work and luck. Very rewarding business. Liaison for the refinery. 00:20:30 Most facilities do not have a marine person. May have access to marine people. Provides unique opportunity. Regardless of level of education, experience plays a big role. Not the standard model to have people with marine experience at the facility. Given the size of Baytown and the traffic, very few facilities handle amount of traffic that 00:22:47 Baytown is the largest refinery in America. Run 580,000 crude barrels a day. 60% of that s water borne, rest comes from various pipelines. Barges move product back and forth. Very difficult business, capital intensive, lot of labor. Running at full capacity almost every day of the year. 00:25:27 Use harbor lights and Port Vision. Both track ships through the AIS system. Harbor lights takes it a step further and gives pilots schedule. Schedulers or dock supervisors use that tool and find out if the ship has tender. Cuts down a lot on the need to call somebody. 00:28:39 Don't deal with the ships or the tugs directly. Deal with dock coordinators and supervisors everyday at 8 am. Look at the the skeds, delays. Sked needs to be constantly changed. Contractors like dredgers, surveyors. Will communicate depths and drafts to the industry. There is a lot of interface with a lot of people on the dock. Will speak to the person in charge. About 80 people working on the docks, shift workers, 4 days on, 4 days off. Fill all these dock positions. With each dock, have 13 berths, 5 docks. that need to be  manned at all times. Specially anytime a vessel is there. Part of job is to get to know people. Make sure people are comfortable and know there is someone to help. All foreign ships need coastguard inspection. If ship has not been to the US in over a year, they may be to of compliance and need to be inspected. 00:34:50 Exxon prides themselves on a safety record. Number of times a year there is a hard landing and docks have to be repaired. Being at each dock, handling specific products can be a big challenge. Lot of people in the logistical chain. Zero tolerance for accidents. Need an engineer to manage the operations. 00:38:04 Hard landings - dock fenders are designed for a certain wave and certain speed impacting the docks, like .2ft per second. If there is a certain miscommunication, the ship will land hard on the dock, damaging the dock. repairs will then take 8 days and have to limit the usage of the docks. Recently had a hard landing on the crude dock. That was pretty critical because there are only two crude docks. Don't have spare docks, nowhere else to move that type of volume. Need to have the right plan and the right people. Chemical engineers live with the constant challenge of disruption on the docks and manage a very stressful situation. 00:41:22 have two main groups. Shift teams and the docks day team. Five people part of the day team. Start work at 7.30 and go home by 5.30. After hours go with the job. Can get a call at anytime and have to manage ship clearances even on weekends or holidays. Rather be on top of the job than not know what is going on. The marriage - when a ship is delayed beyond the charter agreement, have to pay for the excess time. Have analysts in Budapest and discuss things with them on daily basis. Part of the workload. Not unusual to be involved on vacations, holidays or weekends. When a ship is scheduled to arrive, there is a 3-day window. if the vessel arrives in a 3 day window and they are ready to do what they were hired for, have to accept tender. So need to put them on a clock. Typically a ship will have tender to come, load, and be ready to sail. If it goes beyond that, have to pay an hourly rate for the ship. Ships 5-6 years ago were more expensive like 100,00 a day. Now more like 25,000 a day. Costs have come down a bit. Look at it closely and try to reduce it. Not as much about cost as it is about berth utilization. Vessel operators would rather use the ship than have it sitting on the clock. Merge analysis is another industry in itself. Based in Budapest because part of global presence. Have some business offices in Argentina. Time is easier for Argentina than Budapest. 00:48:32  Have worked in three very different ports. Earlier people used to say being at the port was a dying industry. People were very short sighted. Ports around the world are now maxed out. Have always worked for oil companies. All had large fleet- BP, EXXON etc. A lot of the piers were being converted to different used - condos, tennis courts etc. Marine industry was trying to keeping it for marine uses. No inland traffic in SFO or NY unlike Houston. Big inland traffic in Houston. All deep water ocean going barges. There are a lot of similarities with all these ports. 00:54:15 Biggest change is how big everything can get. Harbor tugs are now three times the horse power.. From 1600 horsepower to 6000 horsepower. Ships have become much bigger. Job is not as much to work on these vessels. Since 9/11 security has become more strict, makes it more difficult on sailors. Sometimes sailors are not allowed off the vessel. Baytown is one of the few facilities in the country that has a plan approved by the coastguard where non TWIC carrying sailors can transit the facilities. So manage to move a lot of people ashore so that they can get a change of scenery and do some shopping etc. In the 70s could drive or walk in and out of any facility. Job has changed a lot, mostly for the better but have taken the fun out of it. 00:58:21 Turn around time for vessels and ships is now faster. Earlier they used to be around for 7 days. Vessels have some advancement in the mooring system. But once a vessel is secured to a dock, will connect to multiple hoses. Some ships unload many different products. Sampling and gauging is pretty much the same. Not a whole lot of change. Except for the volume there has not been much of a change in manning or the process. 01:01:18 Some of the components, like the ship itself used to sail with more than 30 members in the crew. Now most ships sail with just 20 crew members. Tugs would have crew of 5-6. Now tugs operate with 2 people. As far as shore side, not so much change. Still need same number of people on docks. 01:02:15 One of the biggest changes was getting rid of cooks. If there is a boat running 24 hours a day. There will be captain, mate and a deckhand. Combined some jobs. reduces the number of people. Engine rooms re all automated. Everything monitored by computers, alarms if something goes wrong. Line handling has not changed. Ropes are now larger. Most of them are now on a wench, hydraulic or electric. Automation of engine rooms and line handling wenches that have helped reduce labor. 01:05:38 Shipping companies that do a short run, is important to get their crew off the boat at short intervals. They went to coastguard and then to Exxon. Wanted a plan that would meet security requirements and wanted the coastguard to work on this. Identified that it was an  issue that there were unhappy sailors on the ships. Plan - each vessel has a ship security officer would escort crew members to a security van and that would take them to the gate. Security van charges a nominal fee for the service. Don't allow taxis, people are not allowed to walk . But this security van is allowed and it has a few bus stops along the way. There is a document that needs to be signed and tracked. Main thing is vessel has communication. Been doing this for two years. Sailors are very happy. Almost all ships that come to the dock use this van to get on and off the vessel. Wonderful for sailors to have that connection. Worked well for everybody. Not an undue strain on facilities. 01:12:27 Track every one that is coming or going. Everyone is documented. TWIC escort. Very expensive. 01:14:54 The 8 am meeting is when the day team - section supervisor and the dock supervisors, measurement and maintenance supervisors will meet and go over dock forecasts. The forecasts will not only tell vessels that are at the facility or coming to the facility and ongoing work at the dock, maintenance, conflicts, schedules. Have to manage mostly day work, Manage the berths. Logistics. Will also discuss the activities with the supervisors. Good way to start the day. Meeting at 9 am with product quality group. Challenge sometimes to get out of office and out on the docks. Meeting people and looking at operations first hand is always an eye opener. Always have to keep an eye on what is going on. 01:19:40 Helps that the management is all at the Marine terminal. Back in the SO days, had a very large flee, owned marine terminals and more vessels. and so there was a lot of marine expertise. There are about 80 marine advisors in the company worldwide. Shrinking as far as people with actual ship board experience. there are still people coming through universities. Knowledge and experience is invaluable. 01:26:10 Relations within the industry, can’t underestimate what a great port community Houston has. port of Houston is unique. Have close relationships with port of Houston authority, coastguard. Allow coastguard inspections on the docks. There are a number of things that have been implemented that are helpful to the vessels. A ship needs a lot of support. "They are a floating island." Try to offer any help they need. Not a facility that says no. Have sailed for so many years so know what it is to get and keep stores. It is not just about giving. Receive benefits too when a vessel gets its needs met. Everything is very tightly scheduled.  
PortHouston;William Hausinger;1934;2011;William Hausinger , 1934, 2011  WILLIAM HAUSINGER Timekeeper/Fireman/Longshoreman Summary: William Hausinger Jr speaks about holding two jobs, one at the port and the other at the fire station. He explains how it was difficult to get a job at the port without having a connection with someone, pranks they played on new employees, and how his whole family worked at some point at the Port. 00:00 Oct 21, 2011 ILA office in Houston William Hausinger 00.58 Born Nov 9, 1934. 5 years old moved close to ILA union hall. Watched it while growing up. Had a shoe shine box and used to set up near the offices during pay day, turned out to be a lucrative business. Only charged a dime but got good tips. At 18 stood in line to get a job. No seniority system. Button man means union member. Guaranteed a job over anything else. No automation. everything by hand. "Lamb back was a dirty job, cow hide was a stinky job." Tried to avoid such jobs. Had one four year break due to medical reasons. Worked for 32 years. Had side jobs when there was no work. 05:00 No containers. Commodities and household goods would be lifted out of the ship hatch cover and loaded out on the dock or vice versa. Worked Clerk and time keeping for last 25 years. Worked in hold of ship for the first 7 years. 10:00 Rotation on cotton jobs only. Every man working the cotton job would draw the same salary. Good cotton gang would know one another. Know the system, then welcome to work in any gang. Cotton bales had buckles on them with wires that were sharp and could cut. Had protective layering on while working with cotton. Cotton wit 600-700 bales was a coveted job. 13:10 New comers. Kinship and friendship job. These days it is called networking, those days was just called kinship. Did not pull anyone down. Needed to know someone to get in. While hiring it was button men first. 1969 started seniority system. Union advantage of being a button man changed. While hiring it was button men first. Anybody could work and get in the union. Hiring a gang foreman or picking up a gang. Early days there was a man who made ice water. His tools were an icepick. Been there 30-40 years. Took care of old timers then.  17:00 Gang numbers used to vary according to the job. Commodities were loose back then and then they started to be wrapped up in plastic. Worked to the bottom of the hole, called the skin of the ship. Worked down a layer at a time. 20:00 Gangs would stay together. The outsider was getting a start like anyone else. "Partner's progress." Retired since 1990. 23:00 Non-union shops were always known as Scabs. There were non-union jobs available. Port of Houston does not allow its docks to be completely used by non-union labor. 25:00 Nobody broke a picket line when organized by labor. The only people who crossed the picket line were "the ladies of the night." There were some fights when people had other jobs. Fights on the waterfront were a lot of times because of jealousy and sometimes because non-union labor was working in a particular dock. Union also has to police itself. If there are certain people who don't tow the union's line or continually get job abuse written up they are retrained, warned or fired. Don't want anyone harming the union or Port of Houston's reputation. 29:00 Common prank. To buy a Longshoreman's manual. Was asked to buy beer at midnight. Drinking was rampant then. Worked together always. Did socialize after the job. There were certain clubs that we frequented. In 1990, did not socialize as much. Do keep in touch and attend retiree meetings. Hoping to get a museum in Houston, trying to lobby Port Commissioners for the museum. 35:20 Compared to manual labor, clerks and checks only lifted a pencil. Need to make sure job was well done and reached the right place. Lot of responsibility and had a lot of paperwork. Women in ILA. Women did not want to get a job in the hold. They took a dock checking job to check cargo loads on trucks for quantity, damages etc. It was accepted. They were as good workers as the men, sometimes even better. 37:30 Unions were integrated on April 1, 1983. Checkers hall was always inter-racial. Deep sea longshoreman, stevedores were separate. Stood together in the hall as union brothers. Had an equal chance at getting a job. in the old days, Ship was divided in half. First half went to the white locals and the second half went to the black. On the next ship it was  vice versa. So it was pretty equal then. Did away with that system in 1983 when the integration happened. Will Call, available when you need to be. Not a fixed time job. Seniority keeps the same level. Timekeeper job had a lot of responsibility. When foreman notices the time keeper is not there, he has to fire him, 44:00 Worst accident. Saw big forklift with tons of steel back up over a man's leg. Chief on the ship is the first doctor. Chief mate is the pharmacist mate on the ship. Containers squash two men on deck. FBI incident. Customs are the Gods of the waterfront. Nothing loads or unloads without customs approval. Check every ships paper work, people on it, what they are transporting. 48:50 Wife got job at coast wire shipping. Company turned out to be Sea Land company. First ship came with 20 containers. That was the start. Late 60s containerization really took off. Been to Saudi Arabia 7 times with shipping companies. Clerk and timekeepers. 20-40 containers an hour. Container royalty fund. Not as many new hires coming in. Fund that helps pick up difference every year. Great hospitalization plan. 53:20 Used to have papers ready within an hour of either direction. When they gang comes on and off the ship gave them piece of paper saying how much money they made , didn't have to wait, could go to the union hall and hand it in. If there was some problem, union hall would contact the walking foreman on the ship. 55:40 New people are so glad to get a job they will do their best. Union has education programs and safety programs and is continually educating new comers. Have tests and exams for computer literacy. Have to be computer literate, container qualified. Will always need people, even with automation and containerization. Losing a lot of labor is a far-fetched thought. 59:30 Wife liked the steady job of a firefighter. Was always reluctant to think there is no steady income from the waterfront. There is no guarantee. Always made it. Proud of benefits. Left City of Houston job after 21 years, got nothing. Son works at the Port as a clerk. Two daughters work for stevedores and company, son is chief clerk, other son puts up construction elevators. Whole family has worked on the port. Loved being a longshoreman. Different job every day, different people. 1:03:12  Worked 62 hours a week at the fire station. Then started work as a dispatcher for 40 hours a week. Started working at the port. Love the waterfront. Had a shrimp boat on the side. rebuilt a 10 year old shrimp boat. Caught as much 1700 pounds in one day. Helped with the living. In the last 5-10 years just nobody can come and make a living in the first year itself. Have to do something else as supplemental income. Need to be able to leave the other job whenever the union hall calls. Women working in the hold of the ship. Never been approached to do anything illegal. 1:11:38 Visited a lot of ports. Socialize with people at other ports. Hiring time was 7, 8, 10 and 1 pm. Would play dominos waiting to be hired. Seining in Galveston. Have had the opportunity to work at the fire station close to the port. Certified welder. Retired as Deputy Chief from the fire dept. all had secondary jobs, house builders, fire fighters, concrete pourers, jewelry store owners. 
PortHouston;Tom Tellepsen II;1913;2012;Tom Tellepsen II, 1913, 2012  TOM TELLEPSEN SUMMARY: Tom Tellepsen II talks to Pat Jasper about his family business. He remembers how his grandfather built his business form humble beginnings and grew to be highly recognized in Houston. He also reminisces about his grandfather's and father's achievements and how he feels proud every time he comes across a building that they have constructed. He also discusses why he decided to start his own business. March 29, 2012 HAA 00:00:00 Have been a general contractor ever since the early 70s. Worked for family construction company. In 1970 found it was too large a company and decided to do small work. Worked for episcopal diocese of Texas for the last 30 years. Built small churches, parish halls, schools and an activity center. Been more fulfilling. Given an opportunity to mingle, know small churches. 00:02:13 Grandfather was from Norway, Left when he was 14. Worked as a cannon boy in a ship. Circled the globe for two years. Grandfather had relatives in NY. When he was done sailing, landed in NY and sought work there. Became a carpenter. Heard of the Panama canal opportunity. Worked for two years there. Grandfather was encouraged to go to US for naturalization process. Had to stay for 5 years. He settled in Texas for a new start. Started in the construction business in 1909. Took night classes at the YMCA. in 1912, went back to Norway and married Ingleborg. Came back raised a family. Grandfather started as a one man operation. Had an interest for projects on the water. Liked heavy construction. He built the Miller Outdoor theater. Museum of Fine Arts Built the chemistry building at Rice Univ.. Also picked up work at the Port. Built the second public dock - the Manchester dock. Hired by Anderson Clayton, big in the cotton business. Built a 1700 linear foot dock in 90 days. Remodeled and uncovered a sharp shooter, crow bar and a spade shovel. Grandfather restored them and put them in a glass case in his office. Through the years, Tellepsen built more docks. Petro chem group, construction group and commercial group. One of the last jobs was for Philips, a dock at the Port. Actual work on the port was always there. In 1950 Howard Tellepsen was asked to be the Port Chairman. Was an active civil leader in Houston. Following in his father's footsteps , branched out more. Born in 1913. Was 43 years old when elected as the chairman. Father had done a lot early on in his life. Took the reins at the port and got it back in shape. Was responsible for bond issue votes, was a real cheerleader for the Port of Houston as he realized port is vital to Houston's economy. Some port leaders and chaplains got together and gave a lease to the seafarers center in 1969. Was told to start construction. Needed to raise money. Decided to start construction  before the money was raised. Tellepsen built it. First service there on Christmas Eve. Big soccer field where ship crews would play each other. large swimming pool. In Mid 80s pavilion with basketball court was added. Center was highly successful. 00:17:56 Back then ships required more seafarers. They would stay a week to two weeks. became very evident that another branch needed to be opened. At Morgan’s point in Barber's cut. Very first set of docks there was by Tellepsen. Getting ready for the Panama Canal to open is another link at the other side of the port. After 9/11 restrictions are still in place and makes it harder for seafarers to even get off the boat. Last year chaplains went to 5800 ships. Almost 28000 seafarers could get help from the chaplains. Help like phone cards, communication, wifi. First thing seafarers want to do, is go to Walmart. Port authority offer a lot of support. 00:22:34 The TWIC card became prominent. Staff at seafarer center have TWIC cards. Staff picks up seafarers who don't have TWIC cards. Shipping agent on the board. Take seafarers to Walmart, banking work and even the center. The original seafarer's center was a state of the art facility. Like a small YMCA. Ships don't need as many seafarers as they used before. Have three maritime lawyers on board. Lawyers help when there are certain situations where seafarers are not getting a fair deal. Have the seafarers interest in mind but now it is a more litigious society. Abel to direct them to a proper course of action. 00:28:49 Grandfather died in 1975, regret not asking him more stories. Never gave him the opportunity to tell his stories. Been involved in the downtown YMCA, named after the grandfather because of his activity, involvement and support at the YMCA. Had to look into past history of grandfather to be used on panels at the YMCA. Was very proud to be an American. He built his house in the East-end and his work was in the East-end. One of the first houses on Montrose was built by grandfather. Still standing. Just six months ago, uncovered an address that was built exactly 100 years ago built by grandfather. Had a Scandinavian look. In 1923 granddad sent his family to Norway for the summer. While there were away added a second floor to the house as a surprise. Going to have a time capsule at the YMCA. Grandparents went to Christ church downtown. Church the redeemer was everything for grandparents. Grandmother began prayer organizations throughout Houston. Houston is still a young city. has been blessed with pioneering families. 00:49:15 Dad had a lot of civic responsibilities. He never brought work home. In 1954, Dad was president of Chamber of Commerce. Returned to the building he had helped build. Dad made sons work outside of school during summer break. Family has an amazing history of repeat work. Granddad worked at Rice, brother did Rice Wellness building.  00:56:46 Brother are very different from each other. Wanted to know the business from the nuts and bolts. Brother graduated with an engineering degree. Dad did not feel it was necessary either. Brother started out in the office whereas he started out in the field. Became a rodman - person that holds the rod while the field engineer looks through his level. and then became field engineer. Felt this urge to branch out. Became partners with sister and bought old homes in West Univ. and fixed them up and sold them. Were abel to make a living but those who made the money were those that bought the remodeled houses and sold it after a couple of years. Did not have the cash flow to do that. Went on to the commercial side. In the mid 80’s built the very first activity center for church. the influence from father and grandfather is not only build something but take pride in the work done by those who helped build it long after work is done. 01:02:06 The overriding pride for the Port of Houston. People that worked on the docks were on the waterfront. things have changed now. Professionals now don't understand the true meaning of what the port is for Houston. 01:05:49 Remarkable for an immigrant to come to the US without knowing the language and becoming such an important person the city. Was amazed at how resourceful father was. After he graduated was living at home, dad was responsible for concrete order. Ordered one truck too many. Grandfather was very had on him. 01:15:27 Was in college during the strike of 1960s. Was during Dad's final years. Left in 66 for college. Tellpesen was a union contractor. Heard stories from the management s side. Was familiar with strike that went on in construction. Dad was successful in getting along with commissioners and labor, with everyone. Grandfather had a good reputation in Norway. Was awarded the St. Olaf's award. 01:20:59 Got to know the Norwegian consulate. Was astonished by the numbers. Some Norwegians come to a the annual seafarers gala. Don't know if they are spread around Houston or congregate in one area. Very sophisticated people in the Marine business. See potential of Houston. Port of NY was always first and it was competing with NEw Orleans. Houston was sometimes second. statistics are still being measures the same way in terms of tonnage. The area of the docks was extremely union. Couldn't work there unless they were union. Has changed since then.   
PortHouston;Terry Thibodeaux;1961;xxxx;Terry Thibodeaux, 1961, xxxx  TERRY THIBODEAUX SUMMARY:Terry Thibodeaux talks to Pat Jasper about his career as a Port Engineer with Martin Marine. He discusses the nuances of his job, the dangers involved and the work involved in building a ship. 00:15 Born in Port Arthur, TX. Graduated high school from Thomas Jefferson. Started in the Marine business in 1980 as a mechanic/helper. Worked there for 14 years. Whenever any tugboat broke down, would go out and fix it. 01.17 Father came to Port Arthur looking for work from Louisiana. Father was in the bread business. Not in the marine business. Sister married someone who was all in the marine business. Was offered a job through them. If a boat/engine was broken would load up in a truck, fix the boat and turn and come back home. (PHONE RINGS) 03:36 Instead of continuing with school, just continued work and learnt everything on the job. Troubleshoot problems, how to get along with everyone on the job and to make sure everything functions as a whole unit. Learn to fix everything - from a toilet to a broken heart. Mainly engines, steering, gearboxes, propellers. Timeframe involved too. Repairs as cheap as can be. 05:47 First 25 years was all hands on. Changed pistons, liners, everything on the boat that can be changed. When taking care of extra equipment, have to contract that out. When three or four boats are breaking down all over the area, have to hire people in that area to go fix it. 07:31 A lot of older engines that were kept running for as long as possible, A lot of technology has changed. Learnt to operate new equipment as and when it was being used. Learning the same time as the manufacturers are learning. 10:16 Always worked for corporations and hence worked on company's boats. "Marine business is real big but real small too." Cooperative spirit. People know one another. All work well together. 12:18  Even before one gets to work, the phone is constantly ringing. On call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Might end up having 5 boats with problems very early in the day. Might have air-conditioners on a boat stop working. If it is in New Orleans, find a vendor to fix it. Maybe a boat in Corpus Christi with steering trouble. Have to tell vendor what the problem is. Also have to figure out the problem when the call comes in. Boats are all the property of Martin Marine. 15:12 Responsible for the inland fleet. Stays in the inter-coastal everywhere. Offshore fleet, goes offshore and pushes bigger barges and get out in the Gulf. No problems with bad weather. Take care of the inter-coastal side. 20 boats on inter-coastal and 6 offshore units. Push boats and tugs. Push boats stay on the inter-coastal and the tugs go outside. Push boats push the barges. Offshore can either push or pull the big units. 18:39 Now there are people who are hired only to take care of safety. Make sure to keep everyone safe. Wear earplugs, safety glasses. All this is taught before they get on the boat. Lot of training. 20:03 Boats stop in a fleet and park equipment before heading out to the next refinery. Oils and clean products for Shell, Marathon, Exxon Mobil. Have to keep safety up to date. Spills - have to get people moving and hustling. Have to call all the right people. Few years ago, steering of a boat gave way, boat ran into the rocks, put a hole in the barge, had to try and contain the oil to one particular spot. Tried to clog the hole with a mattress. In the 90s. Worked with Port Arthur Towing. 25:35 There have been engines blowing up, throw a rod on the side and break the starter off. Go through a lot of different scenarios. Offshore boats - might need to call another boat to rescue the first one. Inland boats - can always see land from where ever the boat is. Martin Marine serves the entire US coast. From California to Florida and Louisiana to Mississippi and Ohio River. Inland boats do not go up to the east coast. Offshore boats can. 27:22 Responsible for all the inland boats. Martin Marines have some fueling docks, fleet of over 700 trucks, Martin even has refineries with tanks, have a lot more equipment other than marine related equipment. Not just marine but a lot of different equipment. 29:05 Marine industry has picked up tremendously compared to what it used to be. Waterways now look like an interstate highway as far as traffic and equipment on the waterfront.  29:41 Martine marine hired a shipyard to build some boats. Had a contract before it was built. It already had a job even before it was built. Industry is getting so big that it needs people to build stuff fast enough. 30:54 Port Engineer - needs to be present every day during the building of a ship. Lot of input on how it is built, where to put the fuel, oil tanks, how it should be loaded. Company may want particular safety issues to be included. Was port engineer for the Lance Corporal. 31:46 Sheet of steel to start off with. Start from the hull and then move on to engines and gears, have the houses built where the living quarters are located. Wheelhouse on the top. Whole time that is going on, work continues with the electricians, AC workmen and in short everything on it is being overseen. 33:06 Try to get the boat as comfortable as possible. Shipmen are out there so long, try to make the boat like home. Easy to get people if it is comfortable. 36:25 Work with the main foreman at the ship yard. He has welders, pipe workers and he coordinates them. Deals with the main foreman with concerns.Steel structure, in house appliances. 38:19 Special breed, hard on family life. Miss a lot of football games, christmases, new years, thanksgivings. SAfety concerns regarding pilots. Family gets used to erratic hours. Some wives don't get used to it. 40:37 Safety concerns slow a lot of work.. Need to remember that it is for a good reason. Pressure from people. 41:43 Some shipmen don’t retire because they don’t want to leave the waterfront 43:40 Did not have formal training. Worked and learnt on the job. The person who went to college forms the team because he knows a different part of the job and work together as a team. Had a collision with one boat to a barge. Hit it too hard and punctured a hole in the barge, needed to get it fixed. Had to find out which machine failed so that his accident  took place. Had to let the engineer know which machine had failed. He knew how much water was going into a certain size hole and whether the equipment would still float. 47:00 PAUSES RECORDING 47:11 RESUMES RECORDING Dangerous industry. Tanker man discharges and loads the barge and then takes care of the boat. evidently boat as coming up to the dock and just when it got to the dock, he was climbing over the step to the engine room and the boat bumped the dock, he fell overboard, No one knew he fell overboard. Propellers and gears sucked him underneath. Fleet was across the river. Propellers hit him, sucked him under, and pushed him under water right near the fleet of barges as couldn't find him for a few days until the fleet was moved.  
PortHouston;T. C Harris;1974;xxxx;T. C Harris, 1974, xxxx  Timothy Charles Harris. 00: 58 T. C Harris Born March 26th, 1974 at Houston, TX. 37 years. 22 years on waterfront. Spent time as child taking food to dad while he was working. 4-5 years old, watching real crates of goods , watching men work. Attracted to it. Exposed to it from an early age. Camaraderie and closeness of families. There for commonwealth of working class people. Have seen men move trains from Russia to elephants from Africa for the Houston zoo. Was illegal to work. Started at 16. Wanted to do something different. Worked summer months. Tough, hard work. Did labor intense work. Best decision was to work there. 6:15 Father pushed for education. Working at the docks was a summer thing. Was to pursue college or military. First job unloading rail cars of bagged goods. 110 lb bag of cargo. 1400 in one rail car. Unload 4 cars. 6800 bags to take out. Could not quit the first day. Had a namesake to keep up. Made it through first day. Because of pride and not to fail father. 9:22 Worked out of Lake Charles, Corpus Christ, Beaumont, Brownsville. A network, follow a ship, crew of men were together. Shape up was to see if physically able to perform duties. See if they can hold up weight on a ship. Nepotism exists in these situations. At Lake Charles, Louisiana there would be shape up underneath the oak tree right down street from the port. Every local does it different. Does Shape up now. Flocked to wherever the work was at. Lifestyle of a longshoreman does not change from port to port. 13:10 When work is down have to move around to find work. Work is pretty good in Houston. Labor intense work in Houston. Formed a related group out of Texas, a collaboration of different people from Texas. Helped each other. Was a young guy coming in, so all little bit older. Everybody usually took somebody under their wing. Made contact with people of that nature. Always the youngest one in the group. 16:40 Was a longshorewarehouseman. Have worked waterside locals. Port of Houston is home port. Locals have separate criteria to establish seniority, Number of hours, years. Person working in a certain place for a number of years has opportunity to select jobs based on number of hours and years put in. Can vary from port to port depending on volume of work. Can make a selection on a shape up. This is set up  by union officials. Did hard work for 13 years. Travelled a lot. Handle the certifications and education to locals. More opportunities are there and therefore don’t have to do too much labor intensive work. 19:40 Latching and securing cargo is a skill. Loading and unloading bagged goods. Can range from 160 lbs of coffee to 110 lbs of rice and beans, Food grade cargo going overseas or coffee coming in. Containerization was in effect but volume wasn’t enough. Was stuck in labor intensive mode. Nowadays a lot handled in distribution center and less amount of labor intensive work. Poseco cranes, empty handlers used. Long time to get to operate heavy equipment. Like to move cargo, like difficult things, big pieces try to figure out how to move. Loaded Black Hawk helicopters, military work from Desert Storm to Iraq to Afghanistan. Watching them move cargo is an art. 24:10 Supervisor, foreman and work crew. National Cargo Bureau like insurance company sent to see if everything goes smoothly, secured safely. Ensures cargo does not come loose or unsecured. Coast guard also makes sure cargo is secured properly. 27:31 Shapedup in different ports. Would not have believed if someone said would be union official for 9 years including present term. Became walking foreman. Had a good group of people who believed could make good union official. Support from people was good. Knew wouldn’t go anywhere because of inter generational ties. Port has been good to family. Proud to be doing this, it is an honor. 30:50 Assist in shaping up the labor, help in hiring labor, cargo expediters, mechanics. At work at 4.30 am, look at work records, make sure of have highly trained workforce. As business agent, handle the handling of the men, look at books for the treasurer and help in education. Work from 4.30 am to around 5 pm or even 7.30. Long hours. Handle everyday business. If you are handling equipment, need to take a physical examination. Did not have to do a physical when started work at 16. Then just had to be young and in good shape and willing to work. Big change. Keep up with daily upkeep of office. Handle payroll, problems on dock. 34:45 Industry grew at a wild pace in the last few years. Demand for equipment operators has risen. Manpower development program, training program set up. Work as Director of Certification. Non union guys work with us and don’t go back. Highly trained workforce in the last 10 years. System is based on seniority and can choose jobs based on number of years in industry. Nothing different between union and non union workers except training and some representatives there to fight for common good, bargain for livable wages. Non-union guys come in, reach a decision about wages and work. Have a guy who worked as mechanic at a non-union yard for $12/hour as opposed to working with union with  benefits for $32/hour with benefits. Didn’t figure that out years ago maybe because he was content. There were high peak months, then work would drop off where 2-3 weeks in a month there was no work. As long as ship is in the water and there is cargo that moves through here, there will be longshoreman. 42:52 Lot more automation. Older guys thought containers would be the death of waterfront, but it has made it grow. Younger people here with hand eye coordination and computer skills which is required. Lot more younger people coming in. Older guys made me respect this place and what it is. Not too much friction between older and younger generation. If you don’t learn from your past what kind of future will you have. 47:50 Brother is an anesthesiologist. Was on the waterfront before me. Then went on to study and pursue his dreams. Was a competition between home team and visiting team to fill ships. Between Texas boys and Lake Charles Louisiana. Paid by tonnage, more you move more you make. Good camaraderie between everyone. As a business agent, popular guy everyone around you. Earlier on it was like a family, with each other all the time. Very tight knit group. Kids know what longshoring is. Daughter understand containerization. Asks questions about logistics. Son reminds me of me. Son wanted to come down to the docks in the summer to work. Make him the fourth generation doing that. Would not deny the opportunity to son. Took daughter down to docks and maybe because of that she asks so many questions about the docks. See a trend now. 56:30 Warehouseman vs a gang or a shoreside. Prepare cargo for a ship. Palletize everything by hand. Meaning stacking everything. Could be barbed wire, nail, grinding ball, sand, anything. Gang foreman, two drivers and three working persons. 2 people and a driver would be together unloading a rail car. When work drops off, lose a workforce. Workforce will travel looking for work. Since recession, work has dropped off in some areas. It Is hard on new guys coming in. Bag goods are big around spring and fall. Mostly perishable items. 1:02:10 Foolish to not learn from past grudges and mistakes. How can we do better for them so that we can become more employable. Did not come under the bad rap regime. Dealt with a bunch of different union officials used to handling people differently. End of the day the only thing we have is good labor. Good relations with them. Need to have proficient people that make employers people. If they make money employers are able to make more money to pay labor. More educated, proficient group. Times have changed, attitudes have changed.  1:07:00 No progress without sacrifice. Not a bad place to be. Blessing to me and family.  
PortHouston;Steve Bennet;1955;2012;Steve Bennet, 1955, 2012,   January 12, 2012 STEVE BENNET Summary: Steve Bennet, boatman, talks to Pat Jasper about his family's career on the waterfront. From how his father and mother started on the waterfront, right up to his grandson showing an interest on working at the Port. He also talks about exactly what his job entails and just how dangerous it is. 00:00:14 Home 13531, Willow Height Ct. Clearlake City Born in Houston in 1955, oldest of 4 kids. Dad was away at sea working on the ship, from Georgia. Mother from Texas. During WW1 Dad and cousin wanted to find work. Wanted to join the Marines. Was told not to join the Marines but the Merchant Marines. Was told of the extra pay. Went to Florida to get into radio class. Completed the class and waited for a ship out. Cousin Joe was shipped out. Dad was left waiting. Then hired as a deckhand. Worked his way up to become Captain of the ship. Came to New Orleans and Galveston. Mom worked as a secretary. They met and married. Smell of crude oil. Dad was accepted as a Houston ship pilot.Dad was pilot for over 30 years. Dad made introductions and started working part time for a boatman. Wife went into labor while was in Florida. Got back to Pasadena. Son was born healthy but contracted meningitis that left him with brain damage. Got relocated to Houston. Worked part time tying up ships until August 1978. Job has been helpful because could work when it was feasible and could take off when needed. Back then, men had ice chests full of beer and cigarettes and could drink and smoke on the job. 00:16:00 Very low on the totem pole. Peers that he started with are no longer around. Back then while on a boat, did not wear life jackets, hard hats, no protective gear. No radio. "Seniority is good, the older you get" 00:20:00 Have had a few incidents while running the boat up and down the channel. Tornado. A lot of changes, technology wise, makes it a lot easier, 00:25:40 Dad was number 75. Ned Murser top pilot then. When Dad got in the early 60s, had to get to know everyone that was there. 00:27:15 Boatman are ILA local. The company that started boatman position was the Houston Mooring company. Started off part time and if they needed more people they would vote in more people. As President of the local, wanted to introduce a program for drug  screening and rehab. Back in the 80s someone filed a lawsuit against hiring discrimination. Still fighting the lawsuit but now we had a "stair-step system" deal. got the lawsuit fixed and now invite applications to fix positions. 00:32:08 Most of the men moving up the ladder were sons of former employees. That's when the lawsuit came in. Nepotism. System worked out that benefits everyone. It is a good part time job for the extra men. 00:36:53 In group A everyone gets paid the same. The senior most member gets to run the boat and run the gang. Both those jobs mean extra money. The order in which people get the job in the groups. 00:40:26 Have had women working and people from all races have worked. There are about 3-4 locals. Clerks and checkers, car loaders, warehouse local, the boatman local. Only 75 people in Houston tie the ships up. Will meet the other locals during general meetings. They are longshoreman. Do not load ships but are still longshoreman. 00:45:34 Back then Galveston had a local too. They did not have a contract like the one in Houston. Negotiated a new contract. From getting paid $4.70 a job to $12.00 a job. Wages progress by zones. Became $8.00 extra for running a boat. "With Boatman, you just die usually or very few of us retire." 00:50:52 At Houston Mooring, Charlie Block's dad - longshoreman would be on one side of the channel wanting to cross and work on the ship and he had a rowboat and he would charge them a nickel a person to row them across. From there he got into tying up ships, Charlie's brother was tired of waiting around to get a job. He tossed the charter and set up a hiring hall so companies could hire them through that. Everyone has to take turns dispatching. No paid dispatcher. have to dispatch for 8 hours once every 15 days, Don't get paid. 00:55:02 Office will call with a job going to city dock 30. Ship inbound at Shell. Down at the dock wait for ship. Radio on and can hear Port of Houston spot the ship. Tell the ship where they want it. Two men on the stern and two on bow. Guys will throw a heaven line over that has a monkey fist on it. It is a line which has a weight on one end and throw it to the dock. On the other end it is ties to the ship's line. Boatman will take the line and pull it over and take the heaven line and throw it back up to the ship and tie it on. spring lines first and then the stern lines out. two men on each end when tying a ship up. It is a twenty  foot pull up to tying the ship up. When lines get wet they soak up a lot of water. The newer lines are heavier. Sometimes use the truck to tie up the ship. when it comes to untie the ship loose, there will be two boatman. One on stern and one on bow. Ship would select the headlines. When ship goes into crude terminal or chemical dock. Ship is now 800 ft long, 136 ft wide and draft of about 42 ft under the water. Ship will come alongside the boat that boatman is in. Have two gangs. One guy running the boat, one guy swamping - the one who stand behind the boat operator and wraps the lines off when they come on the boat. One deckhand, who takes the lines on the ford end of the boat as they slack them down. So, they slack it down to the guy, the deckhand holds it steady amidst the wind and the water and the elements. Deckhand would get the line on the bow and run it down the port side, pass it to the boat operator. Swamper in the back has a small half inch line that he wraps around this and puts on the bit. Boat will take that line and put it on the bid. Since the boat operator is squatting so much, have been doing it for 35 years have shot the knees out. Also suffer from Arthritic pain in the fingers from pulling the lines. Can take from anywhere between 15 mins to and hour and half to tie up a ship. Depends on the situation, the docks, the ship, and the crew. Like the 15 mins jobs better. Sometimes the giant ships are easier and faster to tie up than the small ones. 01:02:09 have a lot of knowledge. the newer guys want to start running the boats from the first day. But they don't know how to react in most situations. Was tying up a ship at Petrotanks, brother-in-law was running one of the mooring boats. Ship had a variable pitch wheel. Crew slacked off too much line all at once. Right before Mark got to the bank, the line got wrapped around the propeller and all of a sudden the boat went underwater and started pulling it back towards the ship. Mark and James were stuck in the boat and couldn't get out. Luckily, before it got to the propeller, the bit on boat that was holding the line, broke and came out and the boat just came up to the water. Another time, at Barber's Cut. Were using the truck to pull. Through a series of events, the truck was found hanging and luckily Mark jumped off. The line broke and the truck went to the bottom of the ship channel. Know people who have broken their legs, hurt my back, cracked vertebrae, strained ligaments. One guy lost seven fingers by the backlash on the ship. 01:07:10 Watched how older guys ran the boat, the little tricks they had, where to run the boat when you are hooked up. Now there are training programs. Boat training classes. Test new recruits ability to maneuver the boat. On probation they can only operate certain boats on certain docks. New recruits have to do 20 jobs under a trained professional. 01:11:11 As a union member soaked up everything the older members were saying. Watched out for you. When first starting out was still in the navy, so did not have a vehicle. Never had a paid vacation. Take off then don't get paid. No sick pay. Dispatch for free.  01:17:50 Contract for fringes. Increased it for the first time. Got a pay raise or a fringe raise. Increased retirement to $3.75 now. Goes into individual 401Ks. Pension system.. Need 1000 jobs to get into the system. 01:22:26 Work month. With group and seniority can do 10 jobs a day. 50 jobs in 5 days. Work week is not 5 days a week. It is 365 days a year. Paycheck is every 2 weeks. 16-18 hrs day. Work is not guaranteed. There could be fog, channel could shut down. Have the best job in the world. Could take off whenever wanted to see kids games, concerts and other events. No other job would give levy to do that. Have hope for grandson. He seems interested. May take him down to the docks. Family would sit in the truck watching him work. After 9/11, fences came up, places cordoned off, camera monitoring everything. 01:30:20 There are dangers around the work place. If ships surges, lines will pop. wires will break, hooks will come off. Accident at Barber's cut where man lost both his legs and was pronounced dead soon after that. Have had boats crushed. Have had boats leave out from under. There are all kinds of accidents. 01:34:41 Rope draggers, boatman. Line handlers. Terminology. Decals on hard-hat. When first started out, wore a cowboy hat. On the hard hat, have a work number on. Might put a sticker on. Get recognized by the color of the hardhat. Took a trip with dad on ship from Houston to New York and back at 10 years of age. Started love for sea. Was made to color maps on board. Got to go out on the bow in the morning and gather the flying fish that landed on the deck at night. Was assistant first mate to Dad. Was paid $42.00 in quarters. Had a bag of quarters, papers, two frozen flying fish. Was the richest kid around. 01:41:03 Mother would see the boatman tying the ships up and she would tell Dad, "That would be a great job for Steve." Dad set up the job. Can't be a pilot because of colorblindness. Failed all the tests. 01:46:35 Sister went to A&M and got her 3rd mates license in Galveston. She worked in Oregon. and then finally got her Captain's license. After parents passed away she did not go back to sea. The whole family has some ties to the sea and the port. It all started from father and cousin running away to join the Marine and getting picked up by an Officer and being told to join the Merchant Marine.  01:48:32 Father was in Merchant Marine during the war. He stayed on even after the war. Did not even finish 8th grade. 
PortHouston;RICHARD BLUDWORTH;1948;xxxx;RICHARD BLUDWORTH, 1948, xxxx  RICHARD BLUDWORTH 00:00:26 Born in Houston in 1948, Dad and uncle operated tugs and barges on the Houston Ship channel. Started in business after WW 2. Built their own boat. Built own boats and barges till the 1990s. Have two children, One in San Antonio, the other in Hawaii. 00:01:34 Family came over from England in early 1800s. Moved from Louisiana to Rockport, TX. Just raising children, fishing, mechanical work, rebuilding a few boats. Raised 7-8 children. Moved stayed involved in boat operations. Father grew up in Galveston- Houston area, served in WW2. After that he and his brother built a boat from a landing craft. Took the landing craft hull and built a tug boat out of it. Decks, and houses. additional engines etc. Used the extra engines to push barges with. 00:05:31 Built boats and operated boats. They operated barges for themselves. Self taught, entrepreneurial and had creative minds. Eventually went out of business and sold all the equipment and retired out of the business. 1946 through early 90s. By the time they had a a business in the 90s, there was a considerable amount of regulation in the industry than when they started. When they started it was all almost unregulated. Had 3-4 ocean tugs and ocean barges that transported mostly bulk liquids in US and foreign trade. Traveling all the way to South America, Africa, Europe. Did not ever build boats for others. 00:09:07 3-4 brothers or cousins that started Bludworth Shipyard on Brady's Island after the war and they built boats for others. Were in business during the same time period. All friendly competitors. Most of the ship yards are still friendly. 00:11:18 Dad and uncle worked for Bud Adams, Dow Chemical, Worked on small jobs every summer from 14 years of age. Then, boats were still running inland, from Sweeney, TX to Corpus CHristi. Would load barges with crude oil, discharge oil. Was assigned to do the same work everyone else was doing. No special treatment as the owners son. Worked from 14 up through high school, was out of business for 8 years and got back in the late 70s. 00:14:36 Went to Texas Tech, in Lubbock, TX. Degree in business and worked for Continental Airlines. Then went back to work for Dad and Uncle. Then had 30-40 people. Was in charge of running, crewing and maintaining and handling regulatory business on 3-4 ocean tug units. Did everything but deal directly with the customer.  00:16:45 Uncle got into financial trouble, had to declare bankruptcy, took the company down, was dismantled, went to work for another marine transportation company in the early 90s. Worked for Martin Gas Marine, Acquired offshore equipment. Always had side businesses. White working for Martin Gas, ex employees of father needed work .Put them to work doing misc repairs for companies including Martin Marine, Started Bludworth Marine while working for Martin Marines. Left after 2 years. Martin Marine owns boats and barges, Bludworth Marine repairs boats and barges. 00:20:31 Started the company with a few people doing odd jobs, Built the company from a half million to 5 million and then started over in Houston, running about a half million a year in sales. Work on inland tugs, offshore tugs and barges, ships, do a lot of work on pumping and machinery, rotating machinery, overhaul pumps, build connection systems, represent a Japanese company that builds articulated tug barge units. 00:23:11 Business is cyclical, transportation and repair side either very good or very bad. Not much in between. Have tied it to the auto and housing industry, Recent year US inventory has affected it. Housing and Auto drives Plastic and production, petroleum and chemicals, that moves marine equipment and repairs. Inland barges only trade in protected waters - rivers, bays, lakes etc. Small waves, not a lot of winds, they connect with wires and ropes. Offshore equipment is towed on a long wire. Wench on stern of the boat, long wire that stretched out to the barge and then pulled the barge from the stern of the boat. Connection system is mechanical, 00:25:35 In the 1970s, both Dad and uncle built a connection system that they patented, engineered, designed, built and sold. Then only other commercial system was the Arta couple system built in Japan. Only viable systems. Some other reconnection systems did quite well and command a large percent of the market now. 2000- another system developed by the Finnish - Scandinavian company that developed a system that has done well in the market. 4 major companies producing articulated tug barge system. 00:27:35 Physical layout and the equipment in each o the sites and the experience of people running the site really drives the customers. Variety of factors that produce the kind of work a location can do. All share insurance, admin, overhead, risks and employee base to keep all of them functioning as efficiently as possible. Allowed to compete in a way lot of other people don't. Still do a lot o topside on sight repair work. Send out mobile crews on a regular basis. Never dropped that niche.  00:29:27 Focal point in this business has been the degree of experience that is present in the org. (Talks about people who have worked with company for years). 00:32:43 No master shipbuilders. Marine engineers and naval architects. Taken the place of master builders. some have engineering training. Most employee are self taught. Most do not have college education. But very good at what they do. That is changing rapidly. Very few people stay in the business for long. Some people go to school and specialize in marine engineering or architecture that like ships at sea and vessels and take engineering knowledge and apply it. Don't have enough young people looking for them. Trying to train some young people. 00:35:11 Training programs. Locally, Galveston A&M, is a marine training college. A few colleges on the East Coast have provided most of the Marine professionals in the last 30 years. Most of the high school program shave been funded by people within the industry. Huge business base that revolves around the port and water transportation. Hidden industry because of all the regulations and security. LEarning the business has become that much more difficult. Learning about the industry and the opportunities now is more difficult. 00:37:00 TWIC card. Transportation worker Identification Card was a knee jerk reaction out of 9/11 to control security at airports that nobody used. Still need aport security card to take other people in. Additional cards that are necessary and need to be maintained. Some places need three cards to get in. Cab drivers, container operators, forklift operators, all need to get a TWIC. Everyone that wants to go to the POrt of Houston needs a card, but also needs to have a POrt of Houston card and a place specific card. 00:39:21 Wanted to fly jets, when eyes went bad, opted out of the air force. Ended up with a business degree. Helped dad and uncle with the job. THats how ended up at the Port. 00:40:29 Bought first used dry dock 5 years ago. Hurricane Ike put three waterfronts under water, destroyed equipment, no sales for three months. Started dry dock in 2009. Launched in 2010. two dry docks in Orange. Bigger boats means bigger jobs means more income in the same period of time. different pieces of equipment to handle different sizes of vessels. 00:42:40 Sites are spread out because it is hard to find real estate. Prices are very high. Business does not generate enough volume to competitively use that property. Deep water access  land is expensive because of access and prices are not feasible. Land in Channel view was relatively inexpensive until recently. Lot of waterfront area, all in old run down neighborhoods which meant reduced pricing, more practical. Problem with CHannelview is water is very shallow, Cant get a deep draft vessel. Limited to working with inland boats and barges. 00:45:10 Todd Galveston, closing down in the 80s. Marine repair work. Houston - public land in the Houston ship channel and there is private land. Port of Orange, very pro industry, brought lot of business to them. Had a lot of unused property and was able to fit the mold that they were looking for. Leased property from Port of Port Arthur. Lucrative and efficient jobs. 350ft vessel in Houston or Galveston will cost $3-5 per foot per day. 00:48:05 Go to Galveston, Houston, Port Arthur, Orange, and lease dock space, bring a ship in, do the job and put the rent in the job, customer willing to pay it. Thus competing with larger shipyards. Mobilize and demobilize. 00:50:55 In 2005, ship was offloading steel ingots. Ingots were 40 ft long, 8 in thick and 6ft wide. Chain broke and ingot fell, punched a hole through the cargo tank and was lodged like a knife blade. Got a call for some pumps. Took some pumps down there at 5pm. By midnight was able to come up with a repair scheme and got the job. 3-4 weeks repairing. 2009 - gone 3 months without work, Hurricane Ike had destroyed all facilities. In January was able to talk to some people on a container ship. Put some pricing together at Port Arthur. Ship came in a week later and three weeks later had completed the work. THis entailed moving entire workforce to Port Arthur, set up a catering service, work two shifts around the clock for 4 weeks. Million dollar job. Rented the port from the Port of Port Arthur, rented dock space, rented the Port owned crane for heavy container lids. Large onsite job. 00:54:52 Ike put Houston and the Golden Triangle under water. Very unusual to see such a large area under water. 3-4ft of water. Lost equipment, infrastructure, filled in some holes for dry docking, just started Orange facility. Took clean up crews a week to clear the debris. Hundreds of snakes. Had 150 employees. Kept most employees. Up until then had 5 yr. double digit growth. Had a nice cushion of cash. Then economic downturn, BP oil spill. Went from a 170 people to 40 people. Almost all hourly welders and fitters were gone. Kept the entire management and admin staff. Managed to ride it through till business started coming back. 00:59:00  Work with very low insurance. Did not apply for Hurricane insurance. Could have applied for BP money. Chose not to. "Basically against government handouts but will take it if they put it front of me." 01:03:23 Ocean transportation is one of more efficient ways to move large amounts of products. As long as economy is running, going to need it. Probably will be one of the last industries to shut down. In the Marine repair business, company is in the 25 percent percentile. There are some smaller businesses. Very low margin business. Unique aspect, there are multiple small locations. Most other yards don’t do it. Constantly looking for niches to get into. Entered the pump repair business 5 yrs ago, had a change to hire some people. Built a good business around that. Blasters and painters. Instead of adding locations, been adding specialties. Orange is the most versatile. Channelview is inland tugs and inland barges. Houston - pumps are headquartered in Houston. Do some fabrication work. Crane pedestal being built. 01:10:40 220 people in workforce. 30 admin support people. Offshore on boat, live on boat and pay per diem. Private launches to get people in and out to boats. Will get supplies and equipment also. Ship concierge. Folklore name. Derogatory term because very difficult the action. have not been very successful getting business through agents. 01:16:58 Agent relationship. Competitor used to work for cousins. Started a business, based on one company, knows one port engineer, every time a vessel comes to Houston, knows 3-4 people who go down to the vessel. Entire company of 4-5 people working for one customer, one port engineer. 01:20:00 Vessels come and go, trading patterns change. Have done a dozen jobs at one time and never worked for those people again. Most business is with repeat customers. Most of the growth is from getting additional repeat customers. Top customers - Martin Gas Marine, Crawley Maritime out of Seattle. Have not built any new boats, only barges. Have not built tugs. More difficult to do and get a profit out of. 01:24:35 Southwest Shipyard. Sanjay Rao part owner of Southwest Shipyard. Built three boats for Martin Marine. Story of Southwest Shipyard. Tough competitor. (Paused tape) 01:27:42 One of the most unusual things about the port industry is how small the world really is and how many people you can run into over and over again. (Pause tape at 01:33:36)  (Tape resumes) 01:33:36 Houston has a lot of good business. Daughter is in the police force in San Antonio and son is an FBI agent. But both have agreed to be a part of the Board. 01:39:00 Love the industry, fascinated while growing up. Had a great time hanging around the ship yard. Big boats, big toys. Fascinating business. People that do get in do not get out. (PAUSE TAPE) (RESUME TAPE) 01:40:12 Talking about the environment in the Houston ship channel, water quality and air quality. At 4-5, knew a person who used ot stay on his houseboat from time to time. He had a cat that fell overboard. Cat's skin burned off his body and had raw burn spots all over its body. Somewhere around 1950s. Ten years ago they had manatees swimming in the water. AN example of how much Houston ship channel has cleaned up in the last few years. Earlier could hardly breathe because of the sulphur fumes that used to waft from Brady's Island in the 60s. 01:44:00 Shanghai reds. Also Greek restaurant off Clinton Drive - Athens Bar and Grill. Greeks off the ships used to dance on the tables. Could get marinated octopus to eat. Hickory Stick Barbecue where people in the marine industry went for lunch everyday, Dinner Bell restaurant. Very small cafeterias. Right across the street from Dinner Bell was Chuck Wagon. Got torn down only three years ago. San Jacinto Inn. Monument Inn. On Telephone Road - place called Pressure Cooker because ladies would put the food in pressure cookers so they could hang out at the spot all day. 
PortHouston;Pilot James J Hensley;1948;xxxx;Pilot James J Hensley, 1948, xxxx  JJ HENSLEY Summary: Pilot James J Hensley discusses the highly controversial Texas Chicken maneuver, how pay for a pilot is calculated and the underlying tension between captains and pilots. Captain of Houston Pilots. Houston Pilot Association 01:01 Born in Galveston, TX. Raised and schooled in Galveston. UH and then into Navy in 1966 and stayed till 68. Went back to school. and then decided to become a musician. For 6 years, trumpet player. Late Men Plus 1 group’s name. Wanted more security and didn’t feel like music was a good career. Father was a seamen. Strong family background in sea, merchant marine. Joined navy reserve in high school. Started out as ordinary seamen. Got license in 1978. From deck officer to Houston pilot in 1991. been twenty years as a Houston pilot. Started as seamen in Merchant Marine. Able bodied seamen is a skilled deckhand whereas ordinary seamen is apprenticed one. Took exam and sailed as able bodied seamen for three years. Advance through the ranks by taking exams. 07:00 Merchant Marine academies are for 4 years. Go with no experience and graduate either as a engineer or a deck manager. Did on the job training instead. went to sea and got the accumulated time. Then to become officer, went to navigation school for 6 months. 85% of pilots come through academy. There are seminars given about the maritime industry in schools and high schools. Students have an idea about the industry. Pilots give lectures in several schools on career days. 11:00 Sponsor needed to get accepted as a pilot. Business at the port has really picked up over 20-25 years. Number of pilots required had to increase. Only had 2 year waiting period. Apprentice program then was for 2 years. Now because of increase of volume of work it has become 3years. Learnt procedures on how to run the channel. Basic program followed by all. after 6 months start handling ships on our own. Start with small ships 12,000 gross tonnes, 25 footage raft. After 2 months start increasing tonnage by 1000 tons a month and a foot or two feet a year. End of two year program started with 40 feet and 40,000 gross tonnes. Deepening and widening of channel about 7 years ago. Have to be voted into the association according to the performance during the 2-3 years of training.Have to buy into the assoc. Each pilot buys an equal share of ownership into the assoc. On the day he becomes a full pilot, he is an equal partner in the assoc. Then it was 54 full pilots and 8 deputies. now 87 full pilots. Number for life.  18:20 Have rotation list and defined by last job done. Take a ship out and bring one back on. Called a double. When double is completed, time is recorded and then placed at bottom of list. At the end of a double, you are guaranteed 16 hours off, rest period. Then eligible to be called. But not during the rest period. Two groups called Black Hats and White Hats. Group on and group off. Black Hats are more reserved and quiet. White Hats are more active, aggressive. Like doing things together, strong sense of camaraderie. Black hats like hanging out by themselves. Number can be called again within 28 hours. Handle 55-60 ships a day. Chemical tankers will carry large number of different products, chemicals are called parcels. Particular tanker might go to one dock to pick up one parcel. Ship goes from dock to dock and don’t leave the port. Pilots take ships from one dock to another. These are called shifters. Designate a pilot for a 12 hour span to handle as many ships as he an. if ships coincide time-wise then put another pilot. Maximum of 3 pilots on shift duty. Shift job are shorter and close to home the whole time. some pilots don’t care for shifts because of the constant back and forth. Takes 4-8 hours to bring a ship back to dock. Ship channel is 52 miles long. Time it takes to bring in a ship depends on how far it has to go and how fast the ship can go. If ship is loaded doesn’t travel too fast. 25:00 Pay. Formula for size of the ship, the tonnage and the draft (how much cargo it is carrying), how far up in the channel (there are zones). All that goes into the formula to decide pay. Charge fees according to tariffs allowances that the port allocates. After paying all equipment dues and placing money into the pension plan, the rest of the money is divided up between the pilots. On turn for two weeks and then off for 2 weeks. 30:00 Deal mostly with tugboats, ship captains, harbor tugs and push boats. The push boats push the barges up and down the channels. Line hammers who tie the ships up, they are a separate entity. Mooring masses are boatmen. Captain is responsible the entire time. Pilot comes onboard and is considered an advisor. stands by the captain to transport the ship form point a to point B. Pilot is given total access to the ship. Pilot runs the show from then on, but runs it under the responsibility of the Captain. Accidents. Don’t happen frequently. Minor incidents may happen about 7-8 times a year. Every incident goes under investigation to the pilot board. The board hears the counts from all aspects and reviews the situation, come out with ruling. Each incident goes on the pilot’s record, port and to the state record. If pilot is found to be incompetent, recommendations can be made.  There are high priority places where traffic is most intense. Most of them are in bends, because of the contours of the bottom of the channel. High volume areas, navigate with caution. 11-13 knots speed in the channel. That is 14-18 miles an hour. 40:00 Texas Chicken. Developed Back in the 40s one way traffic since channel was so narrow. Devised a system where vessels can meet by altering course to their starboard. Media named it Texas Chicken.Unusual maneuver. Done only in a few places in the world. Corpus Christi. Boarding a ship while underway. Ship always has action in its seaway. When a ship is still it is open to elements. Can control a ship while it is moving. Turn ship to certain course. Define, even and still motion. Go alongside, match speeds with the ship and then climb the Jacob’s ladder. A rigid ladder or the boat itself could be damaged. Hence a portable, flexible ladder is used. American Pilots Association has been initiating programs to make sure pilot ladders are up to the standard. Depth perception at night drops by 70%. 70% of transits are done during the night time. Radars are relied on heavily. Personal navigation units or data from each vessel. Signal gives size, movement, speed and position of the vessel in the channel. With AIS can get good clear picture of the channel and what is going on. Seldom use whistles but speak in terms of whistles. Since 9/11 every vessel is required to have AIS. It emits a signal that transmits all the info from that ship. Position, speeds of the vessel. For Coast guards - type of cargo that is on the ship. MMSI number is an identification number. With that number can get the name, owner, charterer of ship. 53:00 Sometimes can get a captain who doesn’t understand piloting. Constantly questions, or goes over the pilot’s boundaries. Have to inject authority and be firm and be persuasive. Pilot’s responsibility is first to the state of Texas and to the port. Have to do right by state and port. Use diplomacy. and get point across. Learn to work within the boundaries of the bridge team. Some look at pilots as a necessary evil. Yet others think the world of pilots. Professional attitude takes precedence over everything else. 59:00 Called a Deputy while training. Had an incident early on right after training. Sometimes while trying to drop anchor, it just doesn’t drop. What helps then is training at ship handling schools. Learnt why a ship does what it does helped avoid certain things. There are times when a ship loses power, When it moves through the water, it will steer, Ship steers because water runs  by the rudder. If there is no flow by the rudder, the ship has no control. Always moving since it is afloat. When no control, must drop anchor, as it holds the position. Never know when ship might lose an engine, before anything happens must drop anchor and make sure control is lost. Signal for dropping anchor? Normally blow a danger signal, notifies everyone that ship is not under command that it has lost power. Radio commands on VHF. No time to do anything visually unless ship is anchored. Mate will put up the black bulbs. if ship loses power, info through VHF. do everything to notify all about the problem. 01:05:50 Tools. Personal laptop. program for ship channel. Journal with information on vessel. Flashlight. 3 African-American pilots now. 3 women pilots. Wasn’t a problem being African- American at all. Never had a problem with ship masters. Personally have talked to few ladies when they first came in. Gave them the lowdown. Some ship captains don’t want to work with particular pilots. Captains are told to drop anchor and wait for 4 hours while another pilot comes. 01:12 See more of a demand on the expertise of the pilot. With drug testing and no tolerance there are a better brand of applicants. No need to weed out. More intellect. Communication. cooperation and understanding of certain demands of the channel have all increased. Ships are larger. docks are more crowded. Demand on pilots training are constantly being challenged. Went to sea at 27. Continuously moved up. been pilot for 20 years. Rumors about ship channel. Texas Chicken - wait till last minute to alter course. Myth about pilots being prima donna. A bit aggressive.   
PortHouston;Patrick Seeba;xxxx;2012;Patrick Seeba, xxxx, 2012,   AFC 2012/006: 00332 Patrick Seeba interview conducted by Anthony G. Potoczniak 2012-07-19 [0:00] Introducing Patrick Seeba (PS), Project Manager at the Greater Houston Port Bureau (GHPB). [0:29] Patrick Seeba was born in Houston, where he graduated high school and later attended University of Houston. PS has several degrees from UH: political science and supply chain logics. [1:12] Shares impression about the Port of Houston (POH) growing up  PS’s father runs a warehouse off one of the docks near the 610 POH Bridge  PS remembers hearing a lot about the POH: the city is here because of the port  recalls how security and access to the ship channel were less strict growing up. [3:36] Discusses the various levels of security at the POH -- Focus [at the POH has been] given to security and access control for cargo and for people  the effects of these changes on organizations like the Houston Seafarers Center  which assists visiting sailor with different services, has been dramatic  sailors from other countries are now confined to their ships  as a result The Seafarers [Center] is now doing outreach [7:43] PS explains the increased focus for securing transportation after 9/11  discusses the unintended consequences of new regulations, especially the increased interest in the POHs activities and economic impact by congressional representatives  [12:49] PS provides background how he became interested in the POH, and how he joined the GHPB. PS attended the university on a Marine Corp scholarship  moved to Germany for several months after graduation and discovered the thing that always interested me is the chess match of moving containers...what if I have a container in a dock in a warehouse in the middle of China, how do I get it to a Walmart shelf in Peoria? [15:45] After a brief trip to Germany, PS applied to a program in supply chain logistics, which was taught by representatives from the POH  describes how this experience made him realize the importance of the GHPB and how it needed to focus on its core services: understanding regulations, tracking ships, and how cargo was being moved  describes humorous story of how he got the job at the GHPB working for Capt. Bill Diehl in 2009. PS describes how the mission of the GHPB was being redeveloped to stress information brokering for its members. [21:55] PS explains how the monthly bulletins became an important outreach tool for its members and creating a better product, [so] we can touch more people, and how the bulletin become a tool for the GHPB and its members to expand and improve the way we do business every day. 1  AFC 2012/006: 00332 [25:00] Comparison of the function of the Port of Houston Authority, which works with government agencies, and the GHPB, which serves as a trade association for the private terminals, Houston Pilots, and other stakeholders. [29:27] PS details some of the on-going work at the POH from dredging to administering the harbor maintenance tax. An example of this work is described in a luncheon with Lt. Gov David Dewhurst about what the state office can do to help the port. [34:01] PS outlines the core mission of the Port Bureau, our specialty is working with the Regulators, and his role in an aging industry: I provide information. [37:10] PS describes the work of the Marine Exchange at Morgans point, which tracked ships entering the POH  run mostly by retired individuals  provides a detailed account of how 24 types of companies are involved to get cargo from the ship into the stores/warehouses  lists the processes and types of people involved  the challenges of making these entities work together: sometimes it means competing interests  with a business goal in mind: terminals want to always be full. [42:54] PS describes the uniqueness of Houston port culture: we have a competitively cooperative culture that astounds people! By underscoring how the GHPB can help competitors collectively: what do we do to make this problem for the region go away? Or, how do you make them agree without lawyers? PS describes a common practice at the GHPB of convening the players and stakeholders to help recognize the present problems experienced by all industries. [46:15] Shares a story of how the GHPB was able to get consensus with the industry’s adoption of the Automatic Identification System (AIS), which is now required by all ships to improve the tracking of their movement in the channel. It was for the GHPB a proof of concept of how it can help the industry collectively. [49:00] PS provides another example with HarborLights, a harbor management system, which is another information product of the GHPB. [54:50] PS describes the challenge of other American ports of adopting the HarborLights system for their ports. The opposition is what I’ve got works for me: why would I do it differently... [57:30] PS shares about the GHPB partnership with the broader community: Living in the community, you get very good results, because you can harness the power of everybody. [01:00:00] PS describes how ports have to remain competitive to continue retain clients, and to attract future customers. 2  AFC 2012/006: 00332 [01:05:00] PS states that the POH has the advantage that all its customers share 52 mile channel: if a problem that affects one, it can affect all. Shares the example of the barge hitting the power transmission line, which closed the entire POH for several days. [01:09:30] The GHPB is involved in many issues of the port as librarians of the port. PS explains how the GHPB stays involved -- the logistics of knowing how to get sweat equity out of the channel, so we can inform others on the channel is its primary objective. [01:11:21] PS states how the ability to use this information to help others is an important function of the GHPB (01:13:45)  if I can do something for one customer, it is rare that I can’t use this information to help someone else. [01:14:30] PS describes a recent achievement at the GHPB, when it hosted a congressional delegation about security at the port. The 3 - 4 hour discussion highlighted how the POH impacts employment in the Houston. These types of event have emphasized the POH as one of the crown jewels of the city. [01:20:19] PS states there are a lot of opportunities at the POH, but the number of young prospective employees coming into the industry remains too small. The Port Authority is pushing for the maritime industries to help underserved populations and expand outreach to these communities with the purpose of attracting younger people into the industry. [01:23:12] Conclusion of the interview. 3 
PortHouston;Niels Aalund;1955;2012;Niels Aalund, 1955, 2012  NIELS AALUND SUMMARY: Niels Aalund talks to Pat Jasper about the changes he has seen during his career at the waterfront. He describes how challenging it is to find well trained personnel and the efforts the West Gulf Maritime Assoc. is taking to create awareness about the port and start education programs in local schools and colleges. He also talks about setting up a newsletter which not only informs but brings people together on the same page. March 19 2012 West Gulf Maritime Assoc. 00:00:30 Native Houstonian, March 25th 1955. Moved to Ireland, at age 6. Father ran american factory there. Lived near Belfast and would go to docks to look at ships. Wanted to do something in the international field. Came back to Houston at 13. Had an opportunity to work or finish education and then work. Chose to work on international shipping. Got a job and finished school at night. Worked in Houston, DC> Baltimore, philadelphia. Love this industry and proud of the city the port has been names the most ethnically diverse city in the US. Port is a great melting pot. Think and feel to be successful don't have to be born in the US. Need the right work ethic and right attitude. Challenge to keep up a good workforce. COmmunity colleges and TExas Southern Univ. good maritime programs. Programs are coming up in a lot of educational institutions. Port is a sleeping giant, employ more people than the medical industry or NASA. 00:05:04 First job was at the West gulf Maritime Agency in the ordering office. Set up to dispatch labor at the port of Houston. Back then had segregated unions. It was a black union, caucasian and latino union. Would keep track of how many man hours were worked by each union. Containerization was starting, had ships that had hatches and would divide them up. A federal judge came in and said no matter what, need to integrate the unions. Thought it was a good milestone in career. Was involved in work seven days a week. Orders would be placed a day ahead. 00:07:26 Had very positive labor relations. Labor and management worked well together. Lot more break bulk and loose pieces. More handling. ships were at the dock longer. Less security. Could go on a ship with permission. COuld meet the crew and hang out with them. 00:08:59  THere was resistance to integrate because of tradition and maybe also because there was a fear of one group having more power than the other. THere was the issue of seniority, there was anxiety of how it was going to work. 00:10:09 WGMA opened door of opportunities. Got a lot of good contact. They lined up interviews for him. Fastest way to learn the business was to go into sales so started working for a steam ship agent. Worked in Houston during that time. Represented shipping lines and would go to potential shippers and try to get them to use services. 00:12:14 A daily industry update report. Was hired asa consultant at WGMA before joining on full time. First job was to develop info about what members wanted from trade assoc. Needed to gather info of value and be able to bring it to members. So came up with newsletter that summarize events. Had three main areas regional, national and international briefs on pieces that would impact the industry. Done monday-friday every day. Keeps him on top of issues, keeps him informed, sense of pride on it. Title of senior VP but still don't shy away from the newsletter. 00:14:50 Have worked for ship agents,vessel operators, lobbyist in DC for trade assoc., freight forwarding company, and then came back to trade assoc. business. Have learnt a lot from working in different areas. Been abel to understand how different pieces of the puzzle fit together. Beauty is able to maintain relations in all the areas. 00:16:21 WGMA - having been an agent and having worked at the stevedoring agency, had an idea of what was needed, There was a desire from the government agency to have a conduit to pass info to the right people, keep contact updated. 00:17:55 WGMA was formed in the 60s. Prior to that each port had its own assoc. or group. Each individual port group would work with pilots, labor, to work with fee increases and so forth. There was a domino effect. One group would raise its price and it would travel up and down the coast. Group of companies got together and created the WGMA. They agreed to merge and come together and work on a regional basis on issues. It would also have a centralized payroll system. With a central Payroll and a central dispatching office, it cleaned things up and made it more efficient. In those early days role of agents was different. Very few ship owners had offices, so they appointed agents. iN the liner trade, companies have agents but do the commercial aspects themselves whereas earlier it was done by agents. 00:21:30  Three membership categories. Stevedores and terminal operators, Ship owners and ship agents. Maritime stakeholders - associate members involved in maritime commerce. WGMA is different because do the labor for the stevedores and terminal operators and also represent ship owners and agents. Very stringent on who is allowed in as a stakeholder. Companies willing to join have to write a letter of application which states that how they are involved in day to day Maritime commerce. It is then presented to the board with a recommendation. 00:24:50 Only represent management and union labor. In texas there are ILA employers and non ILA employers. Have collective bargaining and need people that are impacted by those decisions. 00:26:51 There is a fee assess per man hour for stevedores and terminal operator member companies. For the ship owners and agents, solicit a lump sum fee for every ship that comes in. Third category will pay a lump sum amount. Can come for meeting but cannot be on board, Can be on committee and can't vote. Important to separate status. 00:29:10 Enjoy public speaking. Daily newsletter goes out to 4000 email addresses. Have very key people who get the newsletter daily. Houston port does not have the problem of families and cliques that run certain parts of the industry. Here, the labor works with the management. 85% of the cargo goes to non port authority terminals. Just like the city, the cargo is diverse. "This is the big leagues". Lots of companies relocating to Houston. 00:32:06 The ability to move products gives Houston a definite advantage. Gateway to Central America and texas is the second most populous state. Impressed by how quickly we can start back up after a storm. Advocate speaks for someone else and has their best interest. If there is a consensus in the board, will use that to the best possible ability and advocate for members. Other trade assoc. might be a meet and greet, info exchange but don't take a position on things. That s what sets WGMA apart. Pilot rate hearings- most of the time sit down with pilot groups. Come to a consensus after a meeting of the minds. Couple of time s when request was so high, so out of line ,went to public hearing and asked why they shouldn't get that kind of increase. Members really appreciate that. Pilots are not part of membership but have very good relations with them. 00:36:38 Will go to Washington to get additional finds for dredging. WGMA has been involved in the dredging advocacy. Sister groups that are part of National Assoc. of Maritime Organizations and other trade assoc. are all trying to get more dredging finds. some are  more in dire need of others. Gulf of Mexico fills in real quickly and need constant maintenance efforts. 00:38:05 Not interested in only Houston but also Galveston, POrt Arthur, Beaumont, Bay-port etc. Very proud of policies, facilities. Good meeting rooms, don't charge for it. Lot of people come and go out of these meeting rooms, helps the industry in a way, Very open minded. Do what is best for the members but at the same time do not hinder progress. There need to be a good working relationship with a good level of compromise. Have been helpful with the education programs in the area, with a program in the local community college. Also proud of what the staff does outside of the office in terms of creating awareness. 00:40:34 Automation and technology have played a bog role. American merchant marine has dwindled. In a right to work state have a great relationship with the ILA. But still a lot of non union competition has come in. See a need for education and finding qualified personnel for the job. That is a real challenge. Very fortunate to be close to a balanced trade. Insulated from world economies and less impacted than other ports have been. POtential trade with Cuba will be very helpful for this port. 00:42:39 9/11 has impacted access to the port but it has not stopped access from the port. Those that need to do business at the port can do it. More scrutiny and it is justified. There has not been a big problem. Used to be literally able to park next to a ship, but not anymore now. Have never been to sea but worked at shoreside jobs. Have had the opportunity to travel overseas and learn about other ports. Learn about door to door shipping. Cant be all things to everyone. Shoreside operations - have to do it in a safe manner, so that product does not get damaged, is environmentally safe, gets delivered on time and will never lose sight of the human factor. 00:45:44 THe outlook for the ports of Texas is very positive. Anyone looking for a career at the port is lucky. Lot of opportunity, lot of good things coming this way. Very optimistic of the future. No family in the Maritime industry. Three daughters. 
PortHouston;Michael Gene Usher;1956;2012;MICHAEL GENE USHER, 1956, 2012,   MICHAEL GENE USHER SUMMARY: Michael Gene Usher talks to Pat Jasper about his career on the waterfront. His unfulfilled dream of becoming a Houston pilot and his tireless effort at carving a place for himself in many different areas of the maritime industry. July 16, 2012 00:01:07 Born in Feb 29, 1956 in Houston. Lived there till 2 years of age. Moved to East Houston area. to a suburb called El Dorado. Then 17 years later, went to the navy. Have family members that worked on the ship channel. Grew up associated with the POrt of Houston. Career started in 1972 at 16 years of age. OBservation tower. First job was for Kansas packing - food purveyor for ships calling on Houston port. Worked in warehouse and filled orders for dried goods etc. Sometimes used to drive the vehicles. Then would drive a bobtail truck. Was a really rewarding experience when got to travel to Beaumont etc. Got a lot of pleasure out of doing the work. THen after 18 was eligible to work as longshoreman. Had to work off social security card. Felt like was in a cattle drive or auction. The gang foreman would come and purvey the casualty workers and pick the workers to work for them. Had family that was established as longshoremen then. Was hired on individual virtue. Worked on social security till received a work number. Did a lot of "sacks back then." Sacks of corn or rice, 105 lb bags. Did get coffee in burlap bags. Had to find ship details and gang details on a huge blackboard. Had to report to work at 7 am. Had a one hour lunch break and back to work. As a casualty worker, get some of the harder labor work - sack, pipe and steel. Had a lot of drums and cowhide. Tried to avoid cowhide jobs, but it pays 75 cents more per hour for cowhide jobs. It was real messy but was worth it. had to endure cowhide fluids all over the body and maggots etc. They were 10-15 lbs bundles. Work as a longshoreman is hard, dangerous, laborious. Back in 1979, pay was $17 an hour. If ship was on a tight schedule gang would be called back to work at night and that was a pay and a half. 00:14:35 Lot of interesting men and places. Light ship , clipper class type. On it there were baby elephant and tortoise on board. They had to be taken off board. Lowered the ship and built a ramp to escort the elephants off board. Tortoise were caged and for their safe transport, 4 ft diameter across their back. Put them in cargo nets two at a time. 40-43 south side docks are referred to as the cowhide docks. Had some good football games. Lot of camaraderie in the hold of the ship. Did a lot of family things t off time. Continued in the same career. Had brothers in the same field. Brother in law worked up the ranks to become an ILA president. After a few years wanted some adventure. Decided to volunteer for the Navy. Went to boot camp in Florida and then Virginia for four years.  Worked on Admiral's barge. Played on the football team. Volunteered to re enlist because wanted to see the west coast. Spent two years on USS Roarke. After 7 years stepped away from the Navy. 00:24:44 Came back to Longshoreman in 1983. Post Oil embargo in the country. Economy was falling apart. ILA merged. ILA had two separate unions. Whites and HIspanics operated one union and blacks operated another one. Hiring hall was the same for everyone. With unions merging and the failed economy, anyone with low seniority starved. Shipping had slowed down tremendously. Containerization had come in big. Many people quit. Started out at the hiring hall in the morning, waited to see if anyone would quit the job etc. Then waited tables at night at a local steakhouse. Did that for several months. Decided to work at a lumberyard close to home. Pregnant wife, needed money. An old friend came along to the lumberyard. Charlie had gone to the coastguards. Fireboats on the ship channel. Charlie was working on a fireboat. Left immediately to the Manchester fire station. Applied for the opening position. Was referred to the marine department manager. Went to the Greensboro fire station for interview. Monday morning was given the job. Started out the following week. Began career on the fireboat. 00:38:38 Passed the physical standards. Did not know anything about firefighting. Had security working for a big company. First promotion from hose man to engineer. Studied and became aware of diesel mechanics operations. Qualified for first captains license. Received certificate of completion. Also coastguard federal license for inland operators. Was promoted to engineer soon. Became interested in handling ships etc. Worked on increasing licenses or tonnage. After fourth year being on the fireboats, saw a path to become a Houston pilot. Was recommended to join the propeller club meetings. Did everything to become a Houston pilot. Even became a mason. 00:50:01 Spent all the off time up and down the ship channel to catch the fleeting service. Could ride the outbound but couldn’t stop to get off. So decided to get a john boat. Had to depend on Dad to bring the boat so could ride it home. Had to keep up work schedule. Got to know some captains on the first name business. Were very supportive of intentions. Father used to pick him up whenever needed. Was able to start riding ships from a captain who owned clipper type ships. Made a lot of one way trips to Lake Charles, Brownsville, Corpus Christie. Did not go further away than the Gulf Coast. Did the shorter trips in the immediate gulf coast area. Felt like an Amway salesman. As a result of all this, got enough round trips to qualify for pilots license. In 1989, received pilots license with unlimited tonnage. Approached Houston pilots for an application to become deputy pilot. 01:02:50  Goal was to show experience on Houston ship channel. Faired well and got their attention. After 3 months was called for an interview. Unfortunately was not to happen. 5 years ago, parents had divorced, and mother remarried a man who had a son who worked for harbor tugs for G&H. Both competed to become Houston pilots. He had more influence and support. Try to get a good mixture of both blue and brown water people. Interviewed both stepbrother and him. Houston ship pilots have a nepotism clause in their bylaws and as a result will not employ relatives. In 1990 Eric (stepbrother) was accepted to the position of Deputy pilot. Received promotions in fire boats. Was promoted as captain in 1994. With 24 hr on and 48 hr off schedule, most fireman take on second jobs to support family. For a 13 yr period was a charter boat captain. on time off drove charter boats on the texas gulf coast. Had a lot of corporate and private parties on the Brady Island, Turning Basin. Then tried fishing boats out off Kemah. Drove the Judy Beth Fishing boat for 80 passengers. Wanted to pilot yachts. Harbor master called from watergate yacht club from Clearlake. Needed a boat in Galveston to pick up cadets from Texas A and M for a dinner cruise. 80 ft wooden hull, 1929 yacht. Made it to Galveston, and completed the job. Operated that boat a few times. Helped as a distraction from the pilots. Operated five different yachts out of Clearlake. 01:22:03 Captained a yacht for the man who invented crazy straws. Fall of 1983 G Ray wanted to go to Fort Lauderdale. But couldn’t go because of fire boat schedule. Interviewed for Star Fleet Marine as vessel manager. After Labor Day in 1993, Star Gazer was launched. Took a break during divorce in the second year as vessel manager. Took a break for three years. Left job except for fire boat job. 01:28:01 Drove limos for five months. Then went back to the water. Started a boat rental company up in Lake Conroe for 7 years. Devoted all attention to fire boat business. PBRC. investigation of any marine casualties on the Houston ship channel involving any Houston pilots. 01:38:55 Five years ago, while still serving as senior captain on fireboats, was approached by Reuben who arranged a meeting between general council and him. Reuben wanted to get legal representation of Houston port up to speed on Marine life. Wanted to put together a class for legal. Class was called navigation course. Met with legal for six weeks and gave a weekly crash course on the maritime industry. Would work in the office on off duty days. Was wearing two hats, Did committee work and served as senior captain on fire boats. Chairman authorized a full time position to pilot board compliance manager. 
PortHouston;Michael Dickens;1955;xxxx;Michael Dickens, 1955, xxxx  MIKE DICKENS Summary: Michael Dickens, longshoreman tells Betsy Peterson about the camaraderie between workers on the waterfront. He talks about the gang system adopted during hiring, how he started off doing very labor intensive work and the reshuffle of seniors during the merging of the labor unions. 01:00 Michael Dickens. Born in 1955, Oct 20. Grew up in Pasadena. Lived there till mid 30s. Then moved to Deer Park. Family of 5 children. Dad worked on the waterfront. Worked from 1959-1989. Did everything. Began as a longshoreman,winch-man, crane operator. Did not think would end up in the waterfront. Wanted to go away to college. Began career as a longshoreman. In 73-74 starting wage was $5.65. So thought money was good and since brothers and father worked there, stayed on the waterfront. Did the same things as father did. Work was fairly hard as a new person. 7:00 Lot of uncertainty in the first few days of the job. Qualified for seniority that is 1200 hours during the first year on the waterfront. That is the threshold to make seniority. Had to pay a fee of $125 to join the union. Qualify for seniority means you get benefits like healthcare, dental care. First ever job was working the drums which are barrels with oil or chemicals. Bagged goods, 110 pound sacks. Very labor intensive and hard work for the first few years. Shipping containers started in the port of Houston sometime around 57-59. Cut back on man hours because of automation. If work was too slow would do just about anything including cutting trees down for people, odd jobs. Whatever it took to get by. Would check in at the union hall a lot to try and get work. There were week when there was a lot of hours and there were weeks when there was just 4 hours. 12:00 Standard hiring hours at the union hall. 7, 8am. Have added 10am, 1pm, 3pm and 7 pm and 10pm and a midnight one in the last 15-20 years. A business agent in the union hall would take orders. Two hours before the start time they have to place orders. It would posted on the recorder. It was also written down on the board. The business agent would place orders. The foreman would know how many people needed to be hired. The gang are 35% less than what they used to be. Automation has changed a lot of things. Manning has reduced over the years.  More non union labor now then ever before. 8-10 different unions that are non ILA. Break bulkers have not had any wage increase in the last 25 years due to competing. they make 25-30% less with no benefits. 18:00 fir the first 6-7 years worked labor intensive cargo. 15 hours a day and worked on a lot of ships. made most money working the bags. Steel jobs. Ship load of pipes, high beams, rope coils. Majority was pipes. Was dangerous working with steel all day. Though bags were harder it was safer. Not too many good choices till 7-8 years. 70% of job was labor intensive. Learnt on the job, was taught by others. Rolling drums. how to roll drums without hurting your back. Lot of training was for labor intensive jobs that are not there today. Due to containerization and automation. Job Training for truck driving and crane operating. Training facilities are organized through the West Gulf Maritime Association. truck driving area where yard will be set up where people can practice, fork lifts, lashing. For hands on training. Gives fundamentals. 23:00 Would get other jobs to supplement income when times were tough. Most of these jobs did not pay any better. Made additional money only as a foreman. Would pay a dollar more an hour. Automated cargo would pay better, get a break in between. Loads containers onto ships. Paceco or yard crane. Can do in 8 hours what used to take 3 weeks. Got involved in the union after friend suggested running for office for the post of recording secretary/fill in business agent. Ran for office and got it. 27:00 Would shake hand and thank for support. How you treat people and how you do your do lets people know whether to keep you in office or now. Union elections are done every 2 years. 2-3 people would run for office. Must know or feel that it is what you want to do. Have to serve for a few months just to see what it is all about. As a recording secretary/business agent, would take minutes and then fill in for the other two business agents on the weekend. On weekends it was a 14 hour day, though would only get paid for 8 hours. Privilege of being an officer at that time. Paid better. Had good business relations with all the people. Would take all the work orders. was part of the hiring and handled everything to do with the union outside of being the leader of the union. Always had a business agent in close contact with all the members. 31:00  Had longshoreman skills and people skills . Was very antiquated. More about organizational skills than technological ones. Business agents were not needed to be computer literate. Became secretary in 1984. Was a lot of anxiety when the locals merged. It took the merger and took awhile before everyone got comfortable with each other. Lot of anxious moments for the first 6 months to a year. Thought they would be major issues. Over time it seemed to settle down. But after 28-30 years it still hasn’t settled down completely. Some tension but no fights. Lot of people left the waterfront. 35:15 There were different rules within the locals. When there came time to merge it caused more confusion. Seniority system. Sections were all for five years. Made a good competitive workforce. When it changed, lost a lot of credibility and it has almost become all about hiring a number. 40:40 3-5 foreman worked for all the time. Gave a sense of stability. Committed to a few gang foreman. Same group of people worked together most of the time. Started this system in the 80’s and has made the workforce more proficient. 44:20 Would have been a gold star 7 years ago. Now in section 37 out of 50 sections. Younger people feel like they can’t move up fast enough. Unique place to work. 46:45 There has always been nepotism on the waterfront. Harder for new people to come in. Not quite as enticing. Have to work every chance they could to try and get into a core group. 80% is core group oriented. Different scenario. Hard to get started. 49:10 Elections. was in Local 24 for 29 years. Have conventions. 53:00 Relationship of district to locals. Mostly pretty good. Locals have better respect to the district officers. Sometimes is difficult to relate to younger people. Minor strike in the 80s and before that in the 70s. Only been part of one strike in 37 years. 55:25 Have two sons, both been trying to work on the waterfront. Work is different but clerks and checkers. Always said clerks and checkers did not work as hard as longshoreman did. they use a lot more computers. 58:30  Technology going to affect us all. Will be seeing more automated facilities. Automation and containerizations essence. Already experience computers taking over jobs from people. Becomes more expensive, lot of cost to update and keep up with technology. Never going to stop technology, but can prolong it from happening. be the very best at what you do and be cognizant of it. Automated terminal - Norfolk, Virginia. 1:04:00 Working on the waterfront has been everything. Would work hard in the day. Always left with a sense of pride after the day’s work. Been blessed. Served as officer for 18-19 years at local 24. Then got appointed as representative for this District Office.   
PortHouston;M. Glass;1981;2012;M. Glass, 1981, 2012,   Log – M. Glass 09-12-2012 [00:03] Born Galveston, TX., 04/01/1981. Family moved to Seabrook, TX. while an infant. House was on the bay. A maritime family  father drove tugboats then became Houston Pilot. [01:47] Age 12 started riding ships w/father. Continued thru high school. Finished high school at Clear Lake age 18. [03:26] Went to Texas A & M Galveston, Maritime School for BS degree and Coast Guard 3rd Mates License, an officer’s classification. Program included summer cruises on the Texas Clipper with classes, standing watch and maintenance. [08:12] First job after college was on a Lightering Support Vessel, transferring oil from super tankers in the Gulf of Mexico to conventional tankers that fit into the Houston Ship Channel. [11:59] First blue water job was on the Richard G.Mattheson out of Rosie Roads in Puerto Rico through the Panama Canal to San Diego. Seasick for a year on the West Coast. At 12 months as a 3rd Mate upgraded license to 2nd Mate, after moving to the Gulf Coast. Worked on Cat Tugs for Leon Hess out of St. Croix refinery. These tugboat/barge units were the size of a ship. [18:15] After 2 years upgraded to Chief Mates License at age 26. Classified as a Senior Officer. Worked first on a chemical tanker, the Sea Venture, “the ugliest ship ” then got his ideal job on the Chemical Pioneer. Union Carbide used the ship to take chemicals from Texas to New York. [21:58] Spent 3 years as a Chief Mate and was able to get his Pilot’s License for the Port of Houston while the Chemical Pioneer was in Houston at 3 week stretches. Applied to the Houston Pilots Assoc. and was voted in Sept. 28, 2010, at age 29. Has finished 2 years of a 3 year apprenticeship to become a full Pilot. Deputy Pilots are assigned to a Master Pilot who overseas their training. After 6 months of riding, they go out on their own on limited tonnage vessels Then after 2 years they are on watch piloting bigger ships until they become full Pilots. [29:58] Growing up seeing his dad’s love of being a Pilot, riding on the ships, hearing the sea stories, has made him feel the same love for the job. [35:56] Today his closest friends are men he knew at the Maritime Academy and those he met at sea. As a Pilot he sees different cultures, tastes foreign cuisine and doesn’t have to leave town. [00:17 track 2] Growing up two Houston Pilots were an inspiration and were often at his house, ‘Uncle Tom’ and ‘Uncle Lou.’ His 1st trip as an apprentice was with  Uncle Tom. He and his father remain friends with Captain Dave from the Chemical Pioneer who now lives in New Hampshire. [05 08] His 3rd mate from the Chemical Pioneer lives here and they often get together. Characters with spaces: 2,640. 
PortHouston;Lou Vest;xxxx;xxxx;Lou Vest, xxxx, xxxx,   Lou Vest Clip 1 / recording part 1 [4:30] So I put in an application and, and as I got to know some of the pilots, I got some support. I got voted in in 1986. They asked me to join the Pilots Association. And I was a very happy camper. I guess I can put it on here. In the maritime industry, being a pilot is like, like being invited to be in the major leagues. If you’re a minor league player and you get to be a pilot, that’s the big leagues, and it’s like being invited to play for the – you know, for the St. Louis Cardinals, or something like that. And I was very pleased. For several reasons. Houston is a very good pilot association. And I was always impressed by the professionalism of the, of the pilots there. And it’s a very busy port, and I frankly liked the pilots I knew from, from Houston. [5:24] So I was very pleased. I found out that I’d gotten in. I’d taken a barge down to Entafagasta, Chile. A big barge of grain. We’d traveled all the way down, down to Chile, and we offloaded the grain, and I was about ready to leave, and I called my wife from, from – they had a big telephone exchange downtown. You had to walk downtown. And so I called my wife, and she said, “Well, are you sitting down?” And I said, “Well, yeah, I am.” She said, “Well, I found out yesterday, you got in the Pilots Association.” And I was so happy. I thought, you know, I’d just won the lottery. And all the way home, all the way back to the boat – I had to walk, you know, a couple miles back to the boat, and I thought, “My God. I’m going to get run over by a dump truck or something. [laughing] I’ve used up all the luck I’ve had in the world. And one of these damn dump trucks is going to run me over here.” I was really careful walking back to the, back to the boat. And it really has been – it’s been a good career. I’ve enjoyed it. I’ve been here since ’86. It’s 2011 now, and I’ve never regretted it. It’s, it’s been a good association. And I like the Pilots Association very much. Lou Vest / Clip 2 / recording Part II [40:36] Oh. It was my early days when I was a pilot. You were asking about going to sea earlier, and the romance of going to sea versus the romance of being in a port. Did I miss that, or – I think you can substitute. It’s a different sort of thing altogether. And I had a job where I finished up about three in the morning, and I had to walk about a mile to get to my car, down in the docks. And it was, like I said, three in the morning. It was absolutely calm. There was a light rain falling. And the reflections of light in the water, the raindrops hitting the water, with the concentric splashes, and I’m walking down there, and there’s all these ships, just ship after ship, and they’re registered in Bombay and Bahamas and Cypress and Vanuatu and they all have exotic names of one kind or another, and I thought, “Wow, you know, I could write a poem about this. I could use the names of these – exotic names of the ships. I even thought about writing down the names of the ships that day, but then I thought, “Ah, you could pick any day, you know, and it was really, it was really kind of a moving experience. There I am with the romance of going to sea and the romance – it was  like Conrad, Kipling, you know, and I really enjoyed the moment. And that was before I started taking photos, but I – I had been a photographer before. Amateur. You know, when I was real young, and I started thinking then about starting to carry a camera with me again. And ... to capture that moment. It was really a – [42:17] Lou Vest Clip 3a / Recording Part III [Fantastic] [18:37] So I usually start off with this photo, and it’s a photo of the America flag in sort of an arch over a container ship in the background. And I took it when I was getting off a ship one night. I saw that and I said, “Yeah, that might be a nice photo,” and I didn’t really plan on it. I took about ten photos but this particular one with the arch over the top. And then a couple weeks later they had some show on television called “America’s Port,” and it was all about Los Angeles. And I thought, what a bunch of bullshit. They don’t do even a third as many ships as Houston does, you know. And Los Angeles is a Hollywood city. I mean here is a nice working class city, the Port is central to our economy. Houston’s America’s port. So that’s what I start my thing with, with the American flag and the ship and the container docks. Houston’s America’s port. And I introduce people to the idea that Houston is the biggest port in the country. You know, I was talking to a captain of the port at a function for the Maritime Museum. We, we got to talking about this, about Houston, how much traffic they do, and he said, “Well, I was at a meeting last month, and we had a consultant come in to talk to us about different ports and how we manage traffic and some of the problems we’re having, and they – and the consultant had this big dry erase board, and he starts writing up there, puts a big circle, and he says, “Okay, this is Houston, we’re going to put this off here by itself for a while, and then we’re going to talk about all these other ports.” And he writes down New York, New Orleans, Los Angeles. And the guy from Los Angeles, he goes, “Well, how come Houston’s separate?” And he said, “Well, it’s just a different case altogether.” And he starts to – “No, really. What’s so special about Houston?” And e said, “Well, how many ships do you do a day over there in Los Angeles?” He said, “Well, fifteen, twenty.” He said, “They’re doing seventy ships a day over here.” And he goes, “Really?” “Yeah.” He says, “A different case, altogether.” [20:39] [21:10] The other question I get is, “How do you all get on and off them ships?” so this picture is how we get on and off the ships, with the ladder dangling down there. This big old hull, and then they got the gangway, so the next few pictures are about getting on and off ships. People are always curious about that for some reason.  There’s a guy jumping off on to the pilot boat off the gangway. I have to say, and I want to say this for public record, pilot boat drivers are some of the best boat drivers in the world. You won’t find better ship handlers, better boat handlers anywhere. I’m talking about tugboat guys, I’m talking about anybody, even pilots – than the pilot boat operators. They’re very, very good. And you can see in this picture, there’s rough sea – and they have to bring the pilot boat in next to this ladder, and hold it there safely while the guy gets on and off. And, you know, they’ve done it so many times. We do seventeen thousand, eighteen thousand jobs a year, and these guys are out there bringing these little boats out alongside these ships seventeen, eighteen thousand times a year, and I’ve seen them just come up just as smooth as you could imagine and put the ladder right next – within six inches of that gangway there, and you just step across, and they treat it like, “This is what I do every day.” And they’re good. They’re very good. And they should get a lot more credit that they do. [You’ve got very high water ...] Oh, this is out in the Gulf of Mexico [... Galveston Island] Oh, we take ships – we go out past the jetties at Galveston  we take ships four or five miles past there. And sometimes we board even further – if they’re real deep draft we have to go out pretty far, maybe as much as seven or eight miles. I haven’t measured it. And that’s that. Lou Vest Clip 3b / recording part III This is a picture that I think is – how do I want to say it? It’s a metaphor for being a pilot, you know. It’s in the middle of the night, and this guy’s probably just been woken up about ten minutes before, and he climbs up the ladder, and you can see this stairway going way up there towards the ship, and it’s dark at the top. You don’t know what’s up there. And here’s this guy. He probably got up there and they said, “Okay, you’ve got your ship coming up and you’re going to oil tank in six.” And he goes, “Uh, Port Side two or starboard side two?” And they say, “Starboard side two.” And he says, “Okay.” And he goes up there, you know. He doesn’t know what kind of crew is up there. He doesn’t know if, if the ship is all in one piece, or not. If the engine works right. Is it going to steer well or not. You know, he just goes up there into the darkness and that’s, that’s a very good metaphor for a pilot’s life. In fact, I’ll probably put that in the exhibition. Lou Vest Clip 4 / recording part IV  [8:05] Now this series I call industrial landscapes. And, and the idea for this series of photos was that it’s an industrial area, but it’s not necessarily ugly. I don’t think. You know, I always thought I was kind of crazy, because when I was a kid, I remember outside the small town where my grandfather had a ranch, they built a power station, and you could see that, that power station, you know – what do you call it – a power generating plant. And you could see it for miles across the planes in south Texas. And it always looked like a fairy castle to me, with all the lights and the catwalks and the towers, and I, I thought, that’s, that’s kind of cool, you know, and when I grew up, I still had that in my mind. And of course, the Houston Ship Channel, that’s all it is – towers and lights and – I had two nephews from Colombia, and they came up, and they were, they were from a small town in Colombia, and they came up, and they were – we picked them up at the airport. And they were like eight or ten years old, and we’re driving over the Beltway 8 bridge, and they’re standing up in the car going, “Wow, look at all the Christmas lights.” You know, and it wasn’t. It was just the Port of Houston. The petrochemical complex. But they thought it was beautiful. They thought it was like a crystal palace or something. So to look at it from – with those eyes is, is different. So I’m not going to be all Polyanna-ish about it. I mean there’s some serious things they do they should probably correct, but they try. And my experience has been that nobody pollutes deliberately, on the Ship Channel, that I know of, you know. People make a real effort to keep things clean. When I first started working, as a young man, I think the first port I went to – was – where was it – Norfolk, maybe. In the Navy, as a midshipman, in the Navy. And it was horrible. I mean the, the banks of it were like black Crisco, with, with embedded eggshells and tires, and, and everything else. And you don’t see that anymore. I mean, there’s definitely a high tide line and a low tide line, but I think that’s as much algae as anything else. It’s not – you don’t see stuff in the water. Now, you will see stuff after a heavy rain. But that’s stuff that washes down from Houston. When, when you see – we see islands of trash wash down the Channel from Houston, and it’s, it’s plastic water bottles, and tennis balls, and abandoned tennis shoes and tires. And disposable lighters and – I mean, especially Styrofoam cups. I mean acres and acres of Styrofoam cups and stuff. And you see, all that stuff washes down, but that’s not thrown overboard by sailors. I’m sure that sailors are not a hundred percent innocent of this, but for the most part, they, they put their trash away. They try not to spill oil. They’re, they’re very severe penalties for it. You can go to jail for spilling oil. And – so, anyway, this is my industrial landscapes. [11:21] And these were all taken in, in periods either before or after the fog, and there’s a lot of moisture in the air, so anything that gives off heat’s going to put off a lot of vapors, so it makes them more dramatic than they are normally.  That’s the turning basin, at the end of the channel. Now, that’s one of those pictures where the sky is so beautiful you can put any damn thing in front of it that makes it look good, you know, so – people say, “Oh, wow, what a beautiful picture of the Port!” But it’s not. It’s a beautiful picture of a cloud, and the port just happens to be there. You could take a picture of a rusty Coca Cola can, and it would look really great. Everybody would say, “What a beautiful picture of a rusty Coca Cola can!” But it’s not. It’s the sky that makes it. Same thing. Beautiful cl – beautiful sky. Petrochemical complex – dwarfed by this beautiful cloud in the morning. And there’s a black and white of the new docks up at, at Bayport. That’s coming down from Peggy’s Lake, looking at Exxon. That’s the biggest refinery – I think it might be the biggest refinery in the United States. I’m not sure. Maybe Baton Rouge. But Exxon is big. [12:47] It got built up during World War II. Another refinery. Same thing. Those are LOU VEST clip 5 / recording PART IV / 28:36] The car carrier. [That’s an amazing thing – ] They’re really ugly, aren’t they? [Yeah. It looks completely unsustainable as any kind of structure] It does. It does. They’re just unbelievable. That’s – you know, when we were talking about the Cajun Radar. That’s it? [search light  that’s a great shot too] This one? [xxxxx] Well, there’s a story behind this one. Do you know anything about Greek culture or anything? [Well, I know – it reminds me of Turkish coffee, which I assume is the same in Greece, with all the grounds at the bottom]  Right, right. And so there’s a thing with, with Greek coffee. If you’re on a Greek ship, it’s Greek coffee. If you’re on a Turkish ship, it’s Turkish coffee. It’s the same stuff. But if you take the cup after you finished it and turn it upside down in the saucer, you, you heard about that – [to read the grounds, I mean, to] no, you take it up and you read the side of the – you know. But it always looks like – what does that look like? It looks like a ship that’s sinking and burning, right? [laughter] It does. I mean, it always looks like that. So every time I get in a Greek ship, I would, I would take that and turn it over to the captain and he’d go – wuh. [laughs] You know, they’d look – you know, and so they’d say, “Pilot, you know, you know how to read that?” And I’d say, “Well, a little bit, you know.” I’d turn it over, and I’d say, “That’s not good.” And he says, “Well, what do you see.” I say, “Well, a ship that’s sinking and burning. It’s probably not your ship, Captain. It’s probably some ship I’m on, I guess.” You know. [laughing]. And then – so, I don’t know – I stopped doing that. I – you know. It might be some guy get really suspicious. But that’s what it looks like. it looks like a ship on fire, doesn’t it? [It does – that’s a fantastic story....] [30:20] Anyway. That’s some weather. Big old thundercloud out there. [sure ....] Lou Vest / Clip 6, recording part IV [32:41] Yeah, we could do it later. [Might as well use the card up [laughing]] You know, I don’t have anything really prepared to say. It’s just the – I think Port of Houston’s a great place. It’s been a very exciting place to work – in the best sense, you know. Not that somebody-screwed-up sort of exciting, but – and it has been very good to me. And I, I think what’s interesting is I’ve been impressed by the organic nature of it. How it all works together. All these independent people and agencies – the steam ship agents, and the terminals. There must be 200 different docks, and a couple hundred steam ships agents, and the Coast Guard, and the Pilots, and the linemen, and the tugboats. And somehow it all comes together to make a big, organic entity. And – like that ship that – that had that captain and the crew that  were smiling. Basically, Houston is like that. I mean, there are days when it doesn’t function so well, and people get kind of crabby, but thus far it’s a well-run, well organized, happy thing that’s trying to do the right – the right thing for the city and the port. And I think they deserve recognition: the people who go out to these meetings, and talk about safety, and how to do things better, and how to clean up, and how to prevent accidents. You know, they, they really seriously try – and the thing organically works very well. [34:12] I mean, I went to a meeting a few years ago, when we were talking about putting the computer program out and making it available. And there was a banker. And he was on the board of directors for one of these things. And he was sort of there, but an outsider. And after the meeting he came up to me and said, “So, the way I understand it, if this program is successful, all these chemical ships will know what docks they’re going to a little bit better, and it will be a lot more efficient for the chemical ships. And I said, “Yeah, it will be. Because they spend a lot of time going all the way out to sea, coming back to the next dock, that might be only a few hundred yards away. You know, but they made a journey of twenty, thirty miles, because they didn’t know when that berth was going to be open, and all this.” And he said, “So, isn’t that good for the pilots? Don’t you make more money that way?” And I said, “Yeah, I guess so.” He says, “So, so what’s your interest? Why would you want to make it more efficient?” And I – well, I mean that’s just what we do. I mean it’s – it would be sort of bad form not to. But, besides that, I mean anything that’s good for the port, ultimately is good for us. And so, so we actually try to – [35:17] He shook his head and he said, “Well, okay,” and walked away. And, and you could see the wheels turning. But it, it’s true. I mean we really do try to make things better for everybody. And I think that’s true of the other parties, for the most part, in the port of Houston. That’s what I’d like to finish by saying. In this day and age. [That’s a fantastic observation. 
PortHouston;Lindbergh Lebert;1929;xxxx;Lindbergh Lebert, 1929, xxxx  LINDY LEBERT LOG Summary: Lindbergh Lebert, pilot remembers how he started his career on the waterfront. He talks about “Texas Chicken”, and how it was a safe way for ships to meet, how he was on the committee responsible for widening of the ship channel, and how local knowledge is extremely important for a pilot. 01:25 Born 1929 in Lafayette, Louisiana. Came to Houston in 1946. Lindy short for Lindbergh. Family of farmers. During depression family did share cropping. In 41-42 started building raw material for WW II. Grew cotton, cane, large garden for family crops. Had 5 sisters. Money was scarce. Had animals on farm, grew vegetables. Went to store for borrowing not buying. Had homemade clothes. Made by Mom. Sewed, cooked, planted, helped father for harvesting. Did not know what money was. Spoke French in school. We’re trying to get all French speakers to speak English. Spoke French at home. Father had good education. Could speak and write English and French. Only skilled labor was railroad. Did not get through high school. Dropped out after 9th grade. Worked in Lafayette from 2 pm- 10pm. Enjoyed childhood and growing up. No electricity. Hunted and fished. Mardi Gras was non-existent. Could not afford to go to town to watch. Started noticing Mardi Gras when older. Did not go to New Orleans till 20. 10:40 Friend’s dad lived in Houston. Was tug captain for Pan American oil company. Invited to go with to Houston. Lived with friend’s father and family for week. Started working at 17. Needed minor’s release. Learnt work from others. That was the rest of my education. Got 500 ton pilot license. Worked for Bay Houston for 17 years. Then worked for electrical power company. Had 20,000 ton barge and moved coal from New Orleans to Tampa and brought back phosphate. Raised license tonnage wise. Have to take test to get license. Became a pilot at 38 years. 17:00 Met a lot of pilots and became friends. Got opportunities to work as pilot when there was a requirement. Started work in 1967 and left in 97. Local knowledge is the name of the game. Taken in by the association. Then have to be approved by the port and governor has to sign. Have to sign a bond. Put up bond for state. A legal document with state. Showing certificate for physical fitness and license. Goes through insurance company. Have to take physical every year. Tested for dope. 24:15 When taken in person sponsoring cannot be master. Master or mentor is appointed and is boss for a year. After one year of apprenticeship you become pilot. Most apprentices go to maritime academy. Have had    two apprentices. Have to bail apprentice out of trouble. Three committee men. Presiding officer, second in command and boatkeeper. Boatkeeper takes care of physical assets. 29:45 Steam ships have agents. Person responsible for ship gives agent what he needs. Agent knows particulars of ship. Pilot has to get some notice to get labor. Was 39th pilot. There are roughly 200 pilots right now. Channel has widened. Was on committee to widen the channel. Texas Chicken. Channel was 400 ft wide, ships were 600-700ft ships. 67 ft -80 ft wide. Now, 1300 ft ships, 140 ft wide. Channel was shallow. Deep draft was 36 ft. now 45 ft depth. Texas chicken safe way to meet. Meet head on. Cannot compress water. When meeting ship head on half a mile move 1-2 degrees. Each on their own side but looks horrible. Have fun with that. As a deckhand, there was no radio. Signals were given with whistle. If the other ship gives four whistles he has a problem. Learnt whistle signals as a deckhand. Deckhand was sent up to answer whistles. Pilots sometimes give hand signals. No use of flags. Communication before radio worked pretty well. In Houston with grain elevators whistles sounds would echo. Some pilots gave hand signals. 42:25 When ship comes in he gives notice that it will be there in 2-days to one week. If there is a change, agent will be notified. Now 3 days notice to be given to coast guard. Passenger lists, cargo lists etc. Pilots don’t get notice till a week before ship arrives. May be four or five pilots on the boat at times. Dispatch in order of work. If it gets foggy, anchor in channel. If outbound, there is traffic you anchor, start ringing bell and blowing whistle to signal fog. Certain pilots wouldn’t meet in fog, don’t trust them. Can’t see ship in dense for buy can see lights as they pass by. Texas chicken in fog, good radar. Never taken deep loaded ship. Wouldn’t board a loaded ship against loaded ship in fog. All depends on who the person is and if he can be trusted. A pilot, Nixon loved to run the fog. Did it well. It was a game with him. Some people good at job but not at par. 53:00 Meeting two small ships, have to give way a little. Polish ship radar was very poor. Had a magnetic compass was all he had. Have to figure the error. Magnetic compass in fog is terrible. Pilots relationship with ship captains are good. Maybe some disagreements about how the job is done. Try to please the captain. If they know you are reliable they leave you alone. Never had an accident. Had a couple of brushes. Had an apprentice in his second year, handled ship by himself. Small mistake, rubbed against a ship, cut a gash in the cargo ship all the way across. Like being on a freeway and having a fender bender. Had one bad accident. Pilot and some crew members died. Red bluff across from Bayport. Norwegian ship run into Chinese ship and caught fire. One of tanks was punctured and lost a lot of cargo. Chinese ship burned for 3-4 days. Anchored outside the channel and channel was closed for few days. Tug was stationed with ship. 1:01:00  Tugs to help you on dock. If ship is very big 2-3 tugs to help you dock. Tugs are pretty strong with 5000 horsepower. Might rub a dock or lose an engine. Tugs can help stop or just let the ship drift if in the channel if engine is lost and no control on s hip. Tugs help in turning as well. Report to captain about ship when boarding. Radars don’t carry cargo, we don’t make money with them, we don’t need them. Now, must have 2 radars. Good navigation lights on channel. Night runs are not bad. Good range. (demonstrates) 1:05:50 Boarding a ship. Two tires ,two big fenders and a boarding platform. The tires will touch on both sides without hurting the ladder and you got to board. Going alongside for boarding is no problem. Take radio for navigation. Before radio carried a mouth whistle. Now marine radio. Battery operated. Has two channels. Now radios have many channels and marine operator. No talking on phone for navigation. Dispatcher is on 24 hrs a day. 1:10:00 Horse and buggy days, now electronic age. Not so much guesswork. Better communication. Before radios, you would see a ship coming and wonder who that is. Mason Wiggins, pilot, lost his life. Had heart attack and fell off and died. Westparker on an inbound ship, had heart attack and died. The Master has responsibility on ship. Discuss particulars of ship with Captain. (Shows radio used) Channel 13 was navigation channel. Channels like 77 was pilot office. Talk about navigation or just chat for a few minutes. 1:16:00 Socialize with other pilots. Close knit group of people. Retirements, Christmas parties try to meet then. Don’t know many of the younger pilots. Paul Brown was first colored man. Commissioner did not want a colored man. Now Hensley, another black man as Pilot. Hiring women pilots was harder. During tenure worked with two women. There are meetings to air out likes and dislikes. All eat well on pilot boats. Grocery bills are pretty high. But since hours are long and tough, nobody complains about food. 1:22:00 Deckhands can get experience working alongside pilots. Had hired two deckhands during tenure. Both presiding officers now. Start small and then increase tonnage on license. Local knowledge is important for pilot. Have to have experience on a channel. Need enough trips to make pilot license. Need to know all equipment. Have to draw channel down to scale. But have no ship handling experience. Use a mate and navigated out in the ocean but did not steer in the channel. Stand watch and notice everything. Earlier apprenticeship was one year, then became 2 year, now it is 3 year. Tug people have better sense than ship people. Tug people have little more experience and knowledge for Houston ship channel. Ship people are steering with help of mate. Quartermaster is usually one who steers. People come from all over to work. People like Captain Tom Lightsey stationed in Mississippi would come to Houston on a regular basis and then decided to move here.  
PortHouston;Leo Braun Log;1933;xxxx;Leo Braun Log, 1933, xxxx  01:05 Leo Braun Log Born in Houston, TX on Nov 6th 1933. Went to parochial school, dropped out of college. First towboat in 1955 and worked as deckhand for $10 a day. No conveniences on board. No running water. On the boat for 20 days and back for 10. Segregation was prevalent and even bathrooms were segregated. 04:25 Introduced to towboats by friend from college. Did not need application to get hired as deckhand. Was responsible for upkeep of boat. Cleaning and cooking, fastening luggage. Mates drive boat for 12 hours while captain drives for 6 hours. When not working on towboat, worked in Dallas for printing company. 06:33 Then got drafted in the marine and served for two years. Out of service in 1958 and after a year on towboat decided to get college degree. After college degree, got married to secretary of registrar and went back to work on boat right after graduation. That is where the money was. 7:36 After a few years got a job ashore at National Marine and worked as a dispatcher for four years. Pay got cut in half. National Marine had contract with Shell Oil and moved crude oil. As dispatcher, would ask boats to transport oil, fuel, diesel from one place to another. Then got a job with Sioux City and New Orleans Barge Lines. Work involved travelling on the Missouri River, very treacherous. Sold company to Crown Interest in Chicago. Moved to St. Louis for one year after company was bought over. Started work as a dispatcher and left as operations manager. Worked the Missouri river, Tennessee River, Ohio River and the Mississippi River. 10:20 Boats would haul salt, grains, molasses. Barges can usually load 9-10 ft draft but on Missouri River can load only 6.5 ft. Moved to Houston as Operations Manager in 1970s to a company called Outlow Barge Lines. Business in the company was booming. Decided to leave and buy a boat in 1975. Partnered with Ron Dansby who was more into administration. 13:00 First boat was a David B. It was making $750 a day working with Phillips Petroleum. Formed company but did not quit till there was a contract. Got a job from Shell Oil. David B cost $75,000. Bought three boats.  15:29 Would hear about boats through the industry and through different people because industry was small. Branched out and got a job with DuPont. Had two boats working with DuPont and three with Phillips Petroleum. Started building boats and started naming them after Texas Rivers. Met and started working with Bill Ivy, a good salesman. Money in towboat industry is made through barges. The boats are means to an end. Started building barges. 17:17 Government would help you to build boats and barges by funding some money. Called Title 11. In 80s everyone had overbuilt barges and boats and owed money to the government. By then owed $10 million. Negotiated with the banks. Started paying back only interest, no principle. Decided to take care of equipment and not spend additional costs to put it up somewhere. Talked to different companies about merging. To get out of trouble. Worked out deal with Ed Smith. Bought more barges and boats. Had 10 boats and 20 barges. Talked about selling company to Dixie Carrier or Kirby Corporation in 1989. 20:55 Dixie Carriers were union. Company was non union. Started company called Dixie Marine which was Non union. There was red fleet and green fleet. Did not work because crews were bickering about what one got and the other didn’t. After four years the companies merged. Kirby Corporation bought 5 more companies. Hodge-podge. Companies started bidding against each other. Sales group got together and reported to Houston. Each company had individual culture and was difficult to come together as one company. 1992 all companies came together. 24:40 Stayed in operations. Crewing vessels. Was VP of operations. Kirby did not have training centers. Was asked to set up training department. Trained deckhands and entry level people and were sent to school for 10-12 days. Stayed on a towboat and on a fleet and ran classes even at night. Created a scenario exactly like it is on a boat. They stayed on boat. Retired from Kirby and went back to ride boats. 27:30 To maintain license a certain number of days on board is needed or working in the industry can be counted as sea time. In 1955 did not need a license to run a boat. Licensing laws came in 1971-2. 29:20 National marine was a big company domiciled out of New York. But only 7-8 people worked in Houston office. Sioux City and New Orleans Barge lines had 15 boats, 240 barges. Alamo Barge Lines in Houston had 5 boats and 20 barges, Ed Smith built the company to 20-25 boats and 70-80 barges. Sold company to Houston Natural Gas which is now Enron.  30:54 Moved mostly liquid cargo than solids. Liquid being petroleum, poisons, pressure gases. More government intervention in regulations in the last 20 years. Regulations are pretty strong. Coast guard is regulatory body, used to oversee. Have become coast guard examiner. Check to see if people are qualified to do the job. Do some consulting and some survey work. Also sometimes called on to be expert witness. Ride boats 10-12 days in a month. Pick and choose what I want to do. Have to be familiar with the place. Ride from Brownsville, TX to Panama City, FL and Baton Rouge and New Orleans. 35:22 Depends on area of operation. On the Inter coastal waterway barges are restricted to a size of 1200 ft by 55 ft. On the river 40-50 barges, 7 acres of barges. 10,000 horse power. Inter-coastal waterway mapped out by government. Starts from East Coast, comes down to Florida, goes across Florida, Lake Okeechobee in Tampa to Carrabelle, FL. From Carrabelle, FL to New Orleans, LA to Mobile, AL. Between New Orleans and Mobile boat is in open waters. Inter-coastal waterway was completed in the late 40s after World War II. Government maintained. Canal is supposed to be 125 ft wide and 12 ft deep but parts of it are wider. 38:52 Contracts were done every year and were called evergreen. Can bid on contract for a year or for less time that. Different ways to bid on contract. If you give boat and barge, you get a sum of money or can move it by barrel. Spot marketing, no work but someone wants something moved one time. Lot of money in spot market. Uncertain about work. Contract work is long range. Good to have a mix. Rates are good for contracts in winter time. Summer time rates go down. 41:40 Word of mouth gets around, a lot of work comes that way. Pay is good. Anybody can walk in off a farm and in three years be a mate or a captain making $89,000 a year. Paying you more than anything else to be away from home. Responsibility on the wife is a lot. While working at Sioux City and New Orleans Barge lines there were cooks and maids on the boat. Usually husband and wife team . Used to run a boat with 8-10 people, now it is just 4-5.Dont think industry recognizes the wives enough. 3-4 marriages are not uncommon for people to have. One captain nicknamed Bubba had 7 children, one set of twins, married four times and none of his children were from his wives. 46:01 Status difference is there. Like high school and college. Ship people are college people and tow boat people are high school people. Never cared to go to sea. Still challenging. Have had Collision or two. At the Houston ship channel ship was going too fast and too slow. Ship maybe doing 12 miles/hour. Hit the barge and knocked a hole. Did not sink completely, were still floating. No damage to cargo. Worst incident. Had lots of close calls but none so bad. They are either single skin or double skin. Because of  Exxon Valdez oil spill, everything had to be double skin. With double skin there is a tank inside of a tank. (shows pictures of double skin barges) Cargo was gasoline and floats on water. 49:30 Happened in 1961 and coast guard didn’t come out. Today coast guard would come out immediately. It was mechanical failure on ship. Navigation features are incredible now. Has made communication easier and safer. Earlier couldn’t talk to ship because of different frequencies. Now can talk to ships. Earlier communication was all visual. Biggest change was communication. Earlier had to pull up to drawbridge, blow three whistles and the bridge would open. Now can call ahead and ask for it to be opened. Education level has also gone up. Communication is all on computer. Orders come on computer. Lot of people could not read or write. Coast guard had oral exams. Salaries have become better in the last 20 years. There is still a shortage of labor because wives or girlfriends want men to be home. So they leave good jobs to stay home. 54:27 Met some people at a funeral. Thought of meeting often. Met 3-4 years ago and there were four people. Formed a group called Bay Area Ancient Mariners. Have 70 members but 30-40 are active. Meet once a month and talk about old times. Chance for people to meet people they have not seen in a long time. 58:36 BAM is made of operational workforce. Not too many commercial workers. 2-3 members are ex- coastguards. Good relationship with coast guard. Earlier coast guard shifts were 6 hours on and 6 hours off. Now they have 8 hour watch and 4 hour watch. Industry has become better. 1:02:52 Don’t interact with Port Authority at all. Maybe corporate interacts with them. Seamen’s center is a social club. Seamen’s church institute has been training people since 1834. Is Episcopalian and has trained hundreds of seamen. 1:05:18 Propeller club is a social organization. International club. Meet once a month and don’t have to be in the industry. Networking club that anyone can join. American Waterways Operator (AWO) is national organization for towboaters. Lobby group in Washington. Better waterways, deeper drafts, rules and regulations, more bridges. Infrastructure is the primary thing. More a watchdog. Gulf Inter-coastal association, regulatory authority that takes care of the Gulf Coast. 1:09:22 No school to teach these things, now there are schools. If wife can stand it is a good job. Enjoy this job. Adventure of it, being out on the water. Have time to be by yourself, no distractions. Lots of time to think and pray. Everything is provided. Groceries, laundry, uniforms. Benefits are good, like hospital.  Good place to start. River people start out on towboat by the time they are in college they make $100,000 a year. Working 6 months in a year. 30 days on, 30 days off. Keeps you out of trouble. 
PortHouston;L. Glass;1948;2012;L. Glass, 1948, 2012,   Log – L. Glass 08-21-2012 [0:02] Recorded 08-21-2012, Montgomery, Texas at the home of Capn Leonard Glass. [0:40] Born 1948, La Porte, Texas where he finished high school. Boyhood friends were sons of pilots and tugboat captains. This became his ambition. His father and uncles worked at the refineries. After graduation worked on a boat doing a water pollution study on the Houston Ship Channel. Later hired on at a marina at Barber’s Cut. Worked at oil refineries for a couple of years. [04:45] Left oil refineries to work on and drive tugboats. Got operator’s license. Worked out of Galveston, two years. Worked for Brown and Root on tug in the Amazon River with a pipeline job. Back in the U.S. worked for Tide Water in Puerto Rico and Trinidad. Returned to Galveston/Houston Towing Co. Married his wife Debbie. [11:48] Father-in-law managed John Lafitte Hotel in Galveston and knew president of Houston Towing. Captain Glass [CG] gave head of Amoco Oil ride on the tug and got publicity work for the tug company. Worked out of Houston where family could meet him at Morgan’s Point. Moved to Sea Brook. [16:38] Houston pilot, Jack Rowling, encouraged him to put in an application to Pilots Association. October 1, 1984, he was voted in at age 36  one son was 3, one was 5. Other pilots voted in were Tom Gibson and Armando Luna. CG’s career lasted 22 yrs. After becoming full pilot, the oil crises sent tankers through Panama to Houston that he would pilot. Also, containers from China came through Suez to Houston. Could take family on rides on the boats before 9/11. [24:43] Involved in giving safety seminars for tugboat captains. Piloting foreign ships was like traveling abroad without leaving home. Felt like a guest in their home. Avoided having an accident during his career. [30:03] Son, Matthew, voted in as a pilot, 2012. Due to be full pilot in 2013. CG adapted to cultures and crews from European, Russian, Chinese countries. Was courteous and respectful. A manpower study by the Pilot Assoc. changed working conditions through the Port Authority. [38:00] The Ecuadorian ship, the Monogas, was captained by a unique man who owned several Ecuadorian dept. stores. It was old, beautiful, fast and graceful. CG often the pilot. Ship always completely loaded with freight. Crew were highly trained. The captain, though drunk, saluted the port on the whistle when departing. [46:42] CG saluted the Boy Scout/Cubs campout, piloting a boat with a steam whistle at the Battleship Texas at 11:00 PM. Wife not happy.  [51:26] Worked with Brown and Root’s outsized cranes on barges in building oil drilling platforms on Green’s Bayou. The tugboats used were built to go across the Atlantic working on North Sea oil field: the Godfather, Mister Darby, & Doctor Jack  each had 2 Alcoa locomotive engines. [58:48] Working rules are different for pilots in every port. In Houston the big rule is pilots don’t pick their jobs. CG came to favor Indian food, including curry, but not Korean. On the Ship Channel, outbound in the AM is easterly  inbound in the PM is easterly. Both ways the sun is in your eyes and it gets hot. [1:05:40] Pilot’s Assoc. early on sent members to training schools. Port Authority was supportive. Currently a school in La. Is doing a mock up for training for the new Bay Port facility. When CG started the channel was 40 ft. deep/400ft. wide. It was dredged to 530 ft. wide/42 ft. deep. Pilots worked w/Corp of Engineers on planning to dredge the channel for safe travel while ‘economically feasible.’ [1:11:33] CG takes pride in training new pilots. His philosophy is to make clear the expectations then turn them loose under his watchful eye. He is active in Retired Texas State Pilots who come from the 7 Ports. If able to start his career again, he would do it tomorrow. Characters with spaces: 3,763. 
PortHouston;Joe Burkett;1950;2012;Joe Burkett, 1950, 2012  JOE BURKETT Summary: Joe Burkett talks to Pat Jasper about business at Texas Terminals. He explains the different jobs at the terminal and how they contribute to the daily work. How texas terminals owns the biggest crane on the waterfront and the business they are able to generate from that. The competition between Terminals and the unique ways in which they attract business to their terminal. March 08, 2012 Texas Terminals General Manager of Texas Terminals 00:00:49 Grew up in Galena Park. On the ship channel. Would go down to the ship channel as a child, watching ships come and go. Wanted to be in the business. Took a part time job at a small private docks facility while in college. Loaded small vessels. One of their customers was West India line. Worked with roll on and roll off operation. Started going to college in the night time. WEst india line had property on the sea port. Started their own facility, when they did offered him a job in April 1970. Been in the business ever since. 00:03:17 Started at the bottom doing everything. Became a tallyman, receiver clerk, tracking the cargo, documented it. Then ended up in the ship in the gang. Wanted to know everything. Only member in family in the maritime business. Father worked for Aramco steel. Closed in the early 80s. 00:05:06 Tallyman documents the cargo that is loaded on the ship. Earlier things were manual and handwritten. Dock receipts were even typed up. THe movement of cargo was all manual. Ships have changed, have become "user friendly". Easier to work, better equipment. Cargo has gotten large. Ships have had to increase capacity of ships. Ships earlier could handle 5 tons. 00:08:28 West India Line- came at 22 years of age. Was asst. operations manager. Ended up taking over the total management of the facility. Worked for the operating company. Closed company after partners couldn't agree on the business after founder passed. Always loved cranes and was involved in West INdia with cranes buying and selling. Care shipping was building Crane terminals. Crane represented small containers service. Was offered a job. Became their general manager at Care Terminal. Back then container rates got bad, all carriers were losing money, because it cost them more to move then what they were  getting. Container companies provide trucks with chassis, very expensive to care and maintain. Finances got so bad they had to close their container shipment business. Owners decided to sell the place. Sold it to port of Houston in 1995. Took time off after that. C.A Rousser took up the facility and tried to sell it. Opened it under a new owner. Was concerned about good service and tried level best to provide it. Built a small business and managed to get some old people back. 00:19:01 Couple of crane operators are the oldest employees who are now still around. Cranes are used in a number of areas. Big demand for crane operators. Forklifts and crane comes in different sizes and can carry different types of cargo. Some admin members have still stuck around, 00:23:02 Belong to industry organizations and whenever new technologies and methods are introduced, try to be in the know of it and learn it and use it of it helps. Always need to keep ears and eyes open. Such as Cargo documentation or FID. Anytime there isa process that can improve the operations, try to go with it. Department heads mentor everyone under them. People need to be trained in a particular way. Supervisors are very involved in mentoring their juniors. Safety is very important in the industry. 20 years ago did not see any hard hats in this line of work. PPE - personal protective equipment such as hard hats and safety boots. Training is very important. 00:29:44 Have always enjoyed the industry, been very hands on. Have been at work from before daylight to after dark. Need to be very involved while building a business. Have always enjoyed it. Have expected employees to do a good job also. 00:32:50 Facility built to handle heavy cargo. Most docks are by the water, own piling and maybe dock strength is not much, Older docks only have500 lb.. of square foot capacity. Crane have always been of interest. Back then, did not see many cranes on the docks. 00:34:49 Old boss was a salesman. Name Jim Allen. Was an Aggie. DIed at 56 in 1982 Extremely outgoing, never met a stranger. Leant a lot about cranes from him. Learnt social skills and people skills from him. Was a great motivator and people person. Business is all about relations. He understood cranes mechanically. Taught what each lever does. Crane operators need to do separate things with each hand. Are special people. Crane operation is pure geometry. 00:39:15  Stevedoring - the word means unloading and loading. Supervisors make a big difference. Get a lot of different types of cargo. Have very experiences and very knowledgeable supervisors for handling cargo. Need a lot of good experience. Not a lot of them around. Try to train them in a professional fashion. Manufacturers have people who train our employees. Try to put new people through more class-room time than in the past. Always looking for good people. Last year hired 98 new people but were left with just 19. 00:43:18 People not wanting to be here on weekends, not caring enough, not being productive. They are taught that they are salespeople. Try not to hire anyone who doesn’t speak English. Sometimes difficult to find the quality employee that is needed. Constantly trying to find good workforce. Admin, invoicing, acct. payable etc. Downstairs - cargo documentation and operations. Operations deals with handling the cargo, dealing with customers about movement of cargo. Tallyman, labor category. Operations is larger group of people. 00:47:42 One major con for the employees is will have to put them wherever the need is at that moment. Cannot put them where they want to be, some people are used to doing only one thing and that does not work here. If employees were not flexible, would have to double the staff. Very competitive business as is. When truck comes into deliver cargo, it is met by a truck office. Will inspect papers and identify it and will pass it to receiving clerk. Will inspect the cargo and take it to a place for unloading. Gets it unloaded. Ocean carrier is paid by either cubic or dimensions of cargo or weight. Either cubic meter or metric ton, whichever is greater. Cargo documenters input it into the system and it generates a receiving report. It then goes to a load list for that particular ship. The forklift operators unloading the truck. Supervisor directing the operations. Crane operators and gear men have rigorous work. They know the tools to use. Involved along with labor. Ship superintendent has complete control of the vessel operations on the company's behalf. He also coordinates with the gang foreman. 2-3 gangs to the ship. 5 people. Tallyman are also called clerks. There is a tallyman with each gang as well. Clerk known as pusher shows the crew the order in which to be loaded. Most of the time a port captain is also involved. There is a diagram that shows how it to be loaded. Very important to know the port rotation as a ship can call on many different ports before the final destination. So need to know that information in order to load it in the order of unloading. THe Stow plan also shows the port of discharge for all the goods. Generate a full load list after loading to teh ocean carrier and the agent. A lot of ships are three holds today. 2 decks in each hold. The bottom deck is called a tank top because below that are tanks that help keep the ship stable. Ships today use bunker sea fuel, bi-product of refining process. So thick it has to be heated to be pumped through a line. Some ships will have bunker tanks. Part of the stevedoring gang is also crane operators. Load a lot of heavy cargo with ship cranes. Attract heavy cargo. Regular  business to load blowout preventers on ships that are drill ships in the Far East and sometimes the Persian Gulf. Blowout preventers are big structures that sit on the surface of oil wells. It controls the flow of oil and if there is a problem the blowout preventers close down restricting the fire and the flow of oil. THey weigh about 600,000 lb. 01:03:37 THe second largest crane on the ship front is a 300 ton crane and company has two of those. Barge crane called Big John, can lift 500 short tons and works up and down the channel. Vessel superintendent is in charge of the operations. Directs people in the yard, clerks considered the pushers locate the cargo ahead of time. Vessel superintendent plans the whole flow ahead of time. People work long hours while working a ship. 01:07:07 Non union labor. All stevedores that work at the Turning Basin or the city docks are union labor. Container terminals at the port authority are also union. Hourly labor at the company. Make money on the overtime. Overtime always helps. 01:09:04 No relation between Texas Terminal and Houston port authority. Port treats the other facilities as competition. Don’t treat the other facilities as the common industry. Texas Terminals is busy. Wish there wasn't such a competitive nature between the terminals. Non union cannot work at the Houston Port Authority. Handle respective markets. Most container carriers are signatories to the union contracts so they have to use union labor. SO Barbers Cut, Bay Port will always have business. 01:13:31 Since the property is owned by Texas Terminals, can offer incentives to shippers that the port cannot. Port makes money off wharfage. Wharfage is a charge for cargo going over a dock. Today, typical wharfage rate is $3.11 for 2000 lb. Port Authority has always tried to attract steel for the Turning basin. That's where the port makes its money. Dockage is the charge applied to the vessel for being at the dock, per diem charge based upon the length of the ship. 450 ft ship - $4.50 cents for lineal foot per day. Port charges dockage to the ship and wharfage to the cargo owner. Most steam ships agents represent vessel themselves. Port of Houston is probably the largest port in the Gulf for handling steel. Most of the money comes from the container terminals. 01:17:17 When the port of Houston published tonnages, they include everything. Crude oil makes up most of the tonnage. Don’t submit information to them on a regulate basis. Sometimes will call and ask and then will give them. Port Authority is very involved in making sure dredging of the ship channel happens. Maintenance dredging was last done in 2009. Typically done every 5 years. trying to generate finds to get it done every 4 years since it silts up very quickly. THe channel is a "huge ditch" as it has no flowing, running water  other than the Gulf of Mexico. When cold fronts come down, the north winds follow and with them lose 4 ft of water every two days. When that happens, some ships, like the large tankers have to restrict their draft by a foot or two. It is a great expense. Takes more ship loads to bring in same cargo. Most of the ship traffic is mainly chemical tankers, crude tankers and container ships. 01:21:00 Have a lot of power generation equipment. GE Builds modular power plants. Build several different sizes. Smallest is 25 megawatt. QLSO BUILD 50 AND 100 megawatt units. Pretty aggressive sales effort around the world. Texas terminals handles their export. Their 100 megawatt unit's main module weighs 380,000 lbs and is over 15 ft wide. Move it by rail. Also handle on shore drilling equipment. TO Risers are the long pipes almost 90 ft long. some of the 90 footers weigh 75,000 lbs. Go from drill ship to the ocean floor to the blowout preventer. Serve as the well in the ocean. Every drill ship has to have them. Have handled rigs themselves. Anything related to petrochemicals and oil equipment. Future will handle the generator portion of the windmill for export. 01:25:53 75% of business is export. sometime ago, 75% of business was import. So there is a good growth in export. Make it attractive for shippers to marshal cargo and collect it and search for ships to book it with an ocean carrier. 50% of export business is from shippers, forwarders and manufacturers that deliver cargo to Texas Terminals. Marshalling is the collecting of cargo, waiting till all pieces are built and delivered to a dock facility, and then collected to be loaded on to a ship to be delivered to a site. Give very attractive terms to people to allow them to collect cargo here. 01:27:49 Have 80,000 sq ft of warehouse space. Don’t have a lot of cargo that needs to be in warehouse. Liner service is an ocean carrier that calls a certain trade plane. Goes to the same ports over and over again. Makes a revolution. Most of export cargo is booked on chartered vessels known as the tramp industry. Tramp ships goes wherever the cargo is, loads it and takes it where it needs to go . Most of the cargo that needs warehouses is from the liner business. Large rolls of cardboard used to make corrugated cardboard boards. Each roll can weigh up to 5000 lbs. about 5 ft tall and 5 ft in diameter. Needs to be in a warehouse. 01:31:30 To build a container terminal takes a lot of money. Port authority can generate fund for that. a lot of Pot authorities will lease the container terminal to a stevedoring company. At the port of Houston they want to operate their own container terminal. Warehousing away form the dock area is a different business. Warehousing at the port should be referred to as transit sheds.  01:34:10 Some of the business is from ship agents. Agents represent ocean carrier if they are not familiar with Houston. Good service is always a recommending factor. Have good relations with most of them. A lot of the steel that comes to Houston goes to the city docks. 01:37:05 Consider people as assets more than other people do. Treat employees better than most do. Operate in a little more expensive fashion, as have a lot of people on the terminal side. Staffed to handle the busy days. Manchester terminals has acquired liner from the past because of more warehouse space. They have services toRussia - Aluminum ingots. Large warehouse space did attract cargo for them in the past. But it has changed. MT was built in the 1920s in the days of cotton. All warehouses back then was at the edge of the water because of cotton loading. 01:41:06 Meeting people form all over the world has really been an interesting part of the business. Have met people from every country in the world and ,made good friends with some of them. Japanese have been the most interesting people ever met. Used to make a point of visiting with the captain. Usually give gifts to the captain, chief mate and chief engineer. Get some business through them sometimes. Bugassi - dynamic, wealthy, has a lot of ships. Freight forwarding industry has a lot of international people. Late 70s Europeans came and started buying local businesses. They wanted to establish a presence here. 
PortHouston;James Thomas Tray;1950;2012;James Thomas Tray, 1950, 2012  JAMES THOMAS TRAY SUMMARY: James Thomas Tray talks to Pat Jasper about tugboats. He describes the working of a tugboat in detail and explains what exactly his company does. He also explains the nuances that go into hiring employees for tugs, the difference in the advantages in hiring older men to younger men and also speaks about the efforts taken by the Port of Houston Authority and Pilots association to create awareness in and around Houston, about the Port. 0:00:00 March 2, 2012 Bay Houston Towing, Capt. Tom Tray Grew up in Iowa. Studied there. Got an appt with Kings Point Academy. Never seen the ocean before. Spent 4 years at King's Point. Spent one year at sea. Federal service academy. Requires congressional appt. Graduated in 1976. Went to sea for a few months. Then decided to stay on land. Decided to get a job. Alaska Pipeline. Jobs opened up for a lot of people. Decided to sail oil tankers, mostly on the Alaska route. Sailed as captain in 1987. Got into war zone during the 1st gulf war. Came ashore in 1993. First job working logistics on the Tundra, in Russia. Was hired by a Norwegian company setting up office in Webster, TX. Was hired by El Paso  El Paso went south with Enron, closed ups hops and had to lay off all the employees. Bay Houston was looking for VP, applied and got job after Energy Houston. 00:07:04 Bay Houston was started by Capt. WD Hayden. Invented hydraulic clam shell dredge, started dredging oyster beds in Galveston bay. All roads in south East Texas, up until the 1950s, were paved with oyster shells and not gravel. He also discovered that oyster shells make a good substitute in concrete for limestone. started a cement business - Hayden cement company. Had a large fleet of barges and tug boats. 1925, Houston Towing Company bought the Buffalo Bayou Dan Ryan Towing Company. Only tugboat company on Houston Ship channel, but competition came back. In 1934, G&H Towing Company was formed after merging all their assets and operations into a single company. Towing companies maintained ownership of tugs and marketing. Good Family run company. Members of the 5th generation are now running it. Family owns it since 1880s. 00:13:31 All discreet entities, the business do not articulate. Have a ranch outside Morksdale, TX. Can take customers there hunting. Cooperative spirit is unique to Houston. Spirit of cooperation in Houston is unique, Work together. The dredging done in Houston, is example of best in the country. When it was time to dredge the Port of Houston, all arms came together - industry, Galveston bay foundation, environmental groups came together and discussed and came up with a plan. Took the dredge spoils and rebuilt the islands that  had been washed away over the years, as ships have gone past. Have managed to make Houston more competitive in terms of business at the Port. 00:18:22 One of the few tugboat companies whose crew is all union. They are part of the seafarer international union (SIU). Have gotten along since 1934. Moved family from Connecticut to Houston. Been in Houston since 1989. 00:21:35 Tugboat companies in TX and LA are unionized. The reason they are not elsewhere is because of the labor strife in the mid 80s. Bitter union battle in the North East. Advantages are can get labor, disadvantages can’t get labor. Getting to be difficult to get qualified labor. Was not unusual, back then, to see a person who had very less education start off at the bottom and very soon get promoted to post of Captain. Very unusual to see that now. Recruiting heavily out of maritime academies. Advantages - excellent medical and pension plans. Bad - Have to go through contract negotiations every 2-3 years. Fairly strife free relationship for the last 77 years. 00:24:00 Combined fleet is 32 tugboats. 4th largest harvest tug fleet in the nation. youngest fleet in the nation. aggressive build program. Very progressive, safety oriented. Probably the most honest tugboat company in the US. EMD engines. Bollard pole. Cajun horsepower, more advertised horsepower. Different types of tugboats. Quality and power differences in tugboats. Z Drive favorite tugboats for captains. Starting building E end in 2005. Powerful class of tugboats called Z Techs. Built a particular type of tugboat keeping in mind the expansion of both the Panama canal and the Houston Ship channel. To help facilitate the bringing n of bigger ships. 00:35:05 Ships are the same, the only diff is slightly larger set of tankers. Tugboat requires more horsepower. Instead of steam, they are run on diesel. The tech to do things has changed. Have the most innovative, dispatching and tugboat logging compared to any other place in the US. Estimated the AIS transponders. Automated all the dispatching. Job comes in by email. Everything is set up with a touch screen. Tremendous improvement for efficiency. Have been able to go back and learn from mistakes. 00:42:19 Have to make sure the employee is well qualified. Cant take anyone off the streets, equipment is very expensive. Going form old conventional tug boats, to driving a new tugboats that are operated with joysticks has been a real pleasure. Kids who grow up playing video games very often prove to be good with driving the tugboat. 00:45:35  Older guys have seen it all before and know ways to get out of it. If they are on a new tech boat, wont know how to use the Tech to get out of it. Z drives are very maneuverable. Can get one in and out of trouble. Have not piloted any of the tugs. Have captained one of the fastest freights in history but license says am qualified to drive any gross tons upon ocean. But acc to US. Coastguard not qualified to drive the tugboats. Have a TOAR - Towing officers assessment rating - needs to be filled out for a tugboat. Need to be supervised by a tugboat operator for 3-6 months. Is a safety measure. A lot of regulations were added after the Queen Isabella and the I-40 accidents. 00:48:12 All tugs are names after the family members. All members of the Hayden family. Christenings are fun. Have been short and sweet. Have been to them since 1995. Three as guests and four with Bay Houston. Have held them at Bay Houston. After Ike, have held them at Pier 21. 00:51:23 Important things at a Christening are the prayer and breaking the bottle of champagne on the side of the side of the boat, by the person it is named after. The Greeks would pour olive oil, grain and wine over the bow. Seamen are very superstitious. Don’t like sailing in a boat that is not christened. 00:53:08 Tugboats for many years were just an engine and a propeller with a rudder on the end. Ballord is a great big piling on a dock. That model was working nicely until people started doubting the horsepower. In US, measure in pounds what a tugboat is pulling. Only tugboat company to pull and measure every tugboat in the fleet. Can change how much a tugboat pulls by changing the propeller etc. Have to play around a little till the right combination works. 00:58:31 Do it for certification, not a public demonstration. Have to get the ballord poles certified by a committee. It is a demonstration for the industry members. It is a way to ensure that they are doing what they say they will be doing. 01:00:35 5 tugs on Corpus Christi, 2 tugs in Freeport, remaining in Galveston Bay. One of the strengths of the company, can shift them depending on where they are needed. 2 of the largest ports are in the country are in Galveston bay, Houston is the biggest port in the US. More ships coming to Houston than anywhere else in the country. When the numbers come out for across the country, the ports are all listed as port complexes. Eg. New York New Jersey. New Orleans has 43 ports, but Galveston is listed as 3 ports. Skews the statistics and hurts when money needs to be dredged up. The Houston Port complex has  43% more ships than anywhere else in the US. 9000 ships compared to 4000+ ships anywhere else. 01:03:30 Largest port in the US. Serve 3 of the 6 largest ports in the US Houston, Texas City and Corpus Christi. More economical for tugs to just dock and undock. Tie up the lines under the ship and tug it round or into position. Dock it in a slip, let the ship tie up and then leave. When they are ready to go, go help them out again. Provide an escort which is an extra rudder for the ship. ((Phone rings, Pause tape)) ((RESUME)) All the company does is dock and undock and provide harbor services. Shift a ship from one port to another. Do not do offshore towing, Have a good harbor tug fleet. Area provide company and have contracts with a lot of people. Shipping world is fairly small, so ships that come in either have a contract with the company already or with the competitor. 01:08:25 Maritime education - are the largest port complex in the US. Back until 4 years ago there was no maritime education in any school or college. Changes in licensing have resulted in not being able to take kids off the streets and turn them into tugboat captains. Have tried to get school districts in the Houston area to acknowledge the existence of the port in Houston and create awareness. Did a career day in LaPorte Junior High, 4-5 years ago. Out of a 120 7th graders only 5 knew that there was a port in Houston. only 2 out 5 teachers were aware of the port in town. Need to change that. Need to get awareness and change licensing regulations. Were able to take a kid of the street and get him a license in 18 months. Lost that pipeline and things got desperate for a while. Have partnered with the Houston Pilots and the Port of Houston Authority. Port of Houston has sponsored to maritime academies in Austin high school and Yates High school. San Jacinto college district has put together a Maritime program. Will build a Maritime and Technology Center. Have great courses already. Houston is leading the nation in Maritime education but still a lot more can be done. 2 years ago statistics show that 785,000 jobs were generated by the port. 01:12:04 9/11 has made many changes to access and availability of the port. Regulations were so tight couldn't go see tugs down at the dock. Biggest problem on the manning side was the coastguard's focus completely disappeared from licensing to security and for almost a decade just ignored the regulating side. Tugboats need to be regulated. TWIC card to even work on the tugboat. A lot of people that work on tugs are 3rd and 4th generation. Almost like a family job. 01:15:09  By partnering with the port of Houston Authority. Started recognizing around 2004 that it was getting difficult to crew the tugboats. Members of the Texas waterways Operators assoc. Made a proposal to them to set up an education committee to convince people to study and take up jobs at the port. In 2005 TWA set up a committee and headed it. Started with Galveston college and was a dismal failure. The East End Rotary Club expressed interest. Pilots have been active in this endeavor. Need to coordinate all the independent efforts into one effort.  
PortHouston;Harold Schaffer;1936;2011;Harold Schaffer, 1936, 2011   HAROLD SHAFFER Summary: Harold Schaffer, longshoreman shares with Betsy Peterson his experiences of working on the waterfront, his step father’s influence on his life, his own tryst with politics and how Labor Day does not hold the same meaning now as it did back then. 00.00 Betsy Peterson at the Offices International Longshoreman’s Association, Webster, TX Harold Schaffer, Sept 8, 2011 00.35 Born 1936, Honey Grove TX. Moved to Houston at age 3. Lived across the road from the Union Hall. Gang foreman would use money earned to drink. Could not say much against the gang foreman as would be labelled a radical and not get a job. Labor unions used to march down Main Street. Stepfather had 40+ years on the water. Cotton jammer and cotton screwer are same thing. Cotton was piece work. At 21 years old, went to work longshore and Cotton job. Also worked general cargo in the hold. Quartering time. Stepfather only worked cotton. Was also a great influence in his life. 16.25 Got involved in the port through step-father. Was cotton jammer the whole time. Would work in the hold. Went down to the port at 19 years. Needed a job. Got to carry 7-8 bags in a load. Did 35-40 tons in an hour. Unloaded cattle, on the hoof. Did not have a pension plan earlier. Had to set about creating one. One of the few industries that has not cut back on pension checks. 22.00 Rule of the dock, could not work a ship. Had a 180 days strike in the 60s. Back then, stevedores wanted to break the union. Started working grain boats, and then progressed to steel, general cargo, heavy lifts, etc. Had to make sure there was equipment to work all these jobs. Broke the strike this way. Worked 120 hrs a week for 5 years. 30.00 Started out working in the hold. Stepfather did not want him to work on the waterfront. Grew up knowing only longshoreman. In Houston could get turnkey jobs. Loaded the Western Hunter, biggest ship to ever leave the Port of Houston. The biggest grain load. Was a gear-man. Used to supply all materials that people are going to need, what would work, keep aside, load them and take to the venue. Gear-men were not part of gangs. Gear belonged to the company - Stevedore. Work has been extremely good. Had a turnbuckle accident and lost the tip of finger. Had another accident and twisted back. Retired after foot accident (shows foot and scars). Year later had triple bypass.  40.15 Been politically active over the years. Believe strongly in the democratic party. Wife worked for Congressman. Wife was President of the Ladies Auxilliary Charter number 1. Their job was to take care of the men. When on strike, ladies got donations from nearby establishments to feed the men. Walking foreman handled the ship. Superintendent also present. Nowadays superintendent tells the walking foreman, gang foreman and the individuals what to do. Superintendents are from the company. Took all the power away from locals. 49.00 "We had the biggest bunch of misfits that ever gathered under one roof." Everybody had a different personality, different beliefs, different religions. "But when we went down and got on that ship, we came together and gave them as good a workforce as they could have possibly ever trained. " Trained each other. "Hang the whip." 54.20 Loved working under Ralph Langrez - best walking foreman. Jack Hashem best gang foreman.. Had the respect of everybody. 57.50 Everybody would hang out at bars together after work. Did get along with management. 1.02.22 Worked containers. Agreement "no retiree is allowed one red cent from container royalty." Container royalty came in to replace man hours. Been retired 24 years. Should stand up for retirees and working people. Have not had a raise in anything in the past two years. Still trying to promote the ILA. Son is a longshoreman. Harold and Terry both sons work at the port. Checkers job - "bunch of prima donnas" 1.10.00 1979 ran for state Rep. Ran against Mike Jackson. He won by 8% of the points. Interested in the labor movement. Easier to campaign for somebody else than it is for oneself. Father wouldn't even go to union meetings. Son Harold is at the ILA. Terry was at fire department for 22 years. Retired with $3000 a month and went back to work at checkers local. Worked for a year and ran for business agent. 1.17.12 Business agent calls people about available jobs. Union used to be a lot stronger. Saw labor's strength on Labor Day. Would walk down Main street hand in hand. Did not come to barbecues. 1.20.23  Could blame our leadership for Labor Day not holding any importance for this generation. Was raised on waterfront. Pollution in Deer Park from companies. Container ships can be unloaded and reloaded in 48 hours. 1.25.31 Before containerization loading and unloading would take a 7-10 days and ships would remain for so long. 16- 18 men on one ship. Now, three gangs, ten men to a gang. Loading and unloading almost unreal. 1.26.37 Can work with non union people for one tenth of union employees. Conditions, benefits, wages difference in wages. If there was no insurance and only had to pay a wage with no pension plan, cuts payroll way back. 1.28.30 TAPE ENDS PREMATURELY (Subject continues talking but tape stopped unexpectedly) 
PortHouston;Hank and Townsend Hilliard;1950;2012;Hank and Townsend Hilliard, 1950, 2012  HENRY (HANK) HILLIARD and TOWNSEND HILLIARD 2012-10-26 SUMMARY: Hank and Townsend Hilliard talk to Pat Jasper about innovation, experimentation and creating a tank degassing system that is good for the environment. Hank also talks about consolidation and the roadblocks when trying to get a patent. Hank’s son Townsend talks about strict government regulations and the effect of 9/11 on business. Offices - Purgit Emission Control. 3100 Edloe St, Feb 17, 2012 00:43:00 Grandfather came from Lloyds of London to join the port of Houston to join Adams and Porter Insurance. Knew how to write insurance for cotton cargo. Had racing sailboats on Galveston Bay. Father grew up among these race boats and learnt to navigate them. Father joined coastguards in WW2. Was youngest Lieutenant Commander on a destroyer during WW2. After war bought property on San Jacinto River and wanted to do something with the Marine industry. Bought a number of acres of property. Built a barge repair yard named it Southwestern Barge Fleet Service. Attention was to fleet, barges, and then began repairing barges. Barges would carry steel pipes or coal. Bought a dry dock. started cleaning barges and built a dock to clean them. Started out as a welder's helper. People would dock chemical barges that required cleaning.. Came to work on the shipyard in 1970-72, had 10 men on steel repair, 3-5 people on barge cleaning. Helped them at the cleaning docks, Cleaned all sorts of barges. Acetone barge, gasoline barges. By 1980, had a boiler and could hot water wash and clean. Can remember cleaning cyanide barges. Developed technique called the Noah's Ark method. In the 90s, air controller board said another way has to be found to control the gases. 00:08:44 Left the shipyard in the 90s to start own business doing vapor control as a service. Patented a technique to displace the vapors out of the barge with CO2 and push them to a flare. Could not get anybody interested in the process. To demonstrate, needed a flare and a CO2 vaporizer and CO2 tank. People were interested in flaring. If a tank as heavy oil, fill the tank up and get the air out, no air to burn so weld the tank and would not have to clean it. Competition used nitrogen gas. Rotated into doing more flaring. Found an old vapor recovery unit from Texaco loading unit. Bought an old refrigerator that ran on Freon that had good condensers. Could condense cargo out of air. Condensate was liquid gasoline which could be put back into a tank. Non condensable could be put back into the unit. Virtually no emissions from equipment. Built own equipment. Do a lot of cargo that cannot be burned. Competition uses combustion systems. Problem with combustion is a constant source of ignition. Always an exhaust tank. Do work for sophisticated tank owners. Work on chlorinated solvents. Mother's side were sugarcane farmers.  00:15:29 Mechanic and a little bit of an engineer. More of a mechanic. Will get a call from customer who wants a job done, no patience to meet with customers. Middle son, Townsend is a good salesman. Good team. Townsend finds job and talks to customer. Keep equipment on Brady's island in a warehouse on the Houston ship channel. (Pause) (Resume) 00:18:16 Keep vapor condenser on Brady's island. Nitrogen truck that holds liquid nitrogen for the refrigerant and flares. Have two employees and take the condenser out and setup the hoses that connect to the tank. Sometimes job has to go on around the clock. Liquid nitrogen is connected and the gas starts circulating out of the tank, through the condenser and back to the tank. Get the gas cold steadily and it begins to condense just like a room air conditioner would condense water. Cargo vapors gas back to liquid and come out via a pump to a storage tank. Tank degassing. Can control the emissions. 00:23:23 There was no way to recover vapors or stop emissions at the shipyard. Process is environment friendly. Use liquid nitrogen. Evaporates when it spills. 4 man operation. Small office. Want to expand business. 00:26:36 Born in 1950 in Houston. Dad was born in Houston too. Moved to River Oaks in the 1930s. Lived over by Memorial Park. Have three children. Eldest son is the banker. Middle son works as sales for the company and youngest son is a petroleum engineer. Went to Southwestern Univ. and then South Texas Junior college. North-wood institute. Univ. of Texas. Would do $40,000-50,000 of business in a month. At the shipyard did a lot of different things. Did Gas freeing differently from other people. 00:31:57 Do something enough number of times you will find a better way to do it. Both with barge cleaning business and condenser. Condenser used to work in three chambers. Used Freon to chill. To get freon to chill down to -100 degrees F is very hard. Expensive. Took the Freon part off. Solve problem of ice building up on the parts. Delivering version three of the equipment to Taiwan. 00:36:12 "Wanted to do something on my own" Started accompanying father right out of college at 27 years old. Worked together and lived a few blocks apart. as a kid went down and helped sweep the hubber barges. Then no life jackets and no hard hats. Then dad had only three or four people working. Used to work till the barge was clean.  00:41:14 Back in father's time, on Market street there was a competitor shipyard named Murrel Griswal. Had a boat service. They did barge fleeting. On the other side of the property was Slim Muscrow. Was a crane operator and a boat operator. Was a plane pilot but without a license. He got a helicopter once. Pilot died in mid air. Had to successfully land a helicopter without knowing how to. Dad was a dog lover and had a least 10-12 dogs in the shipyard. All worked as guard dogs for the shipyard. 00:49:48 During a hurricane or inclement weather, water would rise up and pose a big problem as all equipment was on the ground so would try to get as much stuff up as we could. Water would be waist deep. 00:51:07 Could make a living pushing barges up and down the canal. Cannot do that anymore. Consolidation. Niche of tank degassing is expanding. Just the fact that there is so little pollution and that we do it safer, it will catch on. There is this concentrated gas in the tank and the control device can only handle a certain number of DTUs per min or hour. And it computes that the gas in the tank can go through this control device in the amount of time that they claim. Can get around it by where they measure the gas concentration. Our method is verifiable. 00:55:14 Patenting is tough because it needs a lot of money to get done. Have only short 17 year patent window where there is protection. Have opted for the patent technique. Have patents for the process low tank, vapor condensing system and patents pending for other aspects of the tank degassing business. Pleased with progress. Matter of funds. TOWNSEND HILLIARD 00:59:14 While the waterfront was developing, regulations always got in the way. Permits and industrial services. Swamped daily trying to find out about what the government has written about the business. Painfully clear that regulators do not understand the work. Been very discouraging. So inexperienced, yet so necessary. Pollutants get little attention. Can make more money while doing it. Need a good regulating authority. 01:03:00 Motivated mostly because see it is a better way to do work. Cleaner system. 01:04:35 There are two types of customers. Type 1 has been doing this work for over ten years. Type 2 customers don't do this work very often. When they do they have an unbiased opinion and go into the business looking for the best available technique. Real easy to sell  to them. Impossible to sell to the others. Some refineries choose to go with the lesser model completely aware of the consequences. Frustrating process since they are the most logical consumers of the product. 01:08:21 Not a small business. Customers have millions of dollars worth of storage tanks. Major refiners and major mid stream groups. Rule inhibits group that has better technology. Inhibits growth and development in pollutant free sector. Have made it difficult to participate in business. Very frustrating process. 01:11:38 Used to work on the waterfront when in high school during summer vacation, weekends. Summers worked as a hand in the field, dragging hoses. Learnt from the bottom up on the contractors side. Trying to find interested parties for the product. The greatest application for the product is storage tank degassing. Major oil groups neglect the maintenance aspect of their job. Know about the advantages. But at the mercy of the regulatory groups. 80-90% of companies would not be doing this work if not for the environmental restrictions. 01:15:07 Texas A&M, interned with the Astros. Worked for a commercial real estate group in San Antonio for a few years. Joined father's business and helping him ever since.. Degree is in History and Anthropology. 01:16:54 Maintenance group has to deal with a lot of salesman. Tricky and difficult for everyone. Many public forums to publicize the new technique. But they are all a sham. Big refineries will pay to have public forum in big trade shows. But they are not really interested. 01:21:05 Impact of 9/11 on business. Back then, could drive right on to southwest barge, park anywhere, heavy equipment always had the key in it. Was very open deal. Now need secondary IDs, need background checks to be done before using marine equipment. Have a transportation worker ID. Perceived safety process that are put into place in these maintenance facilities. Safety at these places is where it was before. 01:23:30 Might get regulated out of business if we don't become big fast enough. Rules keep changing. Could get passed up completely. 
PortHouston;Gordie Keenan;xxxx;2012;Gordie Keenan, xxxx, 2012  AFC 2012/006: 00334 Gordie Keenan interview conducted by Anthony G. Potoczniak 2012-08-29 [0:00] Introducing Gordie Keenan (GK), Vice President of Training at Higman Marine Services. [Interviewer incorrectly states date as Wednesday, August 30 -- the actual date of interview was Wednesday, August 29.] [0:27] GK describes his youth: born in Norfolk, VA, later moved to Rochester, NY, where he attended a Jesuit High School, and matriculated at New York Maritime College (NYC, Bronx)  describes decision to study at the college as one of the luckiest moments of his life. [3:00] Outlines his time at the college as an engineering student  during summers, he sailed on the school ship for extended periods of time: As a mug (freshman) got all the dirty jobs. Explains how mentoring by upperclassman influenced the training process of young cadets. [6:55] GKs post-graduation period described: started career as a third ranking engineer on a newly commissioned Exxon oil tanker  describes the tankers historical trip from Houston, TX, to Valdez, AK, which took 50-days  10-year sailing career with Exxon, worked up to Sr. Engineer status. Transitioned to special projects in the company  in 1986, stationed in Baton Rouge on a two-year-turned- permanent assignment to head their repair department for an inland fleet of towboats. [11:02] Came to Houston permanently in 1991, Exxon asked to come to Houston to work in the business development side of the industry specializing in the towboats. [12:21] Provides insight into the towboat industry: shares impression (shock) of how different it was working on a towboat, noticed that it was like coming into somebody’s house...don’t have to worry about being seasick. [15:18] Describes the port at Baton Rouge, an ocean going port, much smaller than the Port of Houston (POH). [16:15] Moves a 2nd time to Houston in 2005: worked before with a private towing company Ten Tom  shares experience of running the operations of a small company, which was later bought out by large Texas company, became very active in the Houston Yacht Club  [17:35] GK describes how he joined Higman Marine Services, Inc. (currently employed)  GK was asked to run the personnel side of the business  Higman Services is a small company, which grew very fast from 27 towboats in 2005, to 60 boats in 2012  [20:43] GK talks about the influence of the Houston Yacht Club (HYC), and his association with the club and provides overview of its long history with POH business leaders. GK describes the club as a wonderful community and the important function it serves for networking at the POH  1  AFC 2012/006: 00334 explains the benefits of being a member of the HYC  different activities, such as sailing camp  leadership opportunities, such as serving on the board, HYC is one of the gems of Houston. [25:43] GK talks about HMS and its services, as well as what types of jobs are available at the company: it’s a towboat company, which owns its towboats (currently 60)  the geography of its services is wide: rivers, bays and sounds. Describes how a towboat works: power unit that pushes barges, petroleum barges. GK details how new hires move up in the company: from deckhand, tankerman, steersman, pilot, relief captain, to captain. [34:25] HMS is proactive in promoting from inside: new hires are selected with the goal of getting them into the wheelhouse. Hire deckhands, to potentially to become leaders. GK discusses the benefits and challenges of recruiting employees: It’s a hidden industry, and hard to find people. Some employees follow family tradition. Typically, people find out by word of mouth. Currently HMS has approximately 400 employees. [38:55] Addresses the tradition of naming boats at HMS: a lot of boats in their fleet with employees names, a tradition that goes back to the era of the steamboat. GK talks about how Higman names its boats. [42:46] Discusses the process of building teams for each new boat that comes online. HMS has grown from 27 to 60 boats  captains are assigned to new boats based on merit, relief captains are promoted to captain  often the captain will take his crew to the new boat  discusses how HMS trains and develop leadership skills within the organization  team building is at the core of HMS training. [48:07] Discusses the significance of safety and an incident-free environment on a boat, which is important to running a smooth operation  customers often track this information  culture of professionalism has changed dramatically in the last 30-35 years. [50:23] GK shares a perspective on events that caused changes to occur in the maritime industry  discusses the Valdez incident: Besides an ecological disaster, Valdez incident was the most important thing that happened to this industry worldwide, not just in the US. Addresses how the incident reformed the industry in a positive way. [53:34] Addresses question about the importance of emerging technologies in the towboat industry  GK states the biggest gain has been in communications  compares earlier period of operations with the present  all boats at HMS are connected to the Internet  on-board computers run computer-based training software  GK believes is has become easier to communicate with the boat thanks to how cellular technologies have evolved. [58:04] GK discusses how in spite of the improvements in navigation and electronic charting systems, pilots still require solid training and skills to steer a boat and barge: You go back to the Mark Twain days, they were then called pilots, and it’s because they have to use their senses 2  AFC 2012/006: 00334 and skills and knowledge -- their intimate knowledge of the waterway, to be able to maneuver the tow. [59:38] HMS incorporates peer-to-peer mentoring into its training model. Experienced retirees still oversee the certification process at HMS. GK provides the example of Capt. Pete, who worked in the organization 48 years, who evaluates pilots and captains. [1:02:46] Discussion of the HMS routes and services: POH is only one small part of the towing operations, which extend regionally: Our tows go to Brownsville to Houston up to Chicago. [1:06:27] GK explains how the crew changes occur in their operations: crews come to Houston and commute to their crew change sites either by truck (Brownville, New Orleans) or by plane (Chicago). [1:09:48] GK describes the different media used to train employees, from CBT, the bi-weekly newsletter called The Tow Line, and email. The newsletter contains topical information including lessons learned from an incident in the organization or industry. [1:12:35] Additional description of the newsletter The Tow Line and its function in the organization as an additional organizational training tool  GK explains how ideas for articles and stories are developed. [1:18:37] Outlines procedures of how the HMS headquarter offices work with the boats and captains during natural disasters, provides several examples of how these moments are incorporated into the training of employees. [1:26:05] GK outlines the range of communication styles with HMS employees, and describes his philosophy in sharing information as an instructional tool: I take a logical approach with the guys...simple but concise. [1:30:24] The final question describes an area that GK is very passionate about: working with San Jacinto College to develop a Maritime School. He describes the POH as a huge dynamic engine in the community, which is often not recognized by everyone  GK hopes the school will offset this by raising awareness in the community and increase the educational level of the younger workforce, and inspire students to pursue opportunities at the POH. [1:34:16] Conclusion of interview 3   
PortHouston;Gilda Ramirez;xxxx;2012;Gilda Ramirez, xxxx, 2012,   GILDA RAMIREZ SUMMARY: Gilda Ramirez talks to Pat Jasper about her life and influences, her journey from being adopted and brought up by her grandparents to living in Magnolia Park and watching the Port while she grew up only to eventually work there. Gilda explains how everyone living in Magnolia Park is linked to the ship channel and how in turn the ship channel is a giant economic engine. PORT OF HOUSTON AUTHORITY JUNE 19, 2012 00:00:00 Native Houstonian. Was born out of wedlock. Father was away at college "was referred to as prison for those people whose father or parents are not with them." Adopted by grandparents. Grandfather worked at the docks. Had 9 children of their own. Adopted sister also. Often go back to the old house to feel rooted and be reminded of background. Had a very caring and loving childhood. Had exposure to the port authority early on. Earliest memory was going to customs to pick up uncles or brothers when they were clearing customs when they came through on a ship. A lot of family members involved with the port. Lot of memories associated with the port. Got gifts from all over the world. Have got Dutch wooden shoes, masks form Africa, horse hair bracelet. Proud to be part of the history of Magnolia. Was amazed at all the different things that come through the port. Proud that family was so involved with the port. Remember grandfather having union meetings at home. Strategies, how they were going to vote. Recognized the importance of union and labor and what that meant to families with jobs. Families in Magnolia park are somehow related to the port authority because the port is the economic engine of the region. Knew that as a child. 00:08:14 Do remember father being a member of the ILA. Would engage and invite others to participate. Were concerned about hourly rates, pensions. Wanted to make sure that they would be paid fairly. Made sure Workers right were addressed and there was a safe place to work. Before containerization, people could legally bring home goods that were busted. Can remember stories about how food was stretched with those goods. Brother/uncles also worked on the port. One in merchant marine. Once well enough to own property, always rented to migrant workers. rented at lower than market value. Father was very proud of the fact that he was part of the ILA. Went back even after retirement. POrt was exposure to a much larger world. 00:14:40  Grandfather was born on the King ranch near the valley. His parents worked that ranch. Parents/grandparents met and married in Austin. Moved to Magnolia Park because of the port and because they heard that there were jobs. Oldest sister worked on an assembly line during Depression when it was unusual for women to work. "Hustle and bustle" along the waterfront. Were warned not to go there. Prostitution existed. Other illegal activities. Would like to see the area revitalized. 00:19:56 Remember one brother working for Caterpillar. Lot of the pieces of equipment came from the docks. Remember associating the smell of oil with money. Brothers always had a roll of money on Fridays. neighbors also had the smell and the wad of money, Able to run the small business development program at job at the Port. Would love to see the same opportunities given to others. To have the port in the backyard as an economic engine is very important to the city. Everyone living in Magnolia Park is somehow linked to the port. 00:26:14 Mother had to give me away. She also lived a very colorful life. Raised by grandparents, Sister was also a huge influence. Had an entrepreneurial streak since childhood. Wanted to do something that involved traveling and seeing the world. At 14 sister and her husband moved back to Houston from California and opened a jewelry store. Worked with sister and brother in law, counting silver. Hands get all dirty and messy. Learnt very quickly that couldn't have a dirty job. Was available to do other things around the office. Worked there through high school. Were not good at manual labor. Both went to college. South West Texas University. grandfather passed away when she was 14, biological father at 15. Came back to Houston in the summer and started working at Metro as a receptionist Made $16,000 a year and was very happy. Was able to finish school at night. Father's interest in the union caught on. Watched him campaign and strategize. yard signs were always about support the local union. Drove her to love government relations and get involved in politics. Majored in public admin. Worked in the community relations group in POrt Authority. before that was a receptionist at Metro, customer service, supervisor, business development, director of govt. affairs and community relations. Opportunity to start a small business prog from the beginning. Want to continue to grow. Small business development prog has been very successful. Have a port university for small business, offer them training In addition to the contracts they are able to get, look for creative ways to give back to the community. Also have a maritime academy prog. Get to go back to the high school and have about 500 kids in the maritime academy prog. Reach is beyond La Porte, Deer park etc. Work closely with HCC and San Jacinto college. Negotiated with San Jacinto and building a Maritime building in the campus. 00:43:13  When first started the program did a lot of outreach. Get a lot of people interested in doing business with the port authority. Think of the port as a city within a city, go out and procure all the needs. Everything from designing a building to constructing to interiors and transporting goods and services - there are all these opportunities at the port. Have monthly forums for the small businesses. Explain processes - procurement, advertising, speech writers - all kinds of resources are available for small businesses. Can help small businesses realize that just by being in the program doesn't necessarily mean the port authority will want to do business with them but can get good contacts and network. Do have a large directory of the 150 tenants along the ship channel. 00:48:48 Have a mentoring program where small businesses are paired with similar business that are large prime contractors. Provide the directory and introducing them to contacts,that is the purview. Encourage all small business to attend pre proposal meetings so they can meet and pair with another firm that is submitting a proposal for a particular job. Work very closely with chambers of commerce. Help with economic developments. Help us reach their membership. 00:52:05 Small business participation. Since inception in 2002, program has generated and given back to the community $344 million or 41% of all eligible spent going back to the local community. Program is race and gender neutral. Anyone who meets the SBA size standards can participate. 00:53:39 Believe parents had fled Mexico because of the turmoil and had moved to a better life in US. He was adopted and raised by his aunt so not much info available. Originally from Mexico but don't know how many generations back. 00:57:11 Growing up as Catholic, importance of religion was always instilled. Bar on Navigation called Coco Loco. Would walk to Sears. There were some very early Hispanic business owners. Fondest memories as a child, is spending Easter in Mason Park with al the families and the Easter Egg hunt. Small family things associated with celebration and with the port. Family did many things that were tied directly to the port. 01:02:19 Fundraisers for the seamen. Wrap christmas gifts for seamen so they would have something to open on Christmas day. Fr. Patout has been very involved in seamen church and opportunities for them. 01:04:33  As a child just watched father and a couple of colleagues at the house and because it was predominantly Hispanic, don't remember seeing any segregation. 01:06:53 Cant live very far away from Magnolia Park. Keep coming back. Ability to connect people with others, have those friendships and to be able to have a job that aids in doing that. 01:10:37 IDlewood neighborhood was predominantly white. Older homes. Always been very industrious and resourceful. The deed restrictions still said non Hispanics (Mexicans), non caucasians were not allowed to live in that neighborhood. Took it to the civic club and got it changed in 92-94. Predominantly anglo. All the family members have worked in social services. All give back to the community mainly because of how they were raised. Been blessed to have been raised by grandparents. Have experienced unique opportunities and exposure at the Port Authority. 
PortHouston;Gilbert Martinez;1975;2012;Gilbert Martinez, 1975, 2012,    Log – G. MARTINEZ - 09-26-2012 [00:02] Recorded 09-26-2012 at the home of Gilbert Martinez, Houston, Texas. [00:06] Gilbert Martinez [GM] born 08-27-1975 Aransas Pass, TX. Lived in Rockport until high school graduation. Father, Gilbert Sr. was a shrimper  stepfather, Mike Campbell, owned a fisherman’s supply in Aransas Pass. His extended family was all shrimpers. [03:59] Father was against him being a fisherman, but [GM,SR.] moved to Virginia when [GM] was a boy. They remained close. [06:10] After graduation [GM] visited uncle, Hector Saucedo, a tugboat captain in Hawaii who helped him enroll in the Maritime Training School, Tongue Point in Astoria, Oregon. He graduated in ’95 with a deck rating as an Able Bodied Seaman. [11:21] It was first time away from home. His 1st job was with Hornbeck Offshore out of Port Aransas on the Canonaro, a supply boat for offshore oil rigs. The Captain, Dana Dyer, took him under his wing. [17:36] Next job was on an Oil Response Boat in Galveston to deal with oil spills. Joined the Seafarer’s International Union and hired on with Moran Towing for 30 days on a tanker, Shelia Moran, going to Florida. Tool a full time job on the Doris Moran, a gas barge and tug working the Gulf and up the east coast. Chief Engineer, Wallace “Scooter”Ashwood, worked w/[GM] to get his Mate’s License and became the 2nd Mate on the ‘Doris.’ [29:43] Took an interest in tug assist boats used in ports to help vessels dock. Got relief work with G&H Towing in Corpus. Left Moran for full time job w/G&H as a wheelman on tug in the Houston Ship Channel where he moved with future wife, Allison. [41:23] Moved thru the 6 classes of tugs to Z drives, the most advanced. Became Captain after 4 yrs. In May ’07 while working a Z drive tug, the Shannon, was voted in to Houston Pilots. Because he worked tugs, [GM] had not sailed a ship. [48:41] Captain Luna, Houston Pilot, encouraged him to apply and helped move the process along at the Pilot’s Association. For [GM’S] 3 yr. apprenticeship as a deputy pilot was assigned to Captain Barkley his Master to oversee training. Got 1st Class Captain’s License for the Port of Houston after 30 transits (round trips) of the Ship Channel and a 90 testing period. This rigorous test required 6 month’s of his living at home and his son and wife living in Rockport to make the studying possible. [59:33] To learn piloting the ships [GM] rode with Pilots 18 months before piloting on his own. At 1st 1000 ft. tankers were intimidating. For the final 18 months he piloted without observation on limited tonnage vessels. On his time off he piloted larger ships under observation, including car ships, container ships, crew tankers and oversize tankers. His trip with Captain Pizzatola on an Exxon 5 docking taught  him the value learning from one’s mistakes. This shaped [GM’s] approach to training Deputy Pilot’s today. [1:16:14] Among the people who were inspirations to [GM] are: Hector Saucedo who helped him when starting his career, Wallace “Scooter” Ashwood, who helped him get licensed as an officer, Charlie Tuck and Bill Palmer who supported him on becoming a Houston Pilot, and finally his wife Allison who has supported him throughout his career of working a demanding schedule. [1:19:02] End of recording – Characters with spaces: 3,217. 
PortHouston;George Larrimer;xxxx;2012;George Larrimer, xxxx, 2012,   AFC 2012/006: 00331 George Larrimer interview conducted by Anthony G. Potoczniak 2012-08-01 [0:25] George Larrimer, born in Jefferson City, MO, lived in Columbia, MO until 6 years old  father forced to join the service again to pay for hospital bills of deceased wife  later moved to San Antonio, TX, stationed at Fort Sam, moved to Ethiopia for 2 1/2 years. Describes time spent in Ethiopia, father loved boats, spent two years building 16-foot boat. [2:58] Life in Houston: attended Robert Lee High School in Baytown, Texas  later joined the US Coast Guard. Describes several early assignments. [3:53] Shares first impressions of visiting the fireboat "Captain Cortty," at the Port of Houston [POH]. GL joined as a marine firefighter. Served on the f/b "Farnsworth," and other f/bs. [5:03] Outlines the historical development of the POH Marine Fire Dept., and evolving firefighting technologies: from "put the wet stuff on the red stuff" to the introduction of a new HazMat unit: in the days when I came on, the solution to pollution was dilution. [7:57] Describes early training of marine fire fighters  recounts his transition from a US Coast Guard to a marine fire fighter. [10:09] Shares a terrifying experience in the U.S. Coast Guard: you only see two things: sky and water...you don’t see the horizon [13:13] Recalls his first fire at the Houston Ship Channel: an explosion at the Goodpasture Grain Elevator (Feb, 1976). [15:47] Describes story about a fire on the Philippine ship Corregidor, which had on-board unexpected cargo of small arms ammunition  underscores firefighting philosophy: Can we put water on this? [18:08] Describes the typical day at the marine fire station: much of the time spent servicing and maintaining the f/b Farnsworth. [20:03] Explains the growth of the fire dept.: from one boat to three, and why it was necessary to have the minimum of two fireboats servicing the ship channel at all times. [22:51] Describes other POH organizations and their collaboration during accidents and fires, such as at the Intercontinental terminal. It’s a maritime thing -- you’re there to help each other. [27:33] Outlines the typical day at the firehouse. [31.37] Shares marine firefighters’ story of patrolling the channel and discovering a potentially disastrous fire: It’s a matter of timing [...] bad things could have happened. [33:21] Details the challenges of responding to a call and getting to a fire in the channel: quoting Wild Bill Hickok: at a gunfight you take your time as fast as you can. The same thing [with fighting fires at the Ship Channel]. Whenever we get a fire, we pretty much pull out the stops right there.  AFC 2012/006: 00331 [38:35] Explains the practice of securing a fireboat during hurricanes. [40:57] Compares the other fire departments and how they work together, and the function of the US Coast Guard. [45:02] Describes the work schedule of marine firefighters: 24 hours on/ 48 hours off. [49:11] Describes his hobby of creating maritime woodwork, how he began making and selling his artwork, and how he first became interested in maritime art after visiting the Maritime Museum in Mystic Harbor, Ct. Recalls first artworks sold. [58:05] History of the f/b Captain Farnsworth, which was built in 1973, and how GL restored the pilots wheel house: The Farnsworth needed a facelift and we gave it to her. [1:01:55] GL describes decision to become a marine fireman, and how his career developed. [1:03:55] The historical formation of fire stations and their locations on the Houston Ship Channel. [1:05:26] Overview of the staffing and work schedule at a fire station. Most calls are HAZMAT related. [1:10:34] Describes all-nighters, when an emergency goes beyond a 24-hour shift. [1:15:00] Explains mixing the pie: a common practice of borrowing firefighters from other stations. [1:18:13] GL compares the career opportunities for today’s firefighter. [1:23:22] Recounts the day-to-day activities of the MFD and the function it performs. [1:27:42] Conclusion. 
PortHouston;Fr. Rivers Patout, Chaplain and Catholic priest;1938;2010;Fr. Rivers Patout, Chaplain and Catholic priest, 1938, 2010,   RIVERS PATOUT Summary: Fr. Rivers Patout, Chaplain and Catholic priest talks to Pat Jasper about setting up the first secular Seafarers Center to provide seafarers with a better quality of life. He discusses learning on the job, cultural clashes, language barriers and the strict laws regarding stowaways. He also talks about how technology has drastically reduced ship crew which has contributed to a sharp decline in the number of people at the seafarer center. 00:00 Interviewer Pat Jasper, Interviewee Father Rivers Patout. At the International Seafarers in Houston. July 26, 2010 Born on the island. Father had masters from Harvard but did not want to work in Navasota so moved to Galveston to work. Moved later to Houston and got his CPA and then dutifully went back to Navasota. First job was at the store selling clothes. Also did some beekeeping. Had to sell honey for allowance. Wanted to go to Catholic School after graduating high school. Picked Notre Dame. Went to become a lawyer, businessman but changed to Philosophy the first week. Graduated and worked in the seminary in Houston. Ordained in 1976. First assignment was at Port - Blessed Sacrament. Had stereotyped the workers. On the contrary the workers are all family oriented men who were tolerant of every religion and race. Was first Catholic priest to join high coast international counselor seafarers agency. first to offer a school and medical facilities. chaplain training school. Fortunate to have a number of people interested. Number of socialites offered help. First president was a Belgian who had seen deprivation of the sea in his early days. Terrible food. believed in giving seafarers a better life. If seafarers have a place where they can complain about their job, they become better workers. 12:10 Had swimming pool, pool table etc in under construction hubs. Building opened in 1973 and by then knew how to be better chaplains to seafarers. Christmas Gift program. Ask local businesses etc to make a shoebox of goodies. Wrap it and put name and address on box so they can send thank you notes. New York city seamen centers had been doing this for years and called when the strike was on and said they have 1000s of extra gift packages and wondered if Houston wanted any. Got gift packages. 15:06 Athletic program was very important. Norway had a Norwegian welfare assoc. dealt with the well being of Norwegian sea farers in athletics and football, swimming etc. Had  literature in Norwegian. Cooperation in sea farer ministry. Had interfaith ministers. Imam during Ramadan and even a Rabbi. Tried to be as open and helpful. Do not proselytize. Has worked out very well over the years. 18:46 Wanted the chapel to be open to people of different faiths. For Islam, muslims face east and pray on a prayer rug. Had a rug donated and at next mass invited the Muslim attendees to pray. Pointed out the prayer rug and also told them which side was East. But did not illicit any smiles because was standing on the prayer rug with shoes on. Small lessons learnt while dealing with so many cultures. Have travelled around the world to countries where seafarers come from. Have stayed in their homes. Been very educational. Very enriching for those working in the seafaring ministry. 20:45 During the Cold war, there were a lot of Russian ships. Russians did not want their seafarers to be influenced by capitalism. Had a commissar on board in charge of political thought. Against the rules for them to take Bibles. Put plain, brown covers on the Bibles and when Commissar wasn't looking, used to take them. Would not pass them out or take them aboard a ship. Went aboard this one ship during Christmas time. Called Christmas gifts, New Year’s gifts since they did not celebrate a Christian holiday. Captain wanted them but Commissar did not. Opened one and found socks, writing paper etc. Said was not able to accept it because had no gifts to return. Took a drink of Vodka/Cuban Rum instead. 25:07 There were many cultural differences every time a ship came in. Could tell the nationality of the crew by looking at the flag at the back of the ship. Food, drink habits were all different and unique. 28:25 Started out by going to Catholic centers, all that he knew, sea farer center was built around one identity. But when elected as the first Catholic of a non-Catholic center then began to learn about other faiths. With the sea farers club did not have to be of a particular faith to attend. Anyone could walk in. 30:25 Pilot's list. Earlier days had to rely on friends made, like mooring people that tie the boat up. Had to get all information from them. Sometimes the condition onboard ships used to be terrible. No plumbing, no air-conditioning, living conditions were bad. Used to warn one another on the port about incoming ships. Social justice. Coastguard grading system. Jones Act sates if crew has bot been paid for a certain number of days deliberately then the crew gets double the pay and can impound the ship.  35:37 Instituted very strict laws about stowaway. law says anybody that would be a stowaway had to be maintained by the ship company and could not be flown home, had to be carried back to their country and until the ship went back to the country, stowaway was in the care of the ship and expense of the ship. Terrible burden. Filipino seafarers were asked to kill some stowaways they found on board Couldn't do it. So they were hid until they came to the club, Happened on the Gulf coast right up to Canada. 37:50 Pilots share their lists that details their crew, when they arrive, when they leave, agent, making connections. Keeping records much better. Changes - time in port and number of people on ship. then, average 40 members on ship. Now just about 20 people. Earlier ship used to stay for a week. Enough time to socialize etc. Now two days is a long time in port. No time for anything to be used at the center. Have not played soccer on the soccer field for years. Less women. Worst thing to happen to seafarers is homeland security. Restrictions are severe. Expensive visas. Reputation of America has deteriorated. Transportation and worker identification. TWIC. No TWIC card, can’t get near a ship. Quality of crew has also reduced. Good ones do not want to suffer the humiliation. Changes since 9/11. 43:20 TEchnology reduced the number of ship crew. Earlier there were a lot of back breaking jobs, now done automatically. Not even a radio operator on board. Computers do most of the work. Economics. Containers. No human doing any lifting. Cranes. 46:00 Would minister to stowaways as well. Would bring them magazines or whatever else they would need to get through their time in a locked room. Tried to make it more humane. None of the rivalries that exist in the world between religions are hardly ever the problem. Usually something personal. One of the biggest challenges is dietary when dealign with seafarers of different nationalities on board one particular ship. -Sometimes crew is very reluctant to talk to authority. do some mediation. Salary. Common practice to keep two sets of books. Seafarers can’t complain. Will get wages but will lose job. Reluctant to complain even when injustice was there. Penalties. Sometimes can't do anything about the injustice if no one will speak up. 52:25 Soccer fields. had uniforms that players could use. 1-2 games every night. Norwegians maintained the field. Rivalry between two ships. Sometimes would bring in local team out to play. Great form of recreation. Active and fun participation in the earlier days.  53:55 Earlier days it was common to have 200 people a night at the center. Did not even have 11 people last night. Ministry is as active as it has even been. 56:40 There were always minor repairs to be made but again major factors while operating a ship has definitely changed. Even repairs are much quicker. Hire an expert from ashore to do some of the things that sailors had to do earlier. Simulator program on how to pilot a ship. 59:26 Vatican 2 happened and it changed the Catholic church, changed the attitude of the world too. Pope John XXIII. Opened the idea that it was not a sin to cooperate and collaborate with non-Catholics. After the 60s, a time of Vietnam, politics Very exciting times for a young priest. Ecumenical work, social work. While in the seminary was not allowed to leave seminary grounds except during Easter, Christmas and summer. One time went to the rector and asked to leave the grounds to see the doctor. Were always allowed to see the doctor. Then went to see Dr. Zhivago. Was not even allowed to read the secular newspapers except for comics and sports. No television except for the news and lights were turned off at 10 pm. one of this exists anymore. 1:04:27 Wonderful ecumenical people. Some Orthodox members for a number of years. Was born in 1938. 1:05:51 Strike of 1960s. Barely associated with the Port. Did not know anything about the economic factor. Had sailor come in and do some work. Workers lost their income. ((SOMEONE WALKS IN)) 1:08:00 (Shows scrapbook from earlier days) Union busting, attacking scabs. That time there were three unions - black, white and Mexican. Unions loved the strike. Owners hated it. Started out as an issue of segregation. Workers did not want to be in the same union with someone not from their race. Came from one of the most segregated areas in the US - Grimes County. Segregated in schools, back schools, white schools. Went to Notre Dame and came out of that culture. Thought it was going to be a battleground but turned out to be one of the most peaceful integrations. Since it was a small town and even though locals were going to be integrated, everyone knew everyone. Started winning football games when schools were integrated. 1:13:15  open 7 days a week. Now less hours than in the earlier days. All volunteers. Ran the store, bar etc. Now mostly paid people. Paid by own denomination. Very few volunteers now. Was very spirited before. All kinds of parties. Never let a holiday go past without a celebration. Volunteers were mainly from churches, and from just about anywhere. Females who wanted to meet sailors. 1:16:12 The port of Houston has always been a hidden secret. as well known as will ever be. Bigger community of Houston has not connected with the fact that Houston has a port. Port has done a lot for the city. Not less connected to the community. Fewer public parties are organized. strict homeland security policies make it harder for parties to be organized. Nautical school. World Trade school. Port is doing a lot of PR in the education sector. 1:18:47 Festival 3 day event. Friday night - Shrimp ball by the Propeller club. 2-day cook off - barbecue, best decorated stall. Volleyball and soccer tournament. Terrific way for the maritime community to come together. One of the worst things to happen - cancellation of the Maritime festival. 
PortHouston;Eugene Harris;1936;xxxx;Eugene Harris , 1936, xxxx,   Tape 2 lightning and thunder, tape stops EUGENE HARRIS Summary: Eugene Harris talks to Betsy Peterson about his career as a longshoreman. He discusses the strike of 1967-68, working with rice and asbestos, and why the ship channel is the best place in the world to work. 00:28 Started out on docks during 1950s. Loading and unloading raw hide. Swiss would pay one penny a hide. Fresh hides to be cured and then loaded to go to the docks. Would wrap the hide to go to the docks, unload for ship, stretch, salt, roll and stack them. Blood meal, carbon black, 100 pound nails, barb wire, sulphur, 200 pound flour. crystal white (120 lb flour), seed rice, nobody wanted to ‘work that’. Five men would work in a gang carrying 180lb each bags. 5:00 Allowed to join the union at 21. Union did not have seniority. Did not come back till the 60s. Better jobs were controlled by the gang foremans, families and by the men who knew were capable. “Cotton was king.” Could make good money with cotton. Stayed together with gang, Total 17 people. Worked in the hole. 9:15 Started in the union in 50s. Met wife in Mexico. Moved to Houston as there was no work in Galveston. Containers took all the work. No work for manual labor. Didn’t care to operate a machine. 13:00 Strike of 1967-68. Took part in it. Worked for Folgers coffee during strike. Needed money. Palletized coffee for $5.00 a palate. Showed wife how to drive a towboat. Was a tow-boater. Needed money to feed children and send them to Catholic school. Almost 1970. 17:00 Both sons worked on the waterfront. One is a doctor now and the other is a business agent (TC Harris). 19:00 Worked on a lot of cotton in the Port of Houston. Then worked on Asbestos, 7 days a week, 10-15 hours a day. Then started getting rice and flour going to Cuba. Got asbestos in my lung. Did not wear any protective covering. Was given one paper mask in the morning. Loading a railcar to the ceiling and asbestos sticks to face when sweating.  Never asked for another mask. Would be made fun of. Used to get another mask at 1. A whistle would be blown for lunch. "Containers started coming in and gangs started going down." Work started decreasing. First pay-cation check was $65.00. Couldn't believe got paid for doing nothing. 23:00 Mom used to run a bar and used to drink two liters of scotch every week. Mom left the bar to wife. Did not run it. Wanted a $100,000 to rebuild it. Don't have that sort of money. Have to try and get as many cars as you can when you are throwing sacks into a rail car. People take care of their own kind. Irish take care of themselves. There are a few Irishman. Not that many Mexicans on the waterfront then. 29:00 Worked out of the black union when couldn't get a job. When locals were integrated. Wasn't as bad as thought it would be. There was some trouble over seniority. Then went about business. Was past gold star when retired. Was number 1 and then .5 (laughs). 87 years old now. Retired after a heart attack in 2000. Was driving a 30,000 lb. machine. 76 years. Do miss friends, playing cards, truck drivers. It is hard to explain. 33:09 Geno was nickname. nobody ever knew real name. Down time. Would play cards. Hold em etc. Did place bets. Used to be "hell on a bike", used to be hell's angel. Used to have a fancy bike. State of Texas took it away because it ran so fast. 38:50 Longshoreman has really changed. They helped to educate children by donating a lot of money. shipping has improved. Have the best pension, Best healthcare, best dental plan in the world. Don't know what can be improved. Wife has protection. Don't want this industry to die. "Don't want automation to eat it all up." 43:00 See the same ships over and over again. Run a routine route. Worked at a steam ship company a long time. Fire the whole gang even if one person was not doing his job. Can't get a single man to replace. There was a lot of drinking. Mostly all the time. Used to make a 5 gallon drum of Zombies. 47:00 Played a lot of pranks. One time put an alligator in Reverend Louis' car. Right after a storm was cleaning the warehouse. Found a 4 1/2 ft alligator. Put the alligator to sleep by rubbing its belly. "The devil made me do it." Another time put a pair of women's underwear in the seat of a car because the owner gave the job to two young boys instead  of more deserving candidate. One time pulled the crankshaft out of someone's car and threw it in the bayou. 58:10 ""This is the best place in the world to work." Like to work bananas. (Sings a song about loading bananas.) Wore a leather strap with a horn to keep off spiders and snakes. Clerk would call out where each stack was to be loaded. Which truck. The checker would be at the end of the truck. He would tally the total load. The clerk would say which pile goes to which truck. 1:05:10 Liked to work with cotton because got paid by the bale. Bananas got paid by the hour. Dangerous loads. Military work Specialized in explosives. Knew how to secure tanks. There were accidents but nothing very serious.  
PortHouston;Eric Olsen;1953;2012;Eric Olsen, 1953, 2012,   ERIC OLSEN SUMMARY: Eric Olsen talks to Pat Jasper about his career. Starting from the King's Point Academy to travelling the world and now working as a tanker operation manager, he explains the minutiae of his job. He also speaks about how important an education and training is in the industry, the number of things that have changed over the years and how the industry is still hesitant to accept women. February 23, 2012 Channelview, TX Norton Lily International 00:00:30 Born in Connecticut, father is a grad of Yale then served in WW II. Came into the merchant marine by chance. Wanted to go to the Coastguard Academy initially. Was applied and then turned down but then went to the US Merchant Marine academy. Graduated in 1979 as a deck officer. Worked with Texaco for fifteen years as a deck officer. Then got unlimited masters license, then sailed as chief officer. Trade outed were around the US. Went to South Africa, Soviet Union and got to see a lot of the world. Came ashore with General Maritime CO. Served as an expediter. Came to Norton Lily. Tanker operations manager. Like the 'fireman' for all issues related to tanker, oil etc. Have 33 years experience in the maritime world. 00:05:10 Mother was army nurse. Father graduated from Yale with engineering degree and went to sea as a wiper. When they heard he was a graduate from Yale with engineering degree offered to let him take the first asst engineer's license since they were desperate for people during war time. He sat for third asst and got through and then second asst during the war. Was told being Norwegian, all related back to Eric the Red. Oldest brother retired from Coastguards. 00:10:30 In the merchant marine academy, pick one of two tracks, - either deck officer or engineering officer. Or the dual license. Sophomore and junior year you spend 6 months on sea and 6 months of classes. Senior year only classes, completing education, getting licenses etc. Because of that asked normally carry 22-28 hours of credit time. Batch before his was the first to allow women into the service academies. Had technical knowledge to sit for the highest license but no experience. Changed a lot since first day to when he retired. Attributes it to training. First trip from New Orleans to Germany and then to Leningrad. carrying govt materials for the army into Germany and then structural steel for Moscow Olympics. Had taken pics in Leningrad. did not know was not supposed  to. Camera disappeared that night from Seamen's club. Soviet Union was a unique experience. Also sailed to South Africa in the sophomore year. 00:19:35 Unique about King's Point - no training ship. Went aboard commericial vessels. Training was with professional who had been at sea for years. No training with contemporaries. Sea Project - navigation, cargo handling, ship stability, plus English and other subjects. Graded on this as part of graduate program. Was with second mate and was in charge of navigation. Helped with cargo. Got involved in every aspect. This is advantage of being in federal academy as opposed ot state run school. Intense one on one training. US Naval academy doesnot teach celestial navigation to officers anymore because they rely in electronics. But if there is a power failure they don't equip officers with tools to figure out where they are. 00:25:10 Container ships were converted from break bulk ships. McClane started Sealand. He revolutionized the industry by putting things in boxes and moving the boxes. Has made the world smaller. 00:29:25 Started as a deck cadet and when at sea achieved unlimited masters license. Third mate is entry level position for license deck. For Texaco was a non union ship. Carried three mates and a master. Engineering dept would have three levels of engineers. Master is in overall control of the vessel. Most union ships will have two third mates. Chief mate is in charge of cargo and acts as an asst to the master. When you come aboard as third mate, you are expected to know nothing and be green. Time requirements - as third mate got paid 8 hrs a day 5 days a week and overtime. After Exxon Valdez there were forceful laws on working hours in a day. Shuttle hanker service. Been a lot of changes over the years. More structured world since they reinforced the work hours. Merchant ships have engine control recorders which are more accurate when it comes to reconstructing the last few minutes in case of an eventuality. 00:41:40 Rules that say if a boat is fishing it has right of way. Yes and no. If there is a larger boat is in the channel that is constrained by its draft, it has right of way. Sailboats normally have right of way because of the limitations under which it operates. The one rule that really applies is the bigger vessel always wins. 00:48:10 "There are days I miss the sea." Got to spend more time with family when was at sea. Since there were off days after an extended period of time at sea. Would see the family but would miss blocks of it. Longest trip was four and half months. Went around the  world. One of the last trips. Provided a good economic base. There were trade-offs. Have seen whales playing in the middle of the ocean, St. Elmo’s Fire, etc. 00:53:10 Came ashore and became a cargo expediter. Worked exclusively for oil companies. Like Saudi Petroleum. Difference between what is loaded and what is received. Often saw differences between 2000-3000 barrels. Job was to help ensure the measurement and tracking of oil was done as per industry standards was done as accurately as possible in close conjunction with petroleum inspectors. Supply and demand. When there are fewer ships to do the job, price goes up. People went out and ordered ships and prices went down. Container industry is based on concept that moves cargo quickly. Sealand SL7 - 6 day service from Seattle to Tokyo. Standard speed was 32 naughts. Burning a lot of fuel. Want ships to get to destination quicker. More weight of ship, more fuel used. So to compensate, used more smaller ships to get to destination. Same speed, more ships for the same job, same amount of time. 01:04:31 Have dealt with crude, petrochemicals, oil products. If diesel is put in a tank that had gasoline before and was not cleaned properly, it could potentially ruin all the diesel. Its properties affect the diesel. Design of a tanker - box girder construction. Was there as an expert and had to question something if it wasn't right and if it couldn't be corrected there and then had ot take it to the higher authority. As an expediter oversaw the operation. Ran the petroleum inspection office, became the expert on measuring the cargo and how to do it right. Measuring a ship is entirely different from measuring the cargo. 01:09:02 Company that he worked for had a sister company that was an agency. They needed an agent to go to tend the ship. Was doing fine until a sailor had to be repatriated. Dealt a lot with agents earlier but this was the first item on the other side of the fence. 01:12:00 Agency world is one of few industries where a person can come out of high school and still pursue a blue collar career and still rise to mgmnt level and earn a decent salary. Boarding agent will meet the ship and captain, then go down to customs, pay tonnage taxes etc. Ship owners representative on the ground in the port to help that vessel conduct its business at port. Industry and has grown and changed. Difference between tankers and container ships - containers ships are owned by company and operated by the company on a scheduled service very similar to a bus service. Same cities. same routes. Tankers and break bulk ships are tramp services. Can go where and when market demands. Tankers have chartered brokers. Agent comes in to act as an intermediary.  Agency 101 - need to give customer what they want, in the form they want it and on the sked that they want. That works for any business. 01:20:40 Industry has diversified. Ship crews are also from all over the world. Women are in an administrative or supportive role. Boarding agents are all men. some women. Tough world for a woman to come into. Still a rough business. Language on a ship is very coarse and expletives are a plenty. There are sailors who don't know how to sign their names, but still managed to earn a good living. It takes unique individuals to be involved in the industry. 01:26:32 one of the requirements for any ship coming into the US is that there has to be someone fluent in English. 8-5 jobs are non existent now. 01:32:30 Present role is tanker operation mgr. It is an evolving role. Train and instruct employees of Norton Lily in how tankers work. Revenue generated through liners have been pushed down. More involved in marketing in present job role. Need to be ISO certified. Reinforced because of incidents like the deep water horizon and various ship accidents. Need to have programs in place for checks and balances. ISO program was a way to keep information flowing back and forth. Because mngmt is supposed to annually review the program and assess the positives and negatives. Need to look at big picture but also remember that the supporting agents on the groudn are important too. ISO program handles quality managment. 01:39:32 ISO - international standards of operation. Document on how a company wants its business run. ISO helps give a company structure. 01:42:20 Houston ship channel has played and will cintinue to play a tremendous role in the US economy. HSC produces 40-50% of all petroleum products used in the US. Serves a vital function not just out Houston but to the rest of the world. Houston has a passenger ship terminal at Barbers Cut. People should start to realize that the terminals need to work in conjunction and not in opposition and should make Galveston the cruise port, the ports need to start thinking bigger. 
PortHouston;Doug Mims;1960;2012;Doug Mims, 1960, 2012  AFC 2012/006: 00333 Doug Mims interview conducted by Anthony G. Potoczniak 2012-09-13 [00:00] Introducing Doug Mims, captain of the M/V Sam Houston [00:14] Born in Vicenza Italy, Doug Mims {DM} travelled a lot as a child: spent one year in Italy, five years in Germany  father served in army including Vietnam  family moved to Hitchcock Texas, where DM attended junior and high schools, graduated in 1978. [1:17] DM describes early interest in the maritime activities. Father owned a shrimp boat called the Green Plague. Often DM went shrimping with his older brother, where they would go shrimping in Moses Lake near Texas City. Shares stories about the shrimp boat experience and concluding it was a lot of work. Recollects being inspired by his sea travels between American and European continents on a navy ship. Describes his experiences in Hitchcock Texas and attributes his love of the water to these early experiences  his mother also had a float stand in Galveston. [4:33] Outlines his professional work in the maritime industry: shortly out of high schools, DM worked on crew boats, and jack-up rigs, later acquired a Coast Guard license  subsequently received licenses to pilot larger boats  worked for a launch service in Galveston, which carried supplies. [7:56] Shares his experience working at the Port of Houston (POH). After the economic downturn in 1982-83, DM was laid-off  later worked in the tourism industry and subsequently joined the Houston Port Authority in 1987, first as a marine firefighter deckhand on the Farnsworth fireboat  he really liked the benefits and stability of working for the POH. Recalls some fires he fought, while working there. [11:05] Discusses how he transferred to the Sam Houston 1 1⁄2 years later in 1988  from 1988 - 1997 worked his way up from pilot to captain. Describes the job as closest to having an office job [at the Port of Houston] as it gets, while still being on the water. [13:00] DM gives a brief history of Sam Houston tour  the boat was built in 1958 for the Port Authority. Its main mission is to educate the public about the Port of Houston  a free boat tour, it is the best opportunity for the public to see the channel up close and observe the day-to-day operations of the docks. Talks about the upgrades made to the boat after 50 years of serving the public. [15:45] About the tour: normally the tour lasts 90 minutes -- 7 1⁄2 miles each way for a total of 15 miles. Sometimes the tour changes its course due to traffic in the ship channel. DM talks about navigating the ship channel during a busy time and canceling a tour due to bad weather conditions. 1  AFC 2012/006: 00333 [19:53] Describes the types of groups that take the tour and how busy it can get throughout the year  outlines how the new security measures introduced after 9/11 has affected the tour  information about the TWIC card (Transportation Worker Identification Credential)  since DM was born in Italy on an army base, had to prove his citizenship. [22:53] Discusses how specific events, such as hurricanes, affect the Port of Houston, and how he and chief engineer rode out Hurricane Ike and had to monitor the lines after securing the boat. [25:46] Describes the typical work around upkeeping an older boat  one-month out of the year, the tour is shut down for the boat maintenance and repairs  [27:11] Shares a story about the summer of the great drought (2011), during which a school of black drum fish came up the port/bayou to the turning basin, where truckers were fishing off the docks. [29:04] Typical work day at the Sam Houston: scrub, mop the decks, and prep the boat for each of the two daily tours (10 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.) [30:48] Describes how the ship channel has changed over the years, recounts how new facilities have been added to the channel  significance of the tour starting at the Turning Basin  one of the more industrial area of the Ship Channel: this is the place to be... [33:41] Describes how the tragic events of 9/11 affected the tour. The M/V Sam Houston can carry 100 passengers. Recalls turning away people when the boat had too many passengers. Before 9/11, we used to take stand-bys. Now the tour utilizes an online scheduling system. [36.59] Outlines the staff duties and their main function to ensure that the guests are safe. [39:14] Describes how the new dock has changed and how it affects the way the approach of the boat into the new dock: You’re only as good as your last landing -- you always want to be careful [42:13] DM says his brother, Joe Mims, was an important influence in his life and encourage his appreciation of the maritime industry. [43:45] Conclusion of interview. 2  
PortHouston;Dean Corgey;1952;2012;Dean Corgey, 1952, 2012,   DEAN CORGEY Summary: Dean Corgey talks to Pat Jasper about his family's career on the waterfront. He talks about his mentor Joe Perez, the labor unions, women in the industry and how technology has changed the industry completely. He also fondly remembers how he sent both his sons on ships which allowed them to have an experience of a lifetime. Feb 21, 2012 Seafarers intl union 00:00:35 Born in Houston, TX in 1952. Mother's side of the family escaped the potato famine in Ireland. Father's family fled from Germany. Established the Corgey liveries stable. Went to work at the waterfront after the liveries business died out. Have two uncles that worked cotton warehouses. Grandfather was also on the docks. Father was a longshoreman. Brother is a Houston pilot. Two sons shipped out as sailors. Always around the waterfront. Family and neighborhood everyone worked at the waterfront. Did not participate a lot at the waterfront growing up. But seemed to be programmed to take that route in life. Formed a large part of personality. 00:05:04 Was born in a neighborhood close to Pasadena. Was seven years old and was playing in the front yard, father came home all excited when he got a job in the union and got fringe benefits. Things got better immediately after. Moved to a bigger house, with a two car garage and got a second car. Took vacations. 00:08:00 college in Southwest Texas. first semester - roommate was life of the party, he wasn't cut out for college. Was doing well in school. Old roommate comes visiting in a big car, all tan and has a lot of money with him. At around the same time, was doubting time in college. Had joined the merchant marine and had been traveling all over the world. Was a knee jerk reaction. But went the very next weekend and joined the SIU. Graduated from the program at Piney Point. Was hoping to go see the world, but instead was sent to Houston to work on tugboat. 5 miles from where he had grown up, and was beginning to regret everything. Worked a couple of hitches on the tug. Was basically a deckhand. Boring, mundane work. Was fired on third hitch. Joe Perez. Got me a job in the engine room. Felt I had found my niche. Got with the chief engineer. Became an oiler. Became Chief Engineer. Found it fascinating. Later, got an opportunity to work in the union with Perez. 00:18:00  Joe was a migrant farm worker who came to Houston as a teenager and worked his way to the port. He developed a relationship with SIU. Became elected officer. No place for segregation on ships. 00:21:00 Came on board as an organizer. Tough business. Came back to Houston as a patrolman. Meet ships when they come to port, before they pay the crew, rep from the union comes down to settle all the grievances. Can settle them 99% of the time. Then they pay the crew and we meet and collect dues and conduct union business. From 1980-86. In 86 was appointed as port agent. Responsible for administration of the personnel and property of port. finances and contract, business manager. Very demanding job. 34 years old. Love the waterfront. Became area vice president for the gulf coast in 1990. In 92 as the VP. 00:26:25 People think Port of Houston is anti union. More unionized than any port in the country. Ships, tugs, longshoreman all union. Don't have antagonistic labor relations at all. job to mainly negotiate good contracts, promote the port, create jobs, favorable legislation, like maritime security program, Jones Act. Try ad get more ships and more cargo. Create better opportunities. Labor and management collaborative spirit. One goal - promotion of port and industry. Greatest economic success story in the history of the world. Put together the first port security plan in the country. POH very progressive and efficient port. Value of organized labor. Not only take something from the table but also put something on. 00:31:55 Strike of 68. Came to the industry only in 1973. Losing proposition for all concerned. Dad was not involved with it. Industry is constantly changing. School funded by the industry. Have stayed ahead of changes. Strike was a watershed event. Earlier had to go to the custom house and get two pics and a physical exam. Now, all kinds of training, strength and condition training, physical and mental exams. ALmost like signing up to be an astronaut and not a merchant seamen. Chose to deal with this. Served for 6 years on advisory committee for coastguards. Port security plans - important issues and issues that affect the country, has to be fixed but also need to keep commerce moving at the same time. Find that very thrilling and rewarding. 00:40:35 have tremendous respect for US Coastguards. Do so much and receive so little. Not only a military org, also law enforcement and regulatory agency. Regulate the whole Maritime industry, certifications etc. Very limited budget. Work together for the public good. 00:42:29 On the board of SIU. Have affiliates - Sailors union of Pacific, Marine Fireman, American Maritime officers, etc. Unions that are affiliated to SIU of NA. Mainly  represent unlicensed seamen on US flag vessels. Have officer son tugs, and dredges. Ferries and manpower affiliated with union helped in the aftermath of 9/11 and helped rescue people on board the airplane that made an emergency landing in the Hudson River. HQ in Washington DC. Hiring calls from Puerto Rico to Guam. Largest maritime union in the USA and represent mariners that work on different types of vessels. Involved in community outreach, local politics etc. Have a real sense of ownership after getting involved with the SIU. "The merchant marine has always been a place where kids from humble beginnings go to be somebody." 00:49:25 On a ship, the difference between licensed and unlicensed seamen is the same as hourly worker and management. Hosepipe. Moving up the hosepipe. Can get license, move up the hosepipe and then in the end make a lot more money. 00:55:06 Grievances. Depends on the type of work. Deep sea ships that run overseas - overtime , maybe one employee thinks he is entitled to more overtime than another one. contract interpretation. It is not like it used to be Very little drinking out there. Industry has changed in a positive way. Don't see misconduct. Now that there are women out there. Accident investigation, promotion issues. Last time there was an arbitration was 10 years ago. There are grievances but they are healthy. 00:59:20 The new tugs are like floating spaceships. All computerized. have to have educational skills to be in the industry. Back then, all you needed was crude skills and a strong back. Now, need science and engineering, computer skills etc are needed. Challenge is to get kids interested in science, maths etc. The tendency of people to be honest, straightforward and trustworthy is very attractive in the industry. Sailors tend to be honest, courageous and trustworthy people. 01:03:50 Training from high school and college provided no value on the waterfront. Had to start from scratch. Skills learnt on the debate team really help everyday. 01:09:30 Things were best when government, industry and labor are all at the table. In Gulf of Mexico, workers don't have a voice. Companies are rabidly anti-union. over there. There were real concerns from some of the crew that they wanted to shut drilling down. Mgmt. wanted to continue. Hence the oil spill. Have a safety inspector here who goes aboard ships and checks everything. Best measure of safety is from people actually doing the job. 01:15:45  Elections in the union every 4 years. Any member can run for any job provided they are qualified for the job. Vote at the end of the year for 60 days so people coming and going have an opportunity to vote or request for absentee ballots. 01:17:38 women in elected, administrative positions. women captains, chief engineer, pilots etc. Port agents in number of ports. Women are vital part of this industry. Women are not just limited to steward sections they are in every job profile. Women realize they have a good opportunity at the port. They work hard and move up. Women seem to be very motivated in upgrading their skills and move up the ladder. Don't take it for granted. Don't have to make any special changes if there are women aboard a ship. These days everyone has their own room. 01:21:14 Have a son and stepson. Son was 15 and got a little rebellious. Wanted to quit school and ship out. Told him it was not a good idea. And needed an education. When he turned 16 took him down to get papers and got his Z card. This was at a time of Lech Walesa, Berlin Wall coming down. Great time to be alive. Put son on a ship. Ship was going to Russia with a load of grain. Also had two containers with supplies for an orphanage. At destination ship crew became heroes for doing good deeds. Garnered a lot of publicity. Came back heroes. Son was overjoyed. Wasn't expecting this to happen. Was not the intention. Told him to take another trip. Son got a whole different situation the second time around. Ship broke down in Keywest. Had to stay there for three weeks. Came back a changed person. Wanted to continue with his education. He went back to college. Shipped out every summer. Now in Finance. Getting his MBA and masters in Finance. Son bought a pickup truck with the money he earned on the ship. Son was so proud with his truck. He left here as a boy and came back as a man. More young people need opportunities like that. Did the same thing with stepson. Ended up joining the marine corp. Travis is a numbers person and Michael is a people person. 01:34:26 Very active in the international seafarers movement. Being the top tier maritime country with the best jobs and highest wage rates and the best benefits in the world. The downside of that is a constant erosion of jobs to foreign flag vessels. 350 ships in the US merchant marine. One way to make US more competitive on a global scale is to improve the conditions, wages and benefits of the foreign sailors. Work closely with International Transportation Federation to do that. Burmese shipman - Shuvey who ran a union from his exile in Thailand. Was able to help him when he landed in Houston on a freight. Finally got him political asylum. Top performing ITF inspector in the world. He has collected $8 million in back wages for foreign seamen in the port of Houston. Great American Dream. 01:48:15  Has a reputation among seamen as someone who will help and will be there. Port of Houston cares. 01:50:20 Tremendous amount of regulations since 9/11. Ground checks more throughly, TWIC cards, vessel access. Most progressive and efficient port in the country. We lead by example. Has changed the industry a lot. More background checks when trying to obtain a merchant marine document. Closer scrutiny. Different going to the airport now. But that isn't really a bad thing. Must adapt if you need to survive. 01:55:22 If anyone wants to go down to the dock, need to get a TWIC card. Costs $130 and need a background check done by the FBI. Same background check as when a person gets merchant marine papers. So has not been that much of a culture shock. 01:57:40 (Talks about paintings in the office) Founder of American Maritime Labor Movement. ISU - International Seamens Unit. His statement in front of the Congress eventually led to the passage of the Jones Act which is the seamen's rights act. US merchant Marine is the fourth arm of defense and Jones Act holds it all together. Successors formed Sailors union in Pacific. 02:01:15 First painting is of two harbor tugs docking the Robert E. Lee in Galveston, TX. Primarily ran to India and Middle East. (talks about another painting) The paintings were done by Captain when he was on tug. Used to sail as chief engineer on those tug boats. (Talks about the last painting in room) 02:09:05 There was a fertilizer ship in TX city. Initial explosion was on the fertilizer ship. Ammo ship close to it blew up. Then the refineries close to it. Set off a chain reaction. Close to 5000 people died in 1947. 
PortHouston;David C Morrell;1961;2012;David C Morrell, 1961, 2012   AFC 2012/006: 00335 David C Morrell interview conducted by Anthony G. Potoczniak 2012-07-31 [0:00] David Morrell (DM) is the creator and developer of the pilot scheduling system called HarborLights. [0:24] DM shares recent success of expanding HarborLights to the Galveston Port Authority, which just approved to adopt the harbor management system. Describes the system components of the software: the order and billing systems. [01:30] Harborlights (HL) is a scheduling system, which incorporates ship pilot data. The ship pilot is the primary point of service at the POH that engages an incoming vessel. HL helps to optimize port service and increases security by having more eyes on the ship while at the POH. [03:55] Explains how ship information is displayed in the system. Original database for dispatchers was put together by ship pilot Capt. Lou Vest. The colorization of the dispatch system -- how information is represented -- inspired the name HarborLights. Colors assigned to ease analysis for the dispatcher to understand where the ship is in the process. DM tried to make logic of the colors, i.e., I made the tankers green, because they represented money  red represents emergency or hazardous, so when you take red and green and combine them, that makes a chemical tanker. These schemes were designed within the commercial environment to be able to assess quickly the status of a ship. [06:45] Describes how and by whom information accessed: determined by function and business -- the pilots, tugs, and mooring companies. [08:10] Lou Vests prototype database system tracked ship movement. HL expanded this basic idea by adding more data to the system. [09:10] Describes the optimization of the ordering process, i.e., linking Lloyds shipping database to the HL system  ships still require verification by the pilot, this information also becomes part of the HL database. [11:05] Shares historical process of how vessels were verified: pilots used paper cards to relay information about the ship, pilots verify the accuracy of the information by checking the ships placard located at the wheelhouse  charge for services is based on accuracy information about the ships tonnage and length of beam. [13:25] Describes how tracking ships in the Houston Ship Channel has changed over time. The Marine Exchange was a beach house located at Morgans Point -- nearest point of access to the channel, and run 24/7 mostly by retired women, who reported ships going in/out of the port. [15:02] Explains how ships were being tracked, discovers the problem with the docks, and how this information was important to all constituents involved. 1  AFC 2012/006: 00335 [19:02] DM explains how he joined the Houston Pilots in 1996. First projects were related to data recovery. Overtime, he observed how busy it got in the dispatch area, especially when a lot of ships appeared at the same time: This place can really be a madhouse! [22:10] Describes how the dispatch area worked when the POH was closed down: The phone never stopped ringing... Agents and dispatchers have to work to re-schedule the delays. [24:58] Compares pre-Harborlights era with the current system: HL gave the ability to research the vessel to complete an accurate order without the experience needed to be acquired over the years. [26:57] Shares the experience of observing and learning the day-to-day work of dispatchers: determined a way to optimize the system. The goal was to increase access to information, in a secure way, to all the different stakeholders (agents, tugs, pilots): if the main scheduling services know exactly what’s happening up to the minute as far as changes to the vessel, then it gives them a little more time to utilize their manpower. In most cases, up to 4-hours notice. Describes the earlier HTML version of HL postings: it kept the phone calls down a lot. DM determined that it would been hard to develop Harborlights without this rudimentary system of displaying real-time information. [32:16] Timeline of HL implementation: initially a lot of reservation in releasing scheduling information: pilots worried about the accuracy, shipping agents were upset, because they did not want competing agents in their business. As a result HL had to be taken down for a brief time. One of the largest shipping companies (Moran Shipping Agencies, Inc.) decided to share their information, convincing others players to share their information. [35:15] DM describes the automation of the maritime industry based on regional tours of other Ports and their scheduling systems. HL tracks information not found in other port systems: pilot rotation, pilot certification, certified deputies for operating certain vessels. [38:06] DM describes the eight-year process of creating a patent for Harborlights, and the challenge of completing the process. [41:01] Discusses the process incorporating Automatic Identification System (AIS) data into HL to create a visualization of the ships. DMs daughter, a gifted mathematician, helps to decode the encrypted data. [45:00] DM describes the process a programmer learned the intricacies of the shipping industry, and how HL was developed to reflect the work culture of the Houston Pilots: I had the questions, they had the answers. [50:55] DM shares story of the first days working on the project that would later become Harborlights: When we first got here, there was nothing on a piece of paper that said that this 2  AFC 2012/006: 00335 was a rule or restriction. It just seemed to be in everybody’s head. Without getting that information from a pilot, it was going to be impossible to do. He states: Unless you can make sense of it, you can’t put it to logic. DM describes the interview process working with the pilots. Additional description of how the linemen, tugs, and pilots practices have changed over time. [55:06] Discusses the Port of Galveston Authority and the prospect of expanding HL to other ports  how the system will become more efficient for billing, scheduling, and verification -- a checks and balance between the figures, which is more accurate for the whole industry. [59:15] Description of critical historical moments in the past decade, and how they impacted the development or operation of HL: closing the port: 9/11, hurricanes. [01:01:15] DM shares story about 9/11, when the Port of Houston computers were being hacked, forcing the closure of the entire port. Relates the story of how the FBI and Scotland Yard used computer logs from HL in the prosecution of Aaron Caffrey - the lovesick hacker. [1:05:04] Further description of the Denial of Service (DOS) attack on the HLs servers. After DM reports this activity to the authorities, the shipping industries were shut down several days. [1:07:27] DM describes how he got interested in electronics and programming. Influence from his youth, when a good friend of his had a side-job of buying broken stereos and TVs, and fixing them. He thought: that’s a really good career, I think I can make a career out of that. Moved to California, attended a program at Addington Labs for two years. Moved back in Houston in 1979, joined IBM, where he worked in department that maintained mainframes. [01:13:04] More information about DMs career: married in 1983, worked in an emerging field of digitizing web logs of various oil industries. Worked at several companies that specialized in digitizing seismic and well logs, developed new scanner technologies. Unemployed, DM began to work in the computer service industry. [1:18:22] DM joined the Court of Appeals, revamping the opinion system, so it could be used on a shared computer network. [1:20:15] DM discusses Harborlights as the largest project: We put in more effort into HL, because of the sheer need. The industry didn’t have it. Describes other projects with Pipe Sales Inventory, and developing software that improved the companies work flow and accuracy of data. [1:26:37] Describes his work in the Life Gift Foundation, which keeps track of organ donations. [1:29:13] Concludes interview by stressing the family-like atmosphere of the Houston Pilots and the sense of belonging he experiences at the Houston Pilots. [1:30:39] Conclusion of interview. 3 
PortHouston;Dana Blume;1968;2012;Dana Blume, 1968, 2012  DANA BLUME SUMMARY: Dana Blume talks to Pat Jasper about the environmental affairs department at the Port of Houston authority. The role it plays in the working of the port, the different departments and how it relates to the larger working picture of the Houston ship channel. August 06, 2012 Environmental affairs Manager Port of Houston Authority 00:00:36 Born in El Dorado, Arkansas in 1968. Moved to Houston when 8-9. Liked science in school. Father was in Oil industry. Went to Texas A&M, studied geology. Not too many people in 80s studied geology. Moved away from the oil focus to environmental focus. Wanted to teach earth science. Back when Exxon Valdez cleanup was going on, not too many people were hiring. went to work in a service industry related to the port. Through these connections met people in the environmental side. In 90s went into the environmental field. Had a background in talking about oil and oil wells so got to do a lot of pipeline work. Participated in pipeline decommissioning project in North America called the Penny Ex pipeline. Gave a deep appreciation of how sensitive the environment is. Understood the human side of the environment. Sometimes spills actually stimulate the economy. Have seen while at the port 14 years. Came in 1999 to Houston Port Authority. Environmental attitude has changed over the years. NEPA. Delved a lot into air quality. Making sure operation at port authority avail of clean resources. Bayport - permitting process citizens were against that. Had to defend the work process to the public to make them understand. Don't do enough publicity for Port of Houston. Have the largest petrochemical complex. Houston has a big responsibility. 00:11:42 Speak a lot to children and larger groups about job profile. Take care of water quality issues - permitting issues, clean drinking water etc. Clean water Act very important. Port is very mobile resource driven. Don't make or create anything - clean in that sense. But puts a focus on what can be done with port equipment. Landlord port - lease out property to tenants. Would not ask a tenant to do anything that port would not do themselves. Need to be completely compliant with federal rules and procedures. 00:18:40 Stewardship. Look at the environmental dept. in two realms. Compliance driven program, has permits, deadlines etc. Air quality prog is voluntary. Non attainment in ozone and particulate matter. Majority of roles that are written for NOX and POCS are written for stationary source type emissions. Mobile source emissions roles are written for the fuel that is used and the emissions. Air program is a stewardship program because have  accelerated the turnover of fleet and the tenants too by purchasing the newest, cleaner equipment available. Do a lot of that with grant money that helps offset the cost. Do it because want to do the right thing. 00:25:09 Compliance driven. Emissions are calculated through put of the facility. Number that comes will trigger the kind of permit for the facility. BACT Best available control technology. Mobile sources don't require permitting only the stationary sources require it. Federal channel - to keep it dredged at the permitted level. Entities along the Houston ship channel and Houston port authority are very involved in talking to congress about making those decisions. The shallower the port is the less cargo ships can bring in. Either way it will affect the economy of not just Houston but the country. Only 15% of ships or cargo actually comes to Houston port authority. 85% goes to all the private entities. Have worked well with the community in areas of security, air quality and environmental. 00:34:27 Air quality about 15 years ago was told the air was bad for ozone. were put into a process a state implementation plan. the idea of shutting a vessel down and pulling out like a dead weight would to work from a safety perspective would also quadruple emissions. Educated not just immediate community but also stakeholders also did tours of the facility in a bid to educate and create awareness. Big responsibility just to educate the regulators about type of equipment that was available. Dealt with a lot of 'snake oil salesman'. Outreach and education. Been very successful in setting up funding mechanisms - Texas emission and reduction plan. 00:42:59 Partnered with HAC and environmental defense fund and received $9million for low interest loan program for truck drivers for on road trucks. Try getting the message out by doing a lot of outreach programs. 00:44:45 Port authority pushed back on that for a while. Focussed on cargo handling equipment, tug tow industry, making sure right people were at the table so that they get what is needed. But on road trucks have been a hard one to accept as every truck in the Houston- Galveston- Brazoria area is not a truck that goes to the Houston port authority facility. Host truck fairs at property. Leveraging reputation with the truck drivers to make them understand what a good opportunity it is. Took on truck program because no one else did. Taken on the role of a caretaker of truck drivers. 00:53:12 Job doesn't pigeonhole in environmental only. Allows opportunity to take on different projects. along the Houston ship channel, have 9000 acres of property. Also have rights to the submerged lands given by state of Texas. Most areas that are not developed are  dredge placement areas or confined disposal facilities. Don't have a big contamination problem in the Houston ship channel. All industries are highly regulated. For most part sediment is clean. Use dredge material to build areas that may be developed into property. Houston ship channel is man made. Buffalo Bayou drains out at the ship channel. It is a big task to keep it dredged. Houston is mostly put on Beaumont clay. Have utilized the dredge materials to do demonstrate marshes, help a marsh flourish, in marsh area, have cut channels, can kayak, bird recoveries. Have a plan to create 4200 acres of marsh area. Have recognized that the material thrown up from dredging can be used for other things. Sample all the sediment. Get questioned about placement areas. Why upland ones are not better fenced off. When they are being utilized they will be big pots of sediment which can be used. Everything is sampled before anything begins to be used. When communities have a question about the workings of the port authority, try and work together with them so they understand. 01:09:54 Federal channel. It is the channel that needed a federal corp permit to be dredged up to 45 ft. It is the small part of the channel where ships traverse (points on map, audio low). Federal channel needs federal dollars so it can be dredged to the appropriate amount. Local sponsor help in the cost share. Take the material from the federal channel to some of the port's placement areas. 01:12:24 It is very costly. For e.g.. need 80 million dollars to dredge federal channel. govt. decided for Galveston and Houston ship channel will give 60 million. The corps are ultimately responsible for getting the money. The channel is important to everyone. So while talking to the feds, the big 8-10 chemical companies who have a vested interest will also join in. Harris county taxpayer money pays only for infrastructure not for dredging. 01:15:30 PR department on the medium size. Have 8 full time people. For the amount of area that is covered, and for the number of tenants, there is an environmental person assigned to every single project. Group is a set of professionals with a science degree. Way back then, there were only 4 people. Developed an environmental management agency and went after ISO 14,000, first port in USA to get ISO 14,000. Do tenant audits and tenant trainings. Over the last 2 years, decided to break down some groups and went back to cross training and general lists. DANA BLUME Flashcard #2 August 06. 2012  00:00:41 Clean air strategy program has an outreach prog. Has internal groups and focus groups. Waiting to see what they bring in. There will have more community and outreach programs. Hotline - info line if there any questions. Suggestion for a citizen or rep should be put on the port commission. Every bit of advocacy or outreach enriches the port authority further. A lot of concerns from public about air pollution, noise etc that go into the NEPA program. Always tell community or citizen group that if there is a question about the port, then just call the port. Community will continue to be a big focus for the port. 00:08:40 Port had not built a facility with push-backs  that wasn't supported or backed. Case involving port and company. Port was awarded 100 million dollars. Environmental affairs program helps out a lot with community outreach. Not trying to save the whole world but make the world livable. 00:18:34 Always ask people what their biggest challenge is and how they overcame it. For her an opportunity is what she makes it. The port offers a lot of opportunities. Lot of people say biggest perk of working with the government is to not account for every hour of the day. Environmental affairs department was established in 1984. Work really well with trade development operations. 00:24:33 Have been around for 100 years. Never gone through Sunset. May have been an oversight. Not an agency. Self evaluation report made a lot of people aware of what everyone does. Here to see which areas could be bettered. The big Ditch.   
PortHouston;D. Mayville;1958;2012;D. Mayville, 1958, 2012,   Log – D. Mayville 10-04-2012 [00:02] Recorded 10-04-2012, Houston, TX, at Pilot’s Assoc. offices. [00:47] Born 12-10-1958 Galveston, TX. Lived there, finished high school. Lived in Houston 8 months  returned to Galveston. Started work as a deckhand on Pilot Boat [PB] 04-16-1979. [05:12] Duties included boarding Pilots, logging ships, cleaning and cooking, minor engine work. Acquired Swath boat ’93. They had advanced design, improved comfort on the sea. Pilot Boats are: Houston, Lone Star, Bayou City, Yellow Rose. [14:26] Cooking for pilots and crew a challenge. Mentored by 2 [PB] Captains, Charlie Register and Earl Bradshaw. Learned to drive [PB] on days off. [PB] crewed by captain and deckhand. [21:04] ’83 Earl Bradshaw died on [PB] from heart attack. D. Mayville [DM] replaced him. In’96 all [PBs] got 2 crew members. [DM] Ran [PB] until promoted to Galveston’s Port Captain in ’09. ’97 all [PB] captains required to have Coast Guard 100ton Captain’s License: requires 720 days sea time and written exam. [31:05] Challenging boat-to-boat and boat-to-ship transfers described. One man has fallen in the sea in [DM]’s career. He was retrieved and uninjured. Excellent safety record. Pilots wear flotation devices when climbing ladder, water activated inflation. Pilot’s Assoc. sponsor occasional charitable dinner cruises on [PB]. [39:33] [DM] is responsible for personnel and equipment during storms. For hurricane Ike took all [PB]’s to Barber’s Cut near La Porte, TX to run out the storm. In aftermath surveyed destruction and reported to Coast Guard. Boats found in parking lot. For hurricane Rita took [PB]’s to Corpus Christi. Rita made landfall near Beaumont. [46:57] Port Captain’s job includes managing the [PB] crews. They work 12 hr. shifts night and day. He orders equipment. Groceries delivered MWF. He mediates problems with the crews: hires and fires. [DM] checks the bills with Pilot’s accountant monthly. Oversees day-to-day operations in Galveston. His office is in a converted ship container. [54:40] [DM] acknowledges people who have helped him in his career including [PB] Captains, Pilot’s Assoc. Presiding Officers and Boat Keeper’s (executive committee members) and Pilots. [57:25] End of Interview Characters with spaces: 2,194. 
PortHouston;Clyde Fitzgerald;xxxx;2011;Clyde Fitzgerald, xxxx, 2011  CLYDE FITZGERALD Summary: Clyde Fitzgerald, President of the ILA, speaks about his experience working at the waterfront. He talks about the different people in a gang, how containerization came to be very important for Houston, container royalty and how automation is slowly phasing out the workforce. 00.23 Betsy Peterson, Sept 09, 2011 District offices of ILA, Webster, TX 00.50 Born in Lovelady ,TX. Moved to Houston at 3. Father and two uncles worked on the docks. All three were longshoreman. One uncle worked o the vessel while father and the other uncle worked on the terminal. Terminal longshoreman work on the dock delivering and receiving cargo once it is on and off the vessel. Then warehouse longshoreman deliver it by truck or rail to the customer. Terminal longshoreman different labor union. Started working at docks at 16. worked on docks for 6-7 years. Then became foreman, dock/walking foreman and then President of Local in 1969. 06.00 worked on docks throwing bags, drums of oil, bales of cotton. All handled by hand. In the warehouse, Walking foreman could have upto 25 men gangs working at any dock. 5 men in a gang, one driver, one fork lift operator, 4 men that loaded the palates. Cotton Squeezers. Machine to load and unload cotton. 8.39 Cotton paid more money on ship only. in warehouse worked cotton by the hourly rate. Was not piece work. Fork lift operator was normally the gang foreman. Walking foreman was above everybody. 10.22 peers and relatives encouraged CF to run for office. Ran for recording secretary and got elected. Served one term for two years. Decided to run for President. Elected positions - President, VP. Business agent, recording secretary, 5 person exec board. Only two full time jobs - President and business agent. 11.54 Business agent and President shared and received orders from the Board and would do the hiring. Alternated the jobs. Negotiated contracts. President is the chief negotiator for the local. Would have contract committee people be elected to negotiate. District is above all local unions in that particular district.  13.14 Negotiate contracts for whole district Moorhead City, NC to Brownsville, TX. Master contract is negotiated by the international and all locals participate. Contract committee present proposals, present it to employers and then negotiate it together. Always been handled at an international level, more so after containerization. Master fully automated contract. Almost impossible to have a national contract on break bulk (loose cargo, steel, cars etc). 15.33 Port of Houston big on containerization. Break bulk cargo in Houston - Steel. Don't handle oil at port. Done only at terminals and at refineries. Once barreled, then would be loaded. 17.14 First container ship came to Houston in 1956. Sea Land, first big container carrier. 1969 container revolution. 105 day strike, tried to win a contract to stuff and strip a container on the pier instead of outsourcing stuffing and stripping. Won the contract but later ruled by Fed Maritime commission as illegal. 50 mile rule - any cargo going within a 50 mile radius of the port had to be stuffed and stripped on the dock. 19.50 Non-union started in 1986. Back then, not unusual to be on strike once every 2 years. When on strike nothing worked, everything stopped. Went a few weeks without pay, when strike was over, ships were waiting to be unloaded, didn't go anywhere else, were just waiting. Ships just backed up. Worked day and night to catch up. 105 day strike New York went back to work after 54 days, Jacksonville, FL and Houston were two ports in the ILA that stayed on strike for 105 days. 23.30 Containers go directly to customers facility. Lost many jobs. Jobs all now skilled. Better wages and benefits through containerizations. Locals grew because automation allowed an increase in cargo coming in. Warehouse and terminal side has grown but longshoreman numbers have dropped but better jobs. They didn't drop just didn't increase much. If 50 mile radius could have been maintained there would have been more loading and stripping on dock than there is now. 27.54 Non union mostly tramp ships - customer charters a vessel and move cargo on it. No carrier to have a relationship with like with container carriers. on rail most of the containers come from west container. Quicker to get it there by ship. Can get container to Chicago from west in three days. Panama canal will change that. Lot of cargo from ASia  will go to the east coast and gulf through the canal. Before containerization 200 longshoreman work day and night to unload for two weeks or longer. Today 100 longshoreman can do it in 12-20 hours. 32.00 Back then no training, learnt on our own. Got on machine during lunch hour and fiddled around. Today, training in contract and employees pay to train. Give older longshoreman a fair chance to learn. Computers fit in with clerks and checkers. Eliminated few clerks and checkers jobs. OCR. Where there used to be a clerk writing contents of the box, scanners and bar codes do the job now. Some terminals in Europe that are all computerized. Very few people loading and unloading. Computers running the machinery. 4-5 people operating machinery when there used to be a 100 men. Built a fully automated terminal in Virginia 6 yrs. ago. Came in to Mobile, Alabama and built a container terminal the old fashioned way after Virginia. Building a terminal in Jacksonville, Fl that is fully automated. Fully automated terminal allows use of land where boxes can be moved in and out much quicker. Automation allows to not have too many people on the dock. so no threat of getting run over and killed. Barbers Cut - 60, 70 people running RTGs (cranes) loading and unloading trucks. Jacksonville terminal designed to do same job with 7 people up in a tower controlling machine to load and unload. Hope to not get knocked out because of sheer volume of containers coming in. Have trained Virginia and Jacksonville and now Houston, to run and program machines. Any job in the terminal in Jacksonville, FL would be ILA. Computers, programming etc all ILA jobs. 41.44 Container royalty rewarded to compensate for loss of jobs. District office was integrated long before local unions because they wanted to make sure every group had representation. Each group had own set of rules and own qualifications for seniority. Had to work through all of that. Judge made final decision. 48.05 Made sure to keep equal number of foreman. No problem regarding segregation. Managed to work through all of that. Was elected first president of the merged local on an interim basis. Everybody was represented fairly and it was successful. 51.15 Social side. ILA sponsored teams. Would join other leagues. Labor Day picnic. Did not do too much back then. Last 10-11 years have been very involved with Labor Day. 53.15  Watched and learnt on the job. Advice to new people coming in. " We have a good thing going here, so make sure to keep that going." Majority of the workforce appreciates the port. Have not had a strike at the port since 1974. 56.00 Non union companies pay a lot less. in the turning basin where break bulk cargo is. making less money today than in 1986. In order to compete for cargo. Non union has devastated wages and benefits. 
PortHouston; Charlie Lou Paysee;1943;xxxx;Charlie Lou Paysee, 1943, xxxx,    CHARLIE LOU PAYSEE SUMMARY: Charlie Lou Paysee, office manager at the ILA, recalls her mother Emily Moses’ career at the ILA  beginning her career working alongside her mother. She remembers attending Labor Day parties and growing up in an Union household. Paysee discusses a time when local unions were segregated and talks about how women are holding more posts in the Union now than before. 00:45 Charlie Lou, maiden name Moses. Mother Emily Moses. Paysee – French. Husband’s family came to Louisiana. Born in Galveston. Worked in Galveston till Hurricane Ike. Live in Bellevista. ILA offices severely damaged during Ike. Born 1943, mother Emily Moses worked in ILA. Worked for Buddy Rasberry. Started working in Nov 1977, worked for Benny Holland, Clyde Fitzgerald. Mother was there for 44 years. Mother died Sept 15, 2000. Retd in 1991. She was bookkeeper, secretary, office manager. Grandfather was business agent for teamsters. Union knew each other. Mom got job there. Very low paying when started. 6 day work week. 15 min coffee breaks twice a day. Was only child. Did filing during summertime but didn’t get paid. Mother went to secretarial school. Did not go to college. In early 50s, there was split in Union. ILA was part of American Federation of Labor. ILA was kicked out of AFL. Even got office stationery that said ILA independent. Then President of ILA, Yaeger went to the new longshoreman association, with all the contracts. 11:11  No one followed Yaeger. Stayed with secretary treasurer in old company. Some integration as far as executive office was concerned. Locals were still segregated. While growing up did not have a problem with integration. Not all longshoreman were black. Husband’s grandfather worked on docks and was white. Father came from TN, Educated and also taught in Kentucky. Invented a machine but no patents. Dad worked in coal mines for sometime and decided not to continue with it. He joined Coastguards. Stationed in Galveston. 16:33 Father injured in war. Became city bus driver. Never worked on docks. Mother first woman secy of Galveston labor Council. President OPEIU, VP of Texas state AFL and honorary member of ILA. Very few honorary members of ILA. Commonly said that ILA stand for I love America. Buddy Rasberry’s wife used to say it also stands for I live alone. Family and ILA were two most important things of her life. 19:50 Massey stopped taking salary. Mom was not paid much. Primary responsibility was to negotiate contracts. Master contract in place now from New York to Texas. Have to negotiate on a local level only. Earlier there was no master contract. Had to negotiate own contracts then. Hired some new people. Hired Lucille Allen, who was a Black lady. In the 60s Mom interviewed her. Eventually went to work for ILA. 25:30 Did filing in the earlier days. Decorated the office. Graduated, married, came back in 1970. Had two children. Did some temp work. There was book keeper then and three  other people besides Mother. They were worried about Mother and asked to help her out for a month in 1977. Increased by another month. Then offered full time position. Children were still young. Concerned about children who were still at home. Upto 1990 ILA had annual conventions. South Atlantic and Gulf Coast district. Elections had to be in this geographical area. Kids could come to office after school. Went to work by accident. 31:45 Thought was going to be housewife. Went to work in 77. Mom’s title became Office Manager and Executive Secretary. Soon, took over as Office Manager, mother remained Exec Secy. Took over annual conventions. Knew a lot of stuff just from being around. Mother taught the rest. Buddy died in 1990. Pretty common for Secretary treasurer to become President. Like losing a brother. Been doing bookkeeping too. 36:35 Lots of changes in Union. Went from annual convention to biannual convention. Past convention, voted to have convention every 4 years. Mainly money saving tactic. Handle receipts and expenditure as part of bookkeeping. Mainly financial work. Be conscientious, care about work. Did not have to be told to do things, Did things as and when they presented themselves. Union has to care about employees, make things better for everyone. Maybe things are not quite the same now. Now there is more division. In the past, situation was progressive especially with regard to black and white staff members as opposed to other companies that had all white staff. Now, there majority of Union members are black. Younger ones feel they are not being allowed to advance as  fast as everyone else. They want more positions and opportunities. Experience in the hold and ship, physical work before they hold office. Most have done the work. 45:35 Labor Day was a big deal. Grandfather was with the teamsters. Grandmother would organize prizes. Big Barbeque organized at the park. Dances and singing were organized. Celebrated it with a big picnic every year. All Unions were together, not just ILA. Hayrides. Dock and Marine Council meetings, collection of different locals. Almost always used to be three times a year. Now, meets once a year. Social aspect dinner or reception. Convention used to be every year. Big deal for the ILA. Big Christmas party every year. Open house, food, visitors. Not as many social events. Mainly because of money. Not the same enthusiasm for Unions as before. Youngsters are taking 40 hr work week, 5 day work week for granted. Those were set because of Unions. Better wages also because of Union. In the past, companies had to give benefits to non Union workers so they could compete with Union workers. In the down period now, maybe will pick up, maybe not. 52:30 Grew up in Union household. Went to political rallies. Believed in what they were doing. People worked together, believed in each other. I’m a Democrat, but also watch the Opposition to see what they are saying. Never minded being called a Liberal. People don’t pay attention anymore.  56:20 Went to Labor day picnic few years ago. Did not know anybody. Comfort is a bigger factor now than it used to be. Children don’t stay out anymore, too hot. Two children. Daughter was involved in Union on campus, University of California, Santa Barbara. Married a physicist from Israel. Moved to New Mexico and then to Israel. Son in Minnesota. Lot of longshoreman’s children become longshoreman. Good money but dangerous. Even those with college degrees don’t make that sort of money. Hard work and dangerous. 1:02:20 Had no problems being part of the very few women. Mother used to not shy away. Used to give it back. Things in a way have regressed. Was more equal then, Now there is more separation. People don’t want to hear from a woman. More and more women are part of the Union. Men resent it. Some lawsuits. Men say women should not be on the waterfront. More automation, jobs have changed. Then, women couldn’t physically handle the heavy boxes but could be clerk and checker or nowadays operating machinery or cranes. Don’t stand for discrimination of any kind. 1:09:20 Been a long time since there has been a strike. Don’t really deal with master contract, deal mainly with financial stuff. Mother ‘s name was Moses. People called her everything but Moses. Mosely etc. No official nickname. Lot of respect and love.  1:14:00 There was a split. The IRILA has always been anti communist. Harry Bridges. More socialist than communist. Mom had to sign a document saying she was not communist. Our Union was proud they were anti communist. West Coast was little suspicious. Up north Unions have been sometimes about gangs and violence. Never any kickbacks in the district office. . 1:17:00 (AFTER STOPPING TAPE) Always been Irish or Italian Local 1576 was the Banana Local. Mostly Mexican. Merged into Local 20. They handled the bananas. When they merged put locals together. Lost a lot of stuff in hurricane. 8 ft of water in the building. 1:21:45 Galveston so much smaller than it used to be. Some friction between Houston and Galveston. Never thought HQ would not be in Galveston. Though college educated most feel they can make better living on docks. Some used to work at docks in the summer and go back to regular job after summer. Health insurance was through Maritime Association. Paid through West Gulf, salaries, benefits. Did not go down much to the docks. Mainly in office. Wisconsin, they are out to get Unions. They don’t want any Unions. 
PortHouston;Charles Montgomery;1948;2011;Charles Montgomery, 1948, 2011,   CHARLES MONTGOMERY Summary: Charles Montgomery discusses his career on the waterfront, from longshoreman to President of the Clerks and Checkers Union. He talks about the lack of training at the waterfront, automation leading to dwindling man hours and the accepted pecking order. ILA Local 1351 Sept 07, 2011 ILA OFFICES, Clearlake City 01:13 President, Local 1351, clerks and checkers. Started in 1968. Stepfather was a foreman. Worked on mother's social security number for some time. Started throwing bags and rolling cotton and other general foreman work. ILA nepotism has always been prevalent. Finished high school and continued to work. IN 1971, friend introduced to checkers. Was drafted in 1971. Military time lasted till 1973. Came back to work as a clerk and checker. 1974 - went from working every day to working once every month. 77 economy turned around and Democrats took over. Domestic policy was good. Changed jobs. Clerk and checker. No training. Import marks. People taught on the job. Learnt to create locations within the warehouse, cross reference. 10:31 Still receive a lot of cargo that is break bulk. Also will take cargo from a container out and spread it out so it easy for distribution. Everything has a distinguishing identification mark. Need a packing list from the manufacture detailing the correct information. Like address on a letter. Used pretty rudimentary equipment back then. Fork lifts were a popular item, sophisticated gear for lifting was just being introduced. Got in during a technological evolution. in 1977, Port of Houston opened the first fully automated container terminal - Barber's Cut. Opportunity for younger men to get into working at the Port as older men did not feel comfortable working with containers. Moved into a container yard around 1977 and worked for two years and learnt all about containers - nomenclature, how it operates, stowage etc. Then became clerk for container ships. Never had a problem with jobs after that. Stayed in container related jobs till 1990. Moved to Port Authority and started working on their container yard. Great technological improvements related to handling containers. Sophisticated equipment from forklifts with short blades and 5000 lifting capacity to 90,000 lb. forklift to overhead cranes. 2005 became president of clerks and checkers, have worked in career as clerk and checker and longshoreman in every type of job available at the waterfront. Grazing the job. Well rounded organization.  19:36 in 1990 - recognized the shortcoming of lack of training for the job. Only criteria for hiring was a strong back. in 1971 failed miserably as a checker. Was taught the ropes by someone. Why no training? Became stevedore of clerks in 1990, sent a letter to local 1351 asking for classes to train checkers and clerks. Taught a few classes in 1995. Held classes at the Union hall with visual aids. President in 2005. Hiring spree. 372 people in 36 months. Instituted a training policy. mandatory 12 hr training class. Those trained are in high demand and are in key positions today. Have knowledge of what to do before they go for the job. Makes for a healthy industry. Highlights Houston. Raised standard on hiring. Navigation of keyboard, typing speed. Basic math tests. Raising calibre of person being hired. Ha made contract negotiations easier. 26:03 109 day strike. People walked picket. Went back to work in 1968 and there was a lot of business. Next event was in the 70s for wage increase. Back then negotiated wage increase was for a nickel or a dime an hour. 1977 strike relegated to containers. Working to get the 50 mile rule instituted. Anything manufactured within 50 miles of the port had to be stuffed and stripped only by ILA employees. Was successful for a brief period. Overturned in 1983. Starting seeing the beginnings of non union competition. some non union companies tried to unload cargo on union docks. There was cargo being delivered for loading by non union, cargo and Equipment was destroyed, people were hurt. Quit being adversarial and just started working on a situation that was amicable for both sides. 35:56 Operate in all public docks. North Turning Basin area. City docks 8-32. Barber's Cut and Bayport. Union operates and runs docks. Workable arrangement. non union - privately owned Manchester terminal, Greensport and publicly owned Central Port. Non union do not fully automated cargo. Active only in break bulk area. Do work with some containers but do not use the same technological advances used by union workers. Fully automated work. 41:41 Was happy being a "soldier", had more leisure time. In the 80s, participated in the labor unrest, appreciated policy and work of union. More progressive than business minded. Ran for Locals Contract Committee. Negotiating styles. Read books, listened to contract negotiations, watched movies. Sat on the contract committee through 1990. 48:30 Pay and benefits of non union do not rival those of the union. Just short of union. Benefit program at the ILA is very good. Makes for a better community. health benefits, retirement plan bonuses throughout the year based on work performed. Cannot beat the  non union and did not want to join them. Went out and hired some non union people into the ILA. No stoppage of work (strike) since 1977. 52:38 Business based on world economy. Takes two or three months for the orders to trickle down at the Port. In good economy Sept, Oct are busy months because of pre christmas. Now, Containers are floating warehouses. Houston is a large oil and gas port and is also the center for manufacturing oil and gas products and oil and gas expiration equipment. Deep water drilling and land drilling, huge influx in pipe, all country pipe. Business in the summer are slow. Things start getting busy in the fall. Now all predicated on world economics. 57:40 Advances in technology is the next big thing that is going to be detrimental to manpower of "man hours." Hardware and software business to try and adapt computer programs to do regular work. Optical character recognition (OCR) -to read the container numbers. There are programs that interface with yard locations, one to locate any container in any yard, program that knows all available spaces on a ship. Eliminates humans completely. Will displace longshoreman of a particular rank. (TAPE ENDS at 1:00:19) Tape 2 00:20 (Talking of changes for longshoreman) Technological advancements that will replace jobs done by human beings. in the 70s, Port of Houston had 10 million man hours a year. After containerization, low of under 4 million man hours a year between 1977 - 2005. 70s created container royalty rule. Helped offset the loss of man hours. Reward someone to work on containers, like a tax put on every container that is unloaded. Paid to the working men. Once a year bonus. Strange thing is that the container royalty check is received by those people that are still working now and not by those who were put out of work by containerization. 04:50 Attrition ratio is much lower now than ever. Large exodus in 1983 when there was a merger of the locals. Houston had segregated locals. 1983 merged together. Lot of men from all ethnicity decided to retire instead of merging. Then in 1986-89 next lot left because of the evolution of containerization. Big hurdle as a labor leader. 09:10 ILA clerks and checkers, warehousemen and longshoreman. 6 ILA locals. Port of Houston employees, police officers assoc. for Port of Houston, small clerks and checkers  office workers local and linesman locals. Longshoreman handle all the vessel work. Warehousemen handle all the ground transportation. 11:10 Pecking order - Longshoreman, warehouseman, clerks and checkers. No work at the longshore hall (Local 24) would create a ripple effect to the warehouse local and the clerks and checkers local. At Local 24, being a walking foreman or a crane operator are ideal positions. Pile man - was prime position. Job was to make ice water for the workers. 1981, negotiated that position away. At Local 28 - warehouseman's hall, ideal jobs would be walking foreman for Port authority or crane operator. Chief of clerks, timekeeper. 18:34 Advice. "Dedicated Worker" - similar to a 40 hr week job. No vacation or holiday pay. Dedicated to a company and will work exclusively with that company. Fewer regular jobs now. 22:24 Dedicated workers are obligated to the company. If the company has no work, can come back to hiring hall and find work. If company calls, must come back. Started dedicated worker in 2000. Before that had something similar called "Core Worker." 24:49 Hazing. Lot of fun to come to work at the beginning. More a meeting place for friends and camaraderie. Now not as fun as it used to be. 27:30 Larger than life characters. Sunny Hardin - feared by everyone. Had the face of a bull dog. But the biggest teddy bear. Fred Hanson- big man stature wise. Clerks and checkers local. Bill Hausinger. Jimmy Hill and Frank. Was like on television when they would fight. Buddy Rasberry - was held in high esteem. Started as a longshoreman and made it to the top of the longshore local and eventually President of the District. Many larger than life characters at the Houston Port. 36:25 Today, it is a different type of business and people and society. Better educated than before. some of the quirkiness is missing. Consumed with trying to make a living rather than trying to make a friend. Waterfront had a magnetic quality that draws people to it. Used to play a lot of gambling activities, during slow times of business when could not get a job, would still go down and play card games. Would play Texas Hold em or Knock Poker. Would also play Craps. 
PortHouston;Charles King;1938;2012;Charles King, 1938, 2012,   CHARLES KING SUMMARY: Charles King talks to Betsy Peterson about his career at the US Coastguards. He explains the work involved in being part of the merchant marine safety unit. He also talks about the difficulty in finding good quality personnel to replace those that retire and stresses on the importance of safety and training in the industry. 00:00:10 Date January 11, 2012. Interviewer Betsy Peterson. Interviewee Charles King. At Buffalo Marine Service, Houston Ship Channel. At a portion of the the original ship channel used by the Allen Brothers. Brady island to deepen channel. 00:01.50 Born in Bozeman, Montana in 1938. Wanted to go to air force academy. Coastguard recruiting academy.Was appointed as cadet in coastguard academy. Coast guard academy in New London, Connecticut on banks of Thames River. CG came to be with merger of lighthouse and lifesaving service in 1790. 00:09.00 4-year training program not unlike other military academies. State maritime academies that have state scholarships. Federal Merchant Marine academy at Kings Point, New York and graduate merchant mariners. Maritime Administration supervises that. Merchant ships of the US are not competitive in the world market. because of cheap labour that is available on most foreign ships. US pays more for licensed and unlicensed seamen. Union got involved. Training became important and expensive. US ownership makes competition very hard. no foreign ships can run from port to port and carry cargo. Come to the US, discharge and load at one other port in the US. Not more than one. and cant discharge at more than one port. This is to prevent from competition with other US ships that travel from port to port. US laws are very restrictive. Protection for merchant seamen. Shanghaied. 00:13.52 Jones act. Part of the Cabotage laws - Seafarers protection law. Advantageous for seamen. 00:14.35 Started as deck officer. Graduated with Bachelor of Science in Engineering. Easiest to get accredited then. Can now graduate in many more fields like, international affairs, engineering etc. Graduate with 4-5 opportunities to specialize. Assigned to wherever there is a vacancy for junior officers. Coastguards charged with merchant mariner - those who man the US merchant ships. Coastguards inspect the ship and then gives a certificate of clearance. Ship plans are  reviewed by coastguard. Today, same plans are reviewed in conjunction with the American bureau of shipping and other classification agencies. Help coastguard determine some factors. More specialized. 00:20.48 Merchant Marine safety. Captain of the Port offices. Responsible for the port as far as commercial ships are concerned. OCMI. Officer in charge of marine inspection. Senior inspector of personnel. Oversees licensing and credentials of mariners. Senior inspector in charge of structural inspections on ship. Senior investigating officer in charge of determining conduct of seamen. Bureau of marine inspection and navigation. Alive because river boats had steam engines which were capable of exploding. BMIN needed to get involved to prevent boiler explosions on river boats. 00:24.02 Initial placement was in Port Arthur and then Washington. Search and rescue work. Law enforcement. After that - deck watch officer. Wanted to be an engineer. Called a student engineer. Learnt power plants, auxiliaries, security of the vessel according to structure and integrity. Then qualified as an engineering watch officer and then assistant engineer. Was then transferred to a Buoy depot in Astoria, Oregon. Supervised the industry of maintaining buoys. Got him into an engineering persuasion. Small enough base to become an executive officer and engineer. Learnt a lot about people. Did offshore cruises for aid and navigation work. Every 4-5 months, had a 30 day ocean station patrol. Along with aid to navigation carried weather bureau officers. They would take weather observations at the point in the Atlantic and report them back to land for analysis. Was a primary purpose of the radio beacon. Also to provide search and rescue efforts. Buoy depot was responsible for care and maintenance of all aid to navigation equipment in that area. Buoy has a 8-10 ton sinker and sometimes 2 of those attached to a lower end of the chain which comes up to the bottom end of the buoy that is a floating structure and supports the batteries for the light and the foghorn. Colored a certain color to mark either the starboard or port, right or left of the channel. Also developed other types of marks to denote intersections along the channel. 00:31:36 Markers are primarily changed for maintenance Developed other methods to control the fouling of the buoys and ships. There was a three year cycle on buoys because of can maintenance. Every year they had to change batteries out. Lead batteries would only last for a year. 00:33:39 Did an isolated tour for 14 months on a long range aid to navigation station in the middle Pacific. Fortunate enough to have a commanding officer on first ship. Was an OCMI before commanding officer. Applied for merchant marine safety assignment. Asked for SFO, LA, San Diego. Was assigned to Port Arthur, TX. Wife got to know of posting  through the Navy Times. Could talk on radio once a week. Came back from tour, took 30 days vacation and then drove to Port Arthur from Montana. Was a bit of shock because it was unknown. But learnt to live within those parameters. (TAPE STOPS) (TAPE RESUMES) 00:38:47 Port Arthur was a merchant Marine safety assignment. Opportunity t learn a lot about what had happened before and how coastguards had changed all that. Began involvement with marine industry of the US. Worked as a regulatory agency with merchant marine personnel. Being in Port Arthur, primary function was tank ships that hauled all petroleum products. Lot of construction for offshore industry then. Vessels including drill ships were all inspected and certified by coastguards. Create service industries. A lot of cleaning needs to be done. With all those shipyards many had own service industries. Provided a lot of opportunity for employment. 00:42:15 Was in Port Arthur for three years, Coastguard wanted well rounded and qualified officers, went back to sea and headed to Vietnam. Ship was home ported in Long BEach, CA. Was assigned as a engineering officer. Went through a training period of 2 1/2 months. In 1970 headed to Vietnam for 10 months. Went in support of the navy, Coastguard had armament that was good for the short bombardment. Needed more conventional type of weapon in Vietnam which the coastguard had. Was in patrol almost every night. Offered naval gun support. 00:46:22 Was in Danang Harbor 3-4 times. When there were spare parts in Danang, would go ashore to pick it up and then get it back to the dock. Felt safe on the ship but not so much on land. Were trained on what to look out for etc. Lasted a year. Did ocean station, searched rescue, navigation support and fisheries investigation and support in the Gulf of Alaska. Because fishing is so good in those waters the Japanese, Chinese and Russians would come in to fish. Had to enforce boundaries strictly otherwise marine life would have been depleted. 00:48:46 Always had to keep an eye out for the fishing. Radar was not so good back then. Could only see the mother ships but was difficult to discern the small fishing boats. Sometimes they were sided by the fisheries enforcement officer who were on board. Hefty fines for the operating company, so often the fleets were operated by the govt. under the guise of a company. 00:51:02 After this went to another assignment in San Diego. Was the senior inspector at the San Diego shipyard that was building tank ships for the American Merchant Marine.  Subsidized for construction and operation of the merchant vessels. Reason subsidy was necessary was because of the less expensive construction and crewing of vessels in foreign countries. Japan as rebuilding, Korea was starting up. Not as regulated as the US. Gave them an opportunity to be less expensive to build and crew. 00:52:34 Got into the container business early on with Sealand. Europe had used more coastalized and into cargo movt than US had. US had a better transportation infrastructure. Their waterway system was more utilized. Internationally as early as anyone, nationally not so much. Trying to develop containers on barges to move them up the river system. Requires pretty large barge for efficiency. Boxes take up a lot of cube. Grain does not add up too much. Built tank ships in San Diego for 4 years. Was transferred to the headquarters and did 4 years in merchant marine safety. Chose to retire in 1980 from the coastguards. Got acquainted with Buffalo Marine service during next posting. Left shipyard in 1990. Moved back after a year and started consulting in Marine and environmental safety at that time. Shortly after that ended up with a law called OPA 90 - Oil pollution Act of 1990 as a result of Exxon Valdez. Helped the local towing industry with the new laws that were implemented. Has developed into a huge business. Were very effective in preventing spills. Prevention, containment and clean up. Need to continually train.Had written the spill contingency plan for the business. Enjoy being a part of the marine industry in Houston. Have grown into the largest bunkering company in the area. Bunkering is a term that comes from coal bunkers. When coal was used to fire the boiler on the ship, it was stored in a bunker. When oil became the fuel for the boiler, the name still stuck. When bunkering used to bring coal, now bring oil. 01:04:49 Oil is delivered by going to a terminal or a refinery, tank farm and hook up to a shore side pipeline and piped on to a barge, in several tanks. some have 10-12 tanks. Have pumps on board the barge. When going alongside a barge, have a flexible hose that gets hooked up and oil is delivered. Remake those connections to check for leaks. Use a new gasket for every hook up. All the piping is pressure tested periodically. to make sure it is not a source of pollution for the water. 01:06:27 Training has become more cohesive. Safety has become very important, Environment has also become important. Steps taken to make sure environment is not polluted. Marsh helps break up tidal wave if there is a hurricane. Hurricane Ike was not too bad, because Houston was on the right side of the hurricane. Only high water. Port Arthur was badly devastated. Wiped out fishing and hunting camps. In Houston had high winds, high water. Learnt to handle that pretty well. (Someone walks in and interrupts)  ((Interview resumes)) 01:10:52 Only way to handle hurricanes is to make sure to get info as early as possible. Port needs to cooperate with coastguard. 01:14:12 Cooperation is growing industry wide. Last 20 years have learnt a lot from East and West Coast. Even though they are competitors, learn a lot from each other. Gulf Coast water is a lot cleaner than it used to be. Learnt lessons from California and Washington. 01:17:39 Cant employ anyone other than US citizens. Get TWIC cards through a screening process. TSa does the screening process. Cant get merchant marine license unless with a TWIC card. Because of the increase in responsibility used a lot of merchant marine safety officers in the law enforcement dept. for years after 9/11. Inspection program for towboats, for navigation, firefighting and life saving equipment and for drugs. Drillers and support people were not regulated. Transition from shoreside to off shore. Boats will be coastguard inspected like deep sea are. 01:27:29 AWO presented their comments to the docker. Individual companies were impacted differently. It will be a big transition. Reassure customers that things will be better. Safety management systems have been an assurance to customers. Management systems are nothing more than written policy and procedures on how you comply with them. Changed more because of awareness to environmental sensitivity. Safety training involves environmental awareness and sensitivity. 01:30:20 One of the biggest challenges at Buffalo will be the satisfactory replacement of mariners as they get older. Have not done very well at getting communities or schools to realize the potential in the marine workforce. Real intense training program at Buffalo. Not an easy environment for families. hurts the industry. End up with men and women who are not family people. Try to make the atmosphere more personal. 9/11 has made it a bit more difficult to implement. Only hire TWIC card carriers. Biggest challenge is getting personnel. 01:35:42 The most important thing to know in the coastguard is development of relationships. Cooperation. Need to get a job that a person loves. Difference between younger and older inspectors. Older one knew who could be trusted, younger one did not. Younger one was more by the book. Coastguard has had to deal with that ever since they became the regulatory authority for the merchant marine. 
PortHouston;Charles Gage;1930;2011;Charles Gage, 1930, 2011,   CHARLES H GAGE SUMMARY: Charles Gage talks to Pat Jasper about the 105 day strike, how containerization has drastically reduced man hours and segregated unions. 00:32 ILA offices in Webster, TX Sept 08, 2011 01:05 Native Houstonian. UH on basketball scholarship. Worked for SHELL for sometime. Followed father and uncles to the waterfront in 1946. Father and family moved to Genoa during WW 1, right up the street they had a truck farm and sold vegetables to an air force base in WW1. Was told by the McGowen family that the port was growing and looking for workers. Father and uncles joined and later joined the union. Father died at 56 but was President and VP of local 1276 when he died. Rolled cotton, and was walking foreman for a while. Then went to work for Canadian Gulf land for 20 years. Then back to Union hall. Have 5 children. 05:08 first day on the docks, was 16 years old. Saw people loading pig iron on a railcar. A rail car has pieces of pig iron and it comes with a magnet to pick it up. Trimming grain - had to build a theater when you loaded grain. While pouring grain into the ship, it would not go to the corners, so men were shoveling it into the corners to make sure a federal law was followed. Men ended up with mouth disease. No water keg, but had a water bucket that everyone drank out of. No cups. A lot of foreman were drunks. Worked in a lot of ports, Houston as the cleanest of them all. 09:00 Filled in when someone quit in the gang handled by father and uncle. AT 16 could not do something that involved strenuous manual labor, but helped around on a lot of summer days. Uncle Clarence was a ship superintendent, Uncle Jim had a gang, father had a gang and uncle walter had a gang. Father was VP of local 1273. Was a mailman with Shell oil. Crossed the picket line with scooter everyday of the strike. Went to work on docks in 1949. 13:25 Strike at Shell. Striking for better conditions and better wages. oil field company workers went on strike, Father would not even get a haircut if it was not at union barbershop. Houston was more of a union town. When people from the North started moving to Texas, it changed from a democratic state to a Republican state. No use for a Union man.  Will see a turnaround when the change comes. Right now people are made to work for minimum wage with no health insurance and no benefits. 17:00 Quit Shell because did not want to cross picket line. Waterfront was good for family. Primarily rolled cotton, with cotton got paid by the bale. Whereas longshore work was paid by the hour. Could work cotton for $3.50 and hour instead of regular work that paid $1.15 an hour. Rolled cotton daily for 7-8 years. Went to work for Young & Company for 3 years. Liberty Steel Doors for a few years. Canadian Gulf Line was a prestigious place to work. Was called and offered a job. Superintendent. Still got paid through the union. 1982 young men were disgruntled. with the work given. Worked with real estate for a while. Just decided one morning to put in for retirement after 30 years. 22:05 Was part of union even though was working exclusively for some companies. Not standard practice. Was second generation on the waterfront. never brought children to the waterfront. 24:10 Was on a strike for 4 months in 1961 or 1962. Container royalty. Two different wages in Houston. Containers make $12-15 an hour, more than the regular workers do now. Back then it was all one wage. President named Willie Wales. While he was on the Port Commission, they took a trip to Japan. Seen the first container ships being built. Came back and told everyone what to get prepared for. Politics got involved, started pushing older men aside and set up seniority system. A, B, or C button. 25 years or more got AA button. Left for real estate. Then got involved again in early 90s with the retirees. 27:31 Elected President of the retirees. Got everyone and their wives involved Started having meals together and also brought in some speakers from the union to talk. Container royalty. Each year workers get about $30,000. Retirees don't get a penny of that. The retirees had been on strike for 4 months so that present day workers could get container royalty. Feel like they should give about 5-10% of that to retirees. 30:00 Waterfront had a lot of ignorant people. Was informed by Willie that containers were coming and that it was going to kill the industry. Has cut the man-hours more than half. At first there were wenches and booms that took cargo on and off the ships. No electric wenches. Wenches worked on steam. Only one container company in the world called Sea-land. Through the years, containerizations has really strangled the industry. The only places that take ships with no containers are those that are too small to handle containers. Has cut the man hours down tremendously. Pension was set on man hours. When containerization hit, it cut man hours going in pension by half. Made a mistake during the  strike by not getting container royalty by the ton. Money would have been better. Move 1500 -2000 containers in 10 hours. Can move as much tonnage in a day as can be done in a week. When pension, welfare and vacation were first introduced the people that fought it the most were the ones that needed it the most. Willie Wales and Raymond Duncan helped tide over the crisis. 37:12 Biggest mistake was never made any change to the insurance paying into the pension, welfare and vacation plan. Man hours decreased and the insurance has been frozen. Tough to be on strike for 4 months. There was a grocery store on Canal's called Richie's Grocery that told the union hall they were willing to provide groceries until the strike was settled. They were faithful and went there for 4 months and managed to pay them back at the end of the strike, Were a blessing. Tough strike, had to struggle a lot for what the future employees are getting today. 40:35 Segregated unions. When started out as a walking foreman, unions were segregated. After a strike, the black local wanted a walking foreman on their end of the ship. They got it and did not need someone else watching over them. Walking foreman was white for a long time. This strike was in the 70s. Even though segregated, gave each union a sense of autonomy and control. Knew the merger was coming and that there would be a lot of hatred. Hence, got out of this. There has been a lot of difference since. 43:22 ((SAYS YOU CANNOT PUT THIS IN WRITING)) ""White man always worked harder than they did and made more tonnage. When they merged the two black and whites together then they seen the speed they work, and they all come down their speed. It has been a big problem in Houston. All kinds of different rules and regulations down there now." No complaints. "Waterfront was good to me, helped me raise my family and can never say anything really bad and I will be a union man till they put me in my grave." 44:37 ILA retirees organization. Have people from the deep sea local, time keepers local and the car loaders local. Meet every third Wednesday at noon. Have a guest speaker. Blossomed into a wonderful thing. 46:30 Gulf wives local merged with the deep sea local. Clerks and checkers union and the car loaders. Deep sea loaded anything that crossed the ocean. Couple of shore lines that ran between New York and Houston. ILA locals were also merged along with the black and white locals.  49:48 Had the privilege of working with people of every nation. got to know people from all over the world. Still close friends. Hear from them once in a while. Interesting, wonderful job. Delta ship line - brought all the paper to Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth. brought it from Canada or British Columbia till they sold out. Fascinating life. No two ships load the same way. Working with people from all over the world. Was city councilman in Pearland. Track 2 1:12:13 Nickname is Earthworm from Elmer Kimlin. IN 1951 was working flour in a ship Very cold day. He kept pouring cold water. at lunch time poured a water keg of water on him and he cursed saying earthworm looking.... Lot of history on the docks. 
PortHouston;Captain Tom Lightsey;1923;2011;Captain Tom Lightsey, 1923, 2011  TOM LIGHTSEY SUMMARY: Captain Tom Lightsey talks to Pat Jasper about his long career as a Houston Pilot. His journey from Biloxi, MS to the Northeast and then as a pilot to Houston, TX. His long career allowed him to see the world, learn new languages and grow through the ranks. Talks about "incidents", working during holidays as a pilot, how the pilots business is a closed shop and some of the challenges he faced during his long career. SEPT 27, 2011. Home of Tom Lightsey. 0:00:28 Thomas Nolan Lightsey Jr. Born in Biloxi, MS June 22, 1923. Went to school and graduated from high school in 1942. Joined the merchant marine and went to boot camp in 1943. Suffered from asthma but did not tell merchant marine employers about it. Passed the physical and went to boot camp in Florida for three months. Caught first tanker in June, 1943. 0:02:21 Merchant Marine is not a fighting organization, but deliver all the products all over the world. First tanker had diesel fuel to the Tanga islands submarines. At the end of WW 2 was on a tanker with aviation gasoline for the navy planes on their way to Japan. Role in the beginning was ordinary seamen, lowest position in the deck department. Got promoted to able seamen. After 18 months qualified to go to officer school, went to Maritime Officers school in Connecticut. Graduated with third mates license in May 1945. Then got on a tanker and went to the South Pacific. 0:04:16 Raised in Biloxi, after depression. Was poor student in school. After war, everyone went back to college. Loved being a third mate, stayed on ship. Four years later, made captain. Process - captain, chief mate (exec officer), Second mate (navigating officer), third mate, have to spend at least a year before rising through the ranks again. During the war, promotions were given out in six months. Had masters license at 26. Stayed in the Merchant Marine till became a Houston Pilot. 11 months trip out in the Persian Gulf to China and Italy. Enjoyed seeing the world. Became chief mate when company acquired three new ships. 50-60 ships, chosen to be chief major under construction of brand new chemical ships. Carried highly volatile cargo, stylene, benzene, zylene etc. Could cause cancer if you breathe it in. Have led a charmed life. 0:08:20 Move from 3rd mate to 2nd mate and the 2nd mate is a navigator. Need to layout the charts for the course over the next 24 hours. Was a poor student in school, so had to study  that much harder for next upgrade in license. "Mentors" on board ships taught Morse Code and Semaphone which helped in getting the upgrade in license. People were glad to help. Enjoyed every position. Being a pilot is very different. 0:13:00 Pilots own their own business and make the rules. Dispatcher receives the call. On for 15 days and off for 15 days. While on call, cannot socialize. Either working or sleeping. Pilot boat goes alongside the ship, pilot climbs a Jacob ladder up to the main deck and a mate escorts him up to the bridge. After introductions and knowing the particulars, pilot is then in command, makes all the decisions. safety is very important. 0:16:05 Channel is only 400 ft wide. Depending on the length, breadth and draft of ship, a certain speed needs to be determined to stop. Depending on how deep the ship is - the more water it displaces as it comes closer to the bank. When two ships meet it called Texas Chicken. Bank forces the ship back to the center of the channel. Channel is much wider now. 00:18:37 Had a collision with another pilot at 2am. Ripped a hole that was 30 ft in the side of the ship. Was a ground boy before that. Memory that lasts a lifetime. Another incident, not so bad. Call them incidents instead of collisions. 00:20:24 Often go on ships not knowing who the captain is. Would meet for the first time. Had a cheat-book with questions in a language the captain was familiar with. That way could talk to him directly and did not need an interpreter. Captain would like that extra touch. 00:22:40 Nowadays have to have a marine background to be a pilot. Half blue water men and half brown water men. Half steam ship people and half two boat people. Three year apprentice program. 00:24:15 Houston to be one of the most dangerous ship channels in the world. Pilots have a closed shop. No competition. Commission from the state of Texas, every port has to have pilots. It is good living and it is top of the Marine profession to become a pilot. Port commission is the Pilot Commission. They set the rate for raise, increase etc. 00:26:18  Getting into the Port commission is very difficult. Can have a lot of credentials but very few are chosen. Was the 53rd pilot since its inception in Houston. Very closed organization. Need to have friends in the commission. Wanted to be a pilot because it was less traveling and as a family man wanted to exercise that option. 00:29:09 Wife's sister had married a man from Boston, so she moved to Boston. In 1947, were home at the same time. Married in Biloxi. Was running offshore and moved up to New Jersey . Had two children there. While trying to be a pilot, moved from New Jersey to Pasadena. Had six children. Got another job as an investor. Cruises with family. 00:33:15 Worked on tankers for the whole career, sacrificed safety for pleasure. Company had chemical ships initially. Worked on those too. 00:34:41 Merchant Marine is a private company. After the war, the companies took their ships back from the Maritime association. Worked with Keystone. Rose through the ranks. Had the best of both worlds. Married the same woman, had the best job. 00:36:12 Liberty ship - ships that were built in WW 2 to make trips to carry goods. Ugly and small and quite a few were built, slow ships. At sea from 1946 -1953. 00:38:26 Background from ship or tug does not make that much of a difference. The person's personal skills counts. Test of fortitude. Now people have to have a maritime degree through a 4 year course. 00:39:50 Liberty company offered a job, NJ was too cold. Reason behind moving to Houston. Was operating a new chemical tanker. Would come back every 10-12 days to Houston. When wanted to leave the North East, made a list of the 27 pilots and found out their hobbies. Would talk to the pilots for hours. Had studied their hobbies. 00:44:09 Shifted close to Deer Park. Bought a lot in 1958 and built the house. 00:46:28 Would take various products from the Shell refinery and bring it to various distribution centers on the east coast. Pilots own the business and the boats. Have 35 employees Crews for the boat and Marine Superintendent in Galveston, brand new office in Deer  Park, 8-10 office staff, executive committee makes all the decisions and everyone meets once every 2-3 months. Everyone is equal. 00:49:10 Pool all the money, take the expenses out and what is left is divided equally among the pilots. No seniority system. (Shows a picture and explains) 00:50:31 Now pilots work like gentleman. Earlier used to work like dogs. There was always a ship waiting to be brought in. Have included minority, women. When one job is done, guaranteed 12 hours off. If two ships are handled, guaranteed 18 hours off. Wonderful communication systems. Can tell the depth, what it is, they converse. Safety has improved a great deal. All in constant contact. Port of Houston has a lot of room to expand. Key to progress. Houston has tripled in size. 00:52:47 Working conditions have improved. Communication - everyone has a laptop to figure out information 00:54:11 Fog. On from October to April. Safety guidelines in place now. Incidents have greatly reduced. 00:56:31 If there is an incident, PBRC - Pilot review board used to look into it. Now industry and port get involved. .One little incident can be blown out of proportion. Reason behind everyone being so safety conscious. 00:58:12 Would interact with the different mates. One of the mates worked with the telegraph. Used to communicate with the engine room. 1:00:00 Would get on a different carrier every time. Ranged from a tug boat to a loaded super tanker, car carrier, barge etc. Did not make any difference. If the boat wanted to come into Houston, would bring it in. Big sea going tugs and barges were a whole different genre to learn to operate. No experience in that. 1:02:34 Quit being on the sea to spend more time with family but as a pilot had to work holidays. Christmas, holidays, birthdays, anniversaries. One Christmas went to work at 2 am and son in law is a Marine Colonel. It is all about mind over matter. Did not like it but had to do it. Built the house in such a way so could sleep during the day. Jobs used to take 6-8  hours. Now, because of docks down in Bayport and Barber's Cut, can do it in 2-3 hours. Before Loading grain ship out of city docks would entail an 8 hr job. no relaxing till out of the bay. Constantly changing course and the speed of the ship. Worked for 15 days and off for 15 days. Pilots own the business. so preferred to work like dogs instead of hiring a lot more and splitting the money. 1:07:57 Pilot room. To lay down and rest. Got so tired of eating fish heads and rice. Was not much into eating Sushi but that was what was available on Oriental ships. 1:09:50 Hidden parts of the channel. As Presiding Officer, any new Dock had to be 225 ft from the near bottom edge of the channel. Before that docks were built right on the edge of the channel. Surge from the ship approaching the channel can break the ship lose. Have to stop and drift by. When docks were built with the new regulation, could have more speed without tearing the ship away from the dock. Was really proud of the achievement. Turnin Basin out in Brady island. Got the space to officially turn the big car carriers etc. Did a few things that was very proud of while was Presiding Officer. Was on the review committee to discipline pilots and did not like that. 1:12:11 If a pilot has an incident, he has to go before 2 groups and the presiding officer and explain his side of the story. The committee would decide on the disciplinary action to take. Had this one pilot who was constantly having problems. Lot of damage. Was a strong disciplinarian. 1:13:45 Review board had two groups. White hats and black hats. Knew everyone's capabilities as work with someone constantly for 15 days. Terminology - nicknames. Used to teach down at Galveston College. Used to teach Bridge Resource Management, how to conduct a watch on the bridge. Used to tell students, "looking at the best ship pilot you have ever seen." Used to be able to answer any questions related to the ship. 1:18:10 Battleship Texas. Could get it out of the mud. There was a big crowd gathered there. Had shut the whole channel down. Said later, "The Japanese couldn't sink the Texas, the Germans couldn't sink the Texas, looks like the timelines (?) are going to sink the Texas." as a Pilot, brought in one of the biggest ships into the channel. National Defender - large tanker that was to load grain. Brought it in with another Captain. Took up all the turning basin. Just couldn't turn it. Big challenge. Took a little bit more of expertise. Was a challenge. Tag teaming. Total concentration. Get too tired. It is safer this way. Was raised  on the water but other than sailing, did not have much exposure to the water. Retired in 1993. Improving almost constantly. Send pilots to school.  
PortHouston;Capt. William Diehl;xxxx;2012;Capt. William Diehl, xxxx, 2012,   WILLIAM DIEHL (BAD MIC AUDIO AT MOST PARTS) SUMMARY: Capt. William Diehl talks to Pat Jasper about his career in the coastguards and at the Houston Port Bureau. He recollects how the coastguards handled Hurricane Ike and what it means to save lives. He also talks about how important it is to develop the waterways as a pivotal point in global trading. TOPICS: accidents, Armed Forces, corporations, job hunting job postings Thursday, May 15, 2012 Port of Houston Authority, sub office of greater Houston Port Bureau 00:00:37 Born in upstate NY. Father college professor. One of 9 children. 6 boys and 3 girls. Had a great childhood. First generation in Maritime Industry. Father had masters degree in organic chemistry. Enlisted and put him in a camp analyzing people coming back from Korea. Older two brothers decided to enlist in the army and got sent over to Germany. Brother went to air force academy. Applied to Meapolis, West point and Coastguard. Finally picked the coastguard. Went on a ship to San Francisco, met wife in SFO. Asked coastguard if could go to graduate school. Was sent to University of Michigan for two years. Got a degree in Naval architecture and marine and mechanical engineering. Was sent to DC. for engineering work. Found it to be very boring. Exxon Valdez was to be moving from Alaska down to the shipyard in Southern California. Wanted to know whether it was going to break in half? While he said that was a total guess, the next person said he could try. Then a ship blew up off Galveston. Needed a naval architect to come and see whether the ship would break in half. Was sent to Galveston. 00:20:03 They needed advice on how to solve. Volunteered to help. Show the ship footage from a videotape. Decided it wasn't going to break in half. Explained why and was asked to go out there to represent them. Next day get out to the ship. Meet ship crew firefighters who are there and who had fought at Desert Storm. Learnt many important lessons during the initial years of working there.  After that another ship blew up. Salvage crew knew his name and asked for him to be sent to Michigan. Wanted to create a salvage team. Formed a coastguard salvage team. 00:34:31 Learned was comfortable in a crisis and not nervous. Have the right mindset to function. Years later promoted to be at the top of the job and moved to Houston. Had a very capable assistant. Had a few search and rescue cases., casualties, oil spills, drug busts. Responsible for 1200 people. Went to meet the Admiral because center was fairly new and was getting a lot of calls for every job. Went back to the office and decided on a new way to work. Told employees to send text messages instead of calling for every little thing. Came on the heels of Katrina and Rita. Coastguard was struggling over how to do a hurricane response. Game plan was to go to San Antonio. Plan was to find a place close enough but far enough away. Wanted a place to stage all coastguard equipment and would be able to rush in when the storm passes. Finally decided to set up in Katy. When hurricane came had enough trial runs under the belt and knew exactly what to do. Had a good team on board. Felt comfortable about doing a good job. Trick with Hurricane Ike was it was headed to Freeport, and when the storm entered the Gulf of Mexico it was time to act. Was informed about the numbers of Hurricane Ike by the authorities. Had to stay put until everyone had evacuated. 00:52:38 One helicopter stayed back to take pictures so it can be looked at later and studied. But had to send them to pick up three people down at Corpus christi. But it turned out there were more than a 100 people stranded. Do not rescue people before a hurricane. Have to be ready to act when it does hit. Had to have a big discussion and ended up rescuing the people stranded there. One of those crisis where no one will advice against it. Had to get some military helicopters from DOD. Was flying them to Ellington and dropping them off. Since it was too far off, instead took them down to the dog track on I 45 and asked the police to cut the locks and just dropped more than a 100 people over there. It was also like a pitstop for the pilots. Really pushed the envelope. 01:00:01 People started calling asking for help. Had to tell them would come to them when the storm passed. Weighed heavily on conscience. Another incident when ship was to hit the bridge. Called the captain from the office. Asked ship captain to back down full. WEre about to hit the 610 bridge. If ship hits the bridge, the cars on the bridge would go straight to the water. Tried to get cops to get on the scene and close the bridge. Told him to steer to the middle of the bridge when close by and go full back and then full forward. Had tugs ready to respond but they were not ready to go out in a hurricane. 01:14:39  When storm is upon them, plans have to be followed and not changed. Buoy tenders that push them up to Galveston. Brought them up all the way up to Galena Park and put them at the Manchester Terminal. They come up the ship channel and they are slow. Orchestrating all this from the Katy office. An employee from New Orleans calls up and disagrees with the buoy idea. This decision is non reversible to move the cutters to Manchester terminal. If it goes up another four feet it would tip over. It would mean they would lose the coastguard cutters. Senior chief suggested abandoning ship when the measurement device showed two feet. Thought would lose two cutters but would manage to save everyone on board. But in the end, the wind shifted and ended up not losing the cutters. 01:26:22 IN the coastguard there are a lot of young people. Have a son who turned 18 recently, through career had a lot of people between 18-22 as employees. Despite all the other jobs that a coastguard has to do the main thing is saving lives. Putting the buoys on the side of the ship channel, like painting the white lines on the side of the road. Telling people till where they are allowed where they will be safe. It all comes back to saving lives. 01:30:23 Felt had a good career at the coastguard. Had dinner once with people from Shell and wanted to talk to him about oil spills, response etc. THey had brought up the topic of raising children. Shell did a study about what happens when moving a child before high school, it is beneficial to the child, more confident and comfortable etc. If they move when they are in high school, it has a detrimental effect. Did not want to move family unnecessarily. Looked at jobs in the maritime community. Had a few job offers. Was asked to be city manager. But if went away from the water front, would be very difficult to come back. Knew that needed to stay at the maritime community, The chairman invited him for dinner and offered him the job to take over the port bureau. But port authority was doing very badly then. Was told by port authority that would be fired if it did not make money. 01:40:00 Simplified what the port bureau does like he had done for the coastguards. Port bureau provides information. Whether it is about networking, or ship movement the port bureau gives information about ships, industry, and community. Have been working on those lines. Back in 2009 had 95 companies and now have a 140 companies. Probably a 50% increase in revenues. 01:43:43 Membership - Exxon and Shell and large terminals, tug companies to the ships themselves, to the agents, owners reps, the mooring companies, the bunker fuels - everyone who touches the ship needs info to be successful.Most places people can go down and see the port. But in Houston cant even see the ship channel, can only see  refineries. In Houston bracketed by the oil industry, the refineries. For eg. when going to Bush Airport, there is ticketing agent, the pilot, the airline, food service etc. Have the same thing. Have a pilot, fuel trucks or bunker barges, line handlers, owners reps or agents, there are a lot of similarities between both the modes of transport. Instead of looking at the big screen at the airport with flight times, dispense info in a different way. Use a program called Harbor lights. 01:53:06 ((PHONE RINGS LOUDLY)) 01:53:07 Association of 160 companies. Want to do the same thing that the port bureau does. Tell them that we would do the same thing for them. There are people dealing with each company. Do three organizations. 01:56:38 Port of Houston authority is a government organization, MAke a lot of money off containers. Not in the soil business. There are a 150 companies and secondary companies along the ship channel. Serve as a conduit between what they want to do to a broader discussion with the other industry members. At the same time when the industry wants to get involved, and make their concerns known. 01:59:00 The port exists to move commerce, goods. The security is not needed unless moving bodies. There are people on board but it is mainly packages. Try to acknowledge the liability or try to transfer the risk to someone else most often through insurance. Environmental issues, cant gran that risk and control it and mitigate it, could go out of business. Security is a liability too. If there is a terrorist incident, could go out of business. It is a new liability that wasn’t there before. Need to figure out how to minimize security liability. After Exxon Valdez all oil companies were told they need to have spill response equipment, specialized trained personnel ready to act and firehouses on every street corner. What happens is, few year later all companies are equipped with all the gear that is now just sitting there. Because there aren't fires every week. So what is being done at the ship channel security district is to gather the funds and pay the people who are in office to keep up the security. Wanted to focus on officers at the spot rather than equipment. THere are officers with badges and have given them the equipment to maintain security. 02:10:15 The value of the port is so underestimated. As a country build the dept. of transportation in the 1940s model where there are going to be highways and rail so that the whole country can engage in commerce. Now, things have accelerated, the world is in a global market. But infrastructure remains the same. No one maintains that the port is worthy of  anything. But the role of the port has changed in global commerce. Has become more important. Teddy Roosevelt - Panama canal, love for waterway. Need to place a lot more emphasis on waterways. Port cities will continue to do well, ramps to global highways. Moving commerce globally through ships. Other countries like China have caught on to this idea except for America. A quarter of all the tonnage comes through Houston. Houston is the juggernaut of commerce. Maritime capital of the US not just the energy capital. 
PortHouston;C.A. Rousser;xxxx;2011;C.A. Rousser, xxxx, 2011,  C. A Rousser SUMMARY: C.A. Rousser, a real estate consultant talks to Pat Jasper about his career on the waterfront. His journey from a farm in Amarillo to one of the most influential positions at the Port of Houston. He speaks about a few of his property deals. He also talks about containerization, the Port Authority investing money to expand its international presence, and the underlying rivalry between Houston and Galveston. 00:00:12 Home of C.A. Rousser in Katy, TX on Nov 15, 2011 Born and raised on a farm in Amarillo, TX. Went to school, played football and basketball. Went to Texas Tech. Came to Houston after studying in Phoenix after friend in real estate suggested it. Interviewed with the Houston Ship Channel Navigation District. Started there as a marketing sales rep, developed business for the port - cargos and ships etc. Promoted. Then as a General Sales Manager. responsible for all sales reps at the Authority. Office in New York. Represented Houston as a general port. Generate economic activity for the port. in 1972 was made Director of Trade Development, that included not only marketing but also PR, advertising, media, research, analysis etc. Traveled all around the world talking to traders and importers, exporters to suggest and convince them to bring ships into Houston. during the container revolution. Helped to get bond elections passed. In 1982, resigned to do other things. DOing mostly real estate. 00:09:44 Real estate business mostly connected with the port. 65 acre facility with a few docks and a slip off the channel. BOught the place by looking up the list of the Independent Stevedores and terminal operators in D.C. Hank Mylum was run out of Houston for being non union on Port Authority Docks. TExas Terminal was bought by John Goreman. 65 acres, 3 docks, privately owned, non union. Galena park. 100 acres, general cargo docks, docks, warehouses. Right off Clinton drive in Galena Park. Bought it for the client once before for 32million. Non union stevedore names McPherson. Trying to get into the Galveston Docks. Asked to go to Galveston by Jim McPherson. He had applied for stevedoring license in the port of galveston. Encountered 300 people in the boardroom, mostly longshoreman. Agnostic when it comes to Union Matters. Passed a proposal whereby he was able to get a license in the port of galveston. All hell broke less. Got tough. people in attendance cursed the board members, chairman. Chairman was all flustered and called for recess. 20minutes later, reconvened and then reversed the vote. Denied McPherson a license. Tried to put together $16 million. Port Authority found out. Port authority did not want non union person to own significant property on ship channel. So Port authority competed against McPherson to buy the facility. Port Authority won. Have clients like cement companies.  North Texas Cement bought 72 acres on Houston Ship Channel. represented them on purchase of property. Company from San Antonio known as Alamo Cement bought 88 acres on the ship channel near Galena Park. Texas Port Recycling and Lone Star terminal represented them during purchase of property. 00:19:52 Toughest things in front of the city is the economy. Very difficult to find property on the Houston ship channel. Not too much of it. Widening and deepening of the Cedar Bayou barge canal into 1000s of acres of property. South side of the ship channel in the turning basin area are old docks which area almost 30 yrs old, used to be called Long Reach docks, port authority bought those from Anderson Clayton. Did not do anything to them. Except for a non union operation in there. they got in there because non union threatened to sue the Port Authority of they were not let in. Called Impart Stevedores. Port Authority has been guilty of overemphasizing containerization at Barber's Cut and BayPort. They deserve emphasis and finding and not at the penalty of long time customers, break bulk customers, conventional shipping customers. 00:26:04 Manchester Terminal is the perfect example of private enterprise on the ship channel. Earlier tried to enhance business for everybody not just the Port Authority facilities. THat attitude changed and now believe private facilities to be their adversaries and competitors. Not sure that is right. Manchester Terminal - 3 docks, 75 acres. MT was in bankruptcy. Had a client interested in buying it. Hubb Finklestein decided to buy the place at $6 million. Port Authority wanted to also buy it and decided to bid against Hubb Finklestein. HF bought it for $7.5 million. Greensport - just down stream from the Washbourn tunnel. Old Aramco steel plant, 600 acres. developed into an industrial park. Partnered up and tried to own it. 1080 ft of workable dock space right now. Very unique space on Gulf Coast and US and money making place. Very efficient and privately owned. 00:31:01 1956 - first container ever from New jersey to Houston. Malcolm Mclane - Father of containerization, formed a company called Sealand later Port Authority decided in the late 60s to go downstream and have more room to expand for containers, that brought Barbers Cut on. Most significant container port in the Gulf of Mexico. Containerization broadened the market reach of Houston. Not uncommon to attract cargo for Europe from the west coast. it will be moved by rail to Houston and then put on a ship to europe. Much easier to do now than before. Started losing Asian business to the west coast but gained business to Europe. Mini bridge - all cargo not only cotton would leave Houston, go to Long Beach, go to Asian ports. Port authority objected and had hearings before federal maritime commission. The rates that were being charged to the exporter while sending goods on a container included the cost for ocean and rail freight. Put together that  cost was less than paying for each individual route. With the talk of expanding the PAnama canal there is also talk of that business coming back to Houston. 00:39:23 Port authority began to allocate money to expand its international presence. Back then there was little international travel by Port Authority. Then there was significant grain movement from the Port of Houston to Russia. Went on a business trip there and had many successful meetings at Leningrad and Moscow. Two kinds of trips overseas one can do for Port Authority. "One is PR, raise a flag kind of trip. The other one is a hard- nose, business appointment with the CEO sitting around to talk nitty-gritty." Preferred the latter. Have to do a certain amount of PR. Now a 130,000 tons of coffee come through the Port these days, earlier just 40,000 tons of coffee. COmpared to 2-3 million tons of steel cargo that is not a lot, but it is important. 00:48:12 Were representing the port as a whole overseas and not just the Port of Houston Authority. Trip to Nigeria sponsored by the Texas Southern University, Spent a week in Lagos. 00:52:29 Back in the early 60s, ILA union working the ships were segregated. All came about with the Civil Rights Act. Changes in the Port Authority - Always had the attitude to run the business like it was private. Port authority board is much larger. Much more political, unfortunately. More politically correct. Used to hire people on basis of ability. 00:55:03 When starting a business either with the Port Authority or with a private enterprise - who is going to do a better job? Born conservative and always resented the government and lack of efficiency and motivation. Private enterprises are more conscious of the money. It is not just tax payers money. Efficiently conscious and non union. 00:58:02 strike of 68. Was working but very low down the ladder. Don’t remember much about it since wasn't involved. Remember the strike. Privatization. Barber's Cut is run by the Port Authority. Bayport also run by PA. Should privatize everything else that the port authority owns including all the docks in the Turning basin area. Must privatize fairly. Been concerned about how privatization that was done was handled. Was it done on a fair enough basis. Think privatization would be healthy for the port as a whole. Also healthy for the port of Houston. Port authority buys a 100 acres or so down in Galveston for a new container terminal called Pelican Island. Instead of building a cruise terminal. 01:03:40  Houston has enough economic activity going on to not be ignored. Lot of good people. George Altmeyer, Chuck Bullock, Bob Curtis. Were contemporaries and colleagues. Personalities made them special. Capital Club. 01:12:10 Only first class hotel ever stayed in was in Amarillo, TX. 01:16:40 Positioning of the Port of Houston as a special place with special characters. Had to have reason for a,n ocean shipping company to come and set up shop.Had to have a reason for cargo to come. Hansa Line incident. There were different approaches used. A certain kind or approach for a shipping company, or a general mills or even some oil field equipment manufacturer, or some fruit exporter in Orange County. Transporting goods to a port by rail cost the same whether it was to NEw Orleans or Houston. How to attract that business to Houston? Those days could work with the railways on adjusting the rate. Not enough for a port of have ships coming and going. Has got to have good service and regularity. Ships have to come and leave like clockwork. (Someone walks in 01:22:27) (INTERVIEW RESUMES AT 01:23:14) Rating the different types of cargo that was dealt with. Each category break bulk encompasses different things. Break bulk means anything that is loose and not containerized. Dry bulk meaning hot ash, fertilizer, exports that moves as a non packaged good. Moves by conveyor or by clam shell. bucket, petroleum, coal. Liquid bulk is anything petrochemical, crude. Containers are measured in TEUs or twenty foot equivalent units. Can have anything in a container from automobiles to coffee. "The bread and butter for the port authority. for so many years has been import steel." Because of two reasons. Economy and marketplace and the other because the port of Houston or port authority were able to offer the importer a direct discharge. Meaning ship pulls up to the dock, anchors, stevedore comes in to unload the ship with union labor. Take it directly out of the hold of the ship with cranes etc. and put it on a truck which leaves immediately to the ultimate user or to a warehouse. By doing this can avoid additional reloading charges. 01:29:06 RORO refers to Roll on and Roll off. refers to wheeled cargo, tractors, caterpillar, rolling stock of all kinds. RORO refers to the kind of ship that is designed to handle that sort of cargo. Easier, more efficient. Was important to maintain a relationship with the railroads and truckers. Good trucking companies exist. 01:32:26  Port authority establishes relationship between the exporter and the carrier. Houston has five or six carriers. 01:37:34 Was raised in Tulia based on the fact that father inherited all this land. Did not want to spend life worrying about ploughing the field. If had stayed would have expanded. Made the decision to go to Texas Tech and studied International Trade. American institute of Foreign trade specializes in international business. Language. Decided to study French. Roommates were a New York Jew, Cleveland Presbyterian and a Chinese- Indonesian Baptist. Next door neighbor was Peter Jacob Marie Defries. Father had a candy manufacturing business. He was from Netherlands. Was introduced to Edith Piaf by him. Fell in love with her music. Used to be active with the international community. 01:49:55 Disgusted by the recent events of the Port Authority. Those positions, commissioners and staff are dealing with public funds and public trust. Even the allegations taint the reputation of the port authority, and some of that may be transferred to the port authority in general, it has to be squeaky clean. Developing new facilities leaves a lot to be desired. Cruise terminal. Why is Houston trying to be a cruise port when the cruise port is Galveston? 01:55:49 Can only go back to people who have influenced. Houston and Galveston have been adversaries as ports. Galveston is very provincial and narrow minded community and very labor conscious and not particularly open to outsiders. Competition has been exacerbated over the years. Competition has grown to include Savannah, Charleston, NY, NJ, Seattle, San Francisco. Wanted to see an elimination of local, provincial competition. Galveston wanted to set up container terminal. But that was not necessary. Transportation costs between Houston and Galveston. 02:01:30 Tri-county port authority - Harris, Galveston and Chambers. Regional approach to the ports.No container port in Texas City. 02:10:53 Port of South Louisiana is the biggest cargo port in the US. Mostly dry bulk. There were efforts to merge Galveston and Houston. Galveston voted it down. Houston went into the deal "like the arrogant, big boy on the block." 02:14:25 American Rice. Allen Parkway. Truckloads of rice being transported daily. Could not unload trucks properly. American Rice got irritated and took their business to Port of  Freeport. If there was a regional Port Authority it would not have mattered. Business would have been in the Greater Galveston Area. Had a petition floating around a few years ago to change the name of Galveston Bay to the Houston bay and the Gulf of Mexico to Gulf of Texas. 
PortHouston;Bobby Kersey;1934;xxxx;Bobby Kersey, 1934, xxxx  BOBBY KERSEY Summary: Bobby Kersey talks about his career as a boatman, mooring techniques, the process of hiring, and the evolution of communication from whistle signals to FM radio. He also discusses how even though regulations after 9/11 have affected work not much has changed for the boatman. 00:45 Born 6/7/34 in Dangerfield in Northeast Texas. Population then 2000 residents. Left Dangerfield in 1959 and came to Houston. Joined Houston Mooring Company. Had a relative that worked as an owner o the Houston Mooring company. Been with Houston Mooring for 53 years. Competing mooring company called Texas mooring. Worked on the contracting for both companies. 02:10 Boatman takes the mooring line when ship comes into the docks. Runs a mooring boat that takes lines out to the moorings that are out in the water. No other access route. Takes the lines from the ship to the moorings. Ship hauls themselves to the side of the dock while cargo is being loaded. Most of the ships ties are chemical or crude oil tankers. Dangerous. No synthetic ropes to hold ship, crude ships use large cables or wires with a piece of synthetic line on the end of it. Awkward to load onto boat. Tugs are alongside the ship, help it to maneuver itself into the dock. On the crude ship that are larger, use two boats 3 men in each boat. Put the spring lines first, lower down to boat. Men are on each end of the ship. Men will put out spring lines first. (shows on picture).Spring lines are lowered down to the boat. Pilot will move ship back and forth till he gets the header. Usually, crude ships put 8 lines on each end. 2 boats take either end. 22 foot, inboard aluminum boat with flat deck so someone walking on it can handle ropes and wires. Really strong boats that can pull a lot of weight. Can go 25 miles/hr. Boats watch out for tugboats so that they don’t get crushed. At least 4 tugboats have been partially sunk in a time before communications were so advanced. 08:05 Communication. Pilots had to use mouth whistle. That was signal for the tugboats. Captain on tugboat knew which way to go and how fast. Then started using single band radios. Signal gets crowded after sometime but worked better than whistles. And then started using FM radios. Channel 14 or Channel 77. Channel 13 for ship to ship traffic and when they are transferring in and out. Takes 30-35 minutes to tie a boat. Sometimes 15 mins with fast crews. Can dock 6-8 boats in a day. On call from 5.00 am and usually work till early afternoon. Can do 10-11 jobs in a day. 11:10  Companies did hiring back then and workers fell in place with the rest of rotation. But now it is different. Union picks employees they bring in. Have to start at the very bottom. If just starting out, need to have another job. Active boatmen - 65. not all on call at the same time. 13:45 Company pays even when union hires. Dispatcher keeps note of hours and who is working. Sends that to company. Go by growth tonnage. Straight job is worth up to 15,000 growth tons. From there a job and a half - from there to 45,000. That is considered a double job. Larger ships take a little longer to come in, tie up etc. if big ships have good crews can tie up in 15-20 mins. 9/11 regulations affecting work. used to drive into the refineries and chemical plants and drive right down to the docks and wait for ship to come in. Now, some plants like Shell, have to park way off and catch their jitney and catch a ride to the dock. 17:40 Dispatcher gets jobs from one company and he will dispatch it out to employees. Gang on men tying ship in one location, and work is close by, dispatcher will call and let them know about the next job. Crude tankers use 4 men. Most jobs require only two men. A gang would be two or four people. Crude ships would have 3 men on each boat. Normal working day would move around the whole terminal. Keep going from one end to another. 20:10 Learnt by being under someone’s wing. Did not take long to know where the docks were. Shell docks were here but they tied up their own ships then. Tying a ship to the dock is not that difficult a job. process of tying a ship. Difficult thing was learning to run a mooring boat. Second or third year started running the boat. Oldest man is called the header and is Responsible for any activity that needs to be reported. Have taken new comers under wing and help them as much as can. job is dangerous and any help is appreciated. 27:00 Older ships that are more dangerous. Years ago, better quality of seamen. Maintained ship better, knew how to handle the lines better. Japanese, Norwegians and Swedes were the most efficient. Knew how to handle the job. Don’t see them that much anymore. Can find cheaper seamen in the Philippines, Oriental countries. Most seamen come from there. American flag ships are almost non existent. Better mooring facilities. Years ago, when tankers were put on sale, used big round steel pilings, mooring up on top of it. Had to climb these things and secure from there. Now, terminals have hooks to put big cables, so cables hang down to boat level. Have better and faster boats and placed in more strategic locations 30:45  Boats belong to the company and they maintain them. Keep them fueled. Have mechanics. That is convenient. Then, had to gas the boat ourselves and maintain them. Boats are bigger by a small margin. Lighter, stronger and faster. Engines that are used now are diesel engines and more reliable than gasoline engines. 33:30 Own meeting separate form the ILA. Monthly Union meeting and safety meetings. Each company has their own rep. Coast guard has their own rep at the safety meetings. Life vest, hard hats, safety shoes, gloves have to be worn at the docks and in the boat. Gear - extra rope in the boat, Lines from a ship that are leading. three quarter inch called a messenger, horn, fire extinguishers. radio. Pretty well equipped with all necessities. Ropes with different names. Wires, mostly on the crude ships, section at the end of the wire. range usually from 25-35 ft long mostly for shock absorbers. Called Combinations. Knots (demonstrates) Bowling knot is the most common and Timber Hitch. 40:30 Wanted to take the training and schooling to get license to become a pilot. Take freshwater boat out occasionally. Son would work weekends and summers starting from when he was 16. Good tugboat operator. Sometimes work the same shift together. Had to work middle of the night when starting out. Had to be on call around the clock. More ships coming in at night. Strikes. Boatman honored picket lines during strikes. Sometimes ship crews had to get down and tie themselves up. Strike in the 60s was the only time layoffs happened. Non union boatmen were there for a while. 50:00 Not too many dramatic changes for boatmen. There is no way around putting line out for boats alongside. Barges do construction the docks. Crane on barge that lifts pipe up and drop the spuds. This hold the barge up to perfect position. Put up mooring lines like they do now. lot of changes but the way lines are put out there has been little change. Used to have more flexibility with going aboard ships. Used to meet a lot of people both local and foreign. Mostly operate crude or chemical ships and come in contact with workers who connect and disconnect the hoses, the pilots and the tugboat operators. Enjoyed a lot of aspects of the job.  
PortHouston;Benjamin Holland;1942;2011;Benjamin Holland, 1942, 2011,   BENNY HOLLAND SUMMARY: Benjamin Holland, Executive VP of the International Longshoreman’s Union talks to Pat Jasper about working his way up from a longshoreman to his present job, automation, technology replacing workers, segregations and the pension and welfare fund. 00:20 SEPT 09, 2011 at ILA Houston and Clearlake city Benjamin Franklin Holland Jr known as Benny Holland. Born in Galveston, TX. Born in August 1942 to an Italian mother. Played all three sports. semi pro football and baseball. went to work on waterfront in 1960. 01:26 first few days on the waterfront was tough. Played sports and thought was in the best physical shape. Hold of the ship was 130 degrees F and had to stack a 140 lb. sacks of flour, 8-10 bags high. Realized was not in the best shape and was a very difficult job. 02:05 Worked as teams. Foreman would have regular crew. Was on the job learning experience. Was not in the union for the first 3 years. Earlier on family guys and union guys were hired first and outsiders were hired after that. Now hiring is based on seniority. Wife's father was a gang foreman and was included in his gang. Earlier on record was kept of the money made by each gang foreman and was turns to work was rotated. Could also go the pier and be recognized by other gang foreman and be hired. So could work more than 2-3 days a week. Wife's father was in WW II. His father was a longshoreman and brought him to the docks. Father in law worked on the docks as a longshoreman for 30 years. 05:31 All work was hand driven, no automation. Roll and stack, shovel grain. 06:16 Getting into the union was tough. (BREAK IN SOUND RECORDING) 07:08 (INTERVIEW BEGINS AGAIN) Born in Galveston, TX. Played all three sports. Little League baseball at 8 years old. Played semi pro football and baseball and went to work on the waterfront at 1960. 18 yrs. old. father in law was gang foreman at the docks. Was taken to the docks during the summer. 08:45  First day was throwing 140 lb. sacks of flour. Very difficult. thought was in great shape but work proved to be difficult. Had to get acclimated to the heat inside the ship and also learn how to handle the sacks, tricks that were needed to do that. Everything was down by hand. More break bulk, cargo would come in on a pallet, 30 bags of rice or wheat would come in a bag. Had to take them off one at a time and stack them in a hold of the ship. Would do that for 8-10 hours a day. There used to be 4 men on each side, working each pallet. 2 men on each end of the sack. 10:26 Wife's grandfather was also longshoreman. Could not join the union for the first 3 years. Was working as extra labor. Gang foreman had a group of people that followed them and were hired on a regular basis and were not in the union, so whenever union men were not available, these individuals would be hired to fill out their gang. Rotated gangs on money. Could even find work 5-6 days a week. Made a lot of money the first summer at work. More money than father had made all year. Galveston was a piece work port. Worked cotton by the bale. Every bale in the hold of the ship was worth counted towards pay. Not uncommon to make $80-100 in a day working cotton. Back in 1960 that was a lot of money. Cotton was the only piece work. Everything else was paid by the hour. Galveston is the number one cotton port in the world. 13:36 Money made in the first three months went towards a long career in the port. Started dating girlfriend in high school. Felt destined to be a longshoreman. So many opportunities to leave the waterfront but something always made him stay. First person to get into the union in three years and after that no one got in for the next 5 years. Was blessed and destined to be a longshoreman. Worked hard and had a good personality. Family connection did not help much. Established own personality and position. Loved to work cotton. 17:02 Loaded cotton. 15 man gang. 2 men running the wench, gang foreman signaling the wench-man, 4 men on the dock sending cotton into the hold. 4 men on end shore, 4 men on offshore taking these bales and rolling them into the hold to stack them. Work was so hard so had to alternate every two and half hours between dock and hold. Started working way up. Became a walking foreman. Walking foreman was at the end of ship and handled the working of the gang, kept track of tonnage. After that ran for office and gave up foreman's job and became assisted business agent, then Vice preside, then president and then secretary treasurer South Atlantic Gulf Coast in 1978. International VP in 82 and President of SAGC in 1990. Now, exec VP. 20:14 Strike in the 60s was about automation. Took the industry from "a hot body industry to a skilled industry." Knew automation was going to eliminate jobs. Stumbling block was the  International had established a guaranteed annual income. So that those who lost their jobs could get a certain amount of money per week guaranteed. long drawn strike. Lasted a 106 days. Union one and won the GAI package. Took a lot of years to make up three months salary. Management lost a few customers. Was not a win-win and have learnt from that. No strike since. 22:30 Was taught a lesson on how to be partners in the industry. How to not be adversaries. Common goal. All become partners regardless of the job role. While on strike for 106 days, did not get to work at all as had to be in negotiations or standing by for a meeting call at any time. Lot of people working on the dock went to work as iron workers and other odd jobs making some money, for almost 4 months. Was tough and was a great learning experience. Important to make things work rather than fight over things. 24:23 Most meetings were at the Galvesz Hotel in Galveston. Some were at the Helena hotel in Houston. Negotiating for the whole west gulf. Several stumbling blocks. Guaranteed annual income, wages and benefits. Knew were going to lose a lot of man hours due to the automation, protect pension fund, welfare fund, wanted to make sure men were compensated for the job loss. Took a 106 days because management was protecting their customers. Workers had to make sure their concerns were addressed. negotiations were tough, Both sides had strong points. 27:02 negotiating was really three layers. Buddy Raspberry was the spokesperson, 7 men negotiating with him. Bill Arnett and 7 stevedores. Were at the table constantly. In another room each local had representatives on the contract committee, each company had reps too. WGMA and USMX. Master contract. 29:00 No changes in the cargo. Don't see it because it all goes into containers. Still have cotton, bananas, cow hides, flour, rice. Only load containers onto ships, but do not see the product. With automation, cannot really employ anybody. Worker has to possess the skill set. 31:15 Two black locals that did deep sea work in Galveston, white local deep sea local. THen Hispanic local that loaded bananas. Loaded and unloaded ships but did so on a segregated basis. Government stepped in and said locals had to be integrated. Since worked the same identical jobs, could not be segregated and had to be integrated. Government stepped in because lawsuit was filed by one of the locals, a smaller black local called 329. Felt like they were not getting their share of the work. Locals felt that once merged they would all lose their identity and people would lose power because the would lose their position.  Fear of unknown, not fear of working with black people. Cannot be segregated in today's world. Hard because of the way the locals were merged. and how it was put together. Men with more experience got hurt. People with less seniority went ahead because they were dovetailed together and into the seniority program. 35:20 Merging of the locals. Judge Black, judge Garcia. don't think seniority system was fair. Judge had all the control. 37:49 Merged two cotton-head locals. Happens quite often. 38:48 Population of most locals is about a 100 or more. Clerks and checkers are mostly around 50. Clerks and checkers receive the cargo when it comes in and count the bags when they go on a ship. Keep tabs on the workers and make sure everyone's papers are in order, keep a note of wages. Management skill but done as union. 39:52 Describes job of clerk and checker. 41:30 all ships had a house in the middle where the crew stayed. 4-5 hatches on front of the house and 2-3 behind. Coin is flipped and one crew gets back and the other front. It is alternated from then on. (PAUSE) 42:30 From lab perspective no competition between Galveston and Houston. From a port perspective there is little competition. Galveston used to be in the container business and used to compete against Houston. Did not work. Galveston shut containers down. Houston not successful with a few cruise ships, but Galveston is because Galveston is closer to the sea and makes more sense for cruise ships to load and unload in Galveston. Port is now a regional concept. magnify their advantages. 45:02 People higher up in office knew that a cruise channel for Houston did not make much sense, but elected officials in the union wanted a cruise ship terminal for their area. 46:24 Labor people have been on board. Some are very resistant. Should be on board. Was able to see both sides of the work. If furniture from Japan needs to be delivered to a store on  Westheimer, chain of events that move the product from A-B. Partnership needs to work collectively together. 49:30 Hardest thing to do right now is to educate members on how industry has changed. Could go into business earlier with just very little money. Cannot do that today. Return on investment is such that need to get more out of production. 52:10 Labor election. Have to be able to explain to people why some things cannot be done. Have to make people understand by putting things in their perspective. Workers need to understand that can lose this job tomorrow and they don't have the qualifications to get another job as good as this one. 55:11 When local unions can't take care of a dispute or when it concerns more than one port, when solving a grievance that sets a precedent for the whole port, get called in. Grievance machinery in the contract. Try not to have grievances. Most of them are about safety and work rules and are handled locally. Some affect the whole industry and then see work it out. 56:55 Story of a recent grievance. National grievance. In the contract, no supervisor will do work on collective bargaining agreement. In Savannah, had supervisors doing some clerk and checking work. With Automation, tend to take two jobs, one as a supervisor and another that is a union job. Resolved it. Share the work equally. 59:00 Scanners replaced labor. Cameras have replaced labor. Have negotiated keeping the job of a union person even it means teaching him a new skill instead of hiring someone new off the streets. 1:00:45 Strike was about automation. Mini Bridge. Plan was to put cargo in containers and take cargo from the Far East, bring it into the West Coast, take off ship in the west coast, distribute cargo throughout the United States by rail and truck. Cargo going to Europe would go all the way to the East coast to be put on a ship. Cargo coming from Europe would get distributed from the East coast. Would shuttle back and forth from East - West coast. Because of congestion to the rails and both the west and east coast, they began to utilize the Gulf. Had to compete with the coasts. Management had to figure out how to get cargo to the Gulf. "Had to survive because of what we did and not in spite of what we did." Had to compete and become partners.. Couldn't be individuals and win. That is why more partners in the Gulf region.  1:03:10 East and west coast colleagues are fine with it. Up in New York management is able to justify extra labor on ship as they cut back on trucking costs. Not so in Galveston. 1:05:03 Mini bridge was an industry thing. According to newspapers back then, worst job in the world was that of a longshoreman, since there were only going to be 3-4 major ports. That was not true. Have 30 ports. 1:06:20 One of the first container ships came in was SeaTrain. When containers really came in they were developed for the East and West coasts. Not really for Houston. 1:08:05 Widening of the Panama Canal is going to be a great asset for the Gulf. The thing that is going to help Houston is the fact that the population of Texas is growing. Ready markets in Houston Dallas and San Antonio will help the port a lot. 1:09:23 Number one job of labor representative is to negotiate an equitable contract for the men, and also one that keeps the employers in business. Second, have to be able to live up to everything that was negotiated on both sides. Also Chairman of the National Health Program, so have to make sure the program is fully funded, benefits are there, money is invested correctly. Sit on different committees. 1:11:51 in 1957, the pension and welfare fund - took 25 cents an hour out of a paycheck to develop the pension and welfare fund, men did not want it like that, they wanted it as wages. It was a difficult fight. Leaders then had to convince the men that this find had to be set up. Today $13.05 goes to the fund from a paycheck. Workers have full healthcare. Set up a healthcare program called MYLA. $5 from every person working in the port goes to the fund and $1 for every ton of automated cargo that is shipped goes into that fund. Fund costs $350 million to operate, but have a surplus of at least one full year in reserve. 1.14.45 Love the work because there is something different every day. Not the same old stuff. Not an 8-5 job. Like helping people. It is rewarding. On the job experience was invaluable. Know exactly what goes on in the hold. Helps with negotiations. Everyday experience does not come out of a book. 1:19:19  Really admired Buddy Raspberry. Inspired by and learnt a lot of things from him. 1:23:21 Leaders of the segregated locals served together on committees - pension and welfare fund, negotiating committees. etc. END> 
PortHouston;ANDREW LAWS;1927;2011;ANDREW LAWS, 1927, 2011  ANDREW LAWS Summary: Andrew Lee Laws speaks to Pat Jasper about his career on the waterfront, early days in the Union, merging of the locals, being an executive board member and the impact on the workforce during the 105 day strike. 0:00 Sept 8, 2011. ILA office in Webster, TX. Andrew Lee Laws Sr. 01:18 Born in Iago, TX - Aug 29, 1927. seventh of nine children. Finished school in 1946. Went to look for work in Galveston and wanted to earn money to go to college. Got job on waterfront. First day was hard and unordinary. Liked the wages and liked the job. 03:19 bags of raw sugar weighing 350 lb. each. Had to sling it and rope it and send it out to ship. Bulk grain. Threw bags of rice, corn, flour. Cotton 575 lb. bales. "pitch" or throw bags. eight men in a hold, four on each side. The left side of ship is called the port side and right side would be the starboard side. The team of eight men would be called a gang. Four men on each side, two wench operators on deck. One flagman, two hook on men on the outside. 07:00 Today it is called OJT - on the job training. Would put an inexperienced man with three experienced people. Ships usually carry three or four hatches, at least one gang in a hatch. Five or six, 14-men gangs in a vessel. 09:40 Then, TX was not a right to work state. Got a job if you were in the union. Extra jobs, when union men have all got jobs. All workers gathered at the union hall to know what amount of work they had the next day. Business agent would write it all on a blackboard. Could tell if there was a chance to get a job just by looking at the work that was listed. Union people first and then non union. 11:32 To get into the union - had to be 21 yrs. Had to have three vouches. three union members had to sign a voucher. Investigating committee. Go to the doctor, get a clean bill of health. Initiation fee with application and after investigating committee, membership would vote on the candidates. Had to weigh at least a 150 lb.. 14:23  Union was stricter than it is now. ""you talked less and worked more." did whatever was told. Joined the African American union. In Galveston, then there were three deep sea locals. "Two blacks and one white." Black and white would work on either side of the hatch. Latino and Mexican American unions came along later. Latino local named 1576 and worked with green fruit. Bananas. Couldn't tell snakes from bananas. During the merger, merged all the locals together. Latino, White and African American. Merged in 1983 20:47 Merger was not sudden. In Brownsville, there was a black and hispanic locals. Judge ruling. Judge gave six months to work through the details. Locals were not able to work out the details. Judge worked it out and gave a merge order. Set leaders in place. Every port that had 2 locals or more had to merge into one. Houston had two locals - a white and a black one. Merged them together. Set out criteria about seniority. Gave everyone a number. Alternated the top leaders from the separate locals into the merged group. 25:50 Merger was in the Gulf Coast District. Lake Charles, LA to Brownsville, TX all the way to North Carolina. 28:20 Fought the merger for a number of years. Case went all the way to the Supreme Court. In Beaumont, three locals. One white and two black. The white local got work all the time and the other half of the hold was alternated between the two black locals. Merger worked in Houston because of the amount of work available. 32:25 Cotton - got paid by the bale. Piece work. Business agent would keep a record of how much to be paid. 36:43 Cotton workers paid by the piece. But then when gang get paid they divide what the gang itself earned for the day. IF there were multiple gangs from one local. Separated by time sheets and gangs. Cotton gang was always 15men. Divide by 15. Split it even. Odd extra pennies would go to gang foreman. 37:45 gang foreman, two wench men, (top) four on each side and four men on dock - one slinging and three trucking. 41:03 Gang foreman was flag and signal. rest would alternate work on ship. would alternate so everybody could get a break.  44:44 Each foreman had a boatsman or substitute foreman. Substitute. There was a committee that watched the work. If they saw potential, they would say he was qualified to be a boatsman. Like a mentor system. 28-29 years became gang foreman. 48:32 ILA leadership. got elected to trustee board in the union. 3-4 years. Then became Vice President for 5 years. then President in 1968. In 1974 ran for executive board member, elected to the top board in west gulf in SFO. Tried to get wife to convince him to take the job. 57:10 Was an executive board member but was still working on the dock. 6 exec board members in the west gulf, Lake Charles to Brownsville . 6 in the East gulf, i.e., New Orleans to Mobile. 6 in the South Atlantic from Miami Florida back to Charleston. 59:00 Representing the interests of brother laborers. More than a prestigious job. No per diem. Take care of expenses. AS a rep on two pay rolls. Negotiate contracts. 1:01:53 Responsibilities. Do whatever comes on hand. Negotiate contracts, investigate problems. 1:03:33 West Gulf Maritime Association. Gamut of stevedores and companies . Formed into an assoc. that has a contractual agreement with. Administer contracts and negotiate wages, terms etc. If they are violated, file agreements, if can’t settle it it goes to step 2. Bring in two mediators - one appointed from district and the other on a per diem basis. 1:06:30 Royalton Reed and Cooke. One attorney to represent the district. Full time attorney for the district - a labor lawyer. 1:07:19 The industry has changed from needing a strong back and a weak mind to now needing a strong mind and a weak back. "Need some ingenuity about yourself." at one time had warehouses all over the dock. It is a service industry now. Need fewer men to do more work. The workforce is almost five times smaller than it was before because of automation. 1:11:35 Can't stop progress, can try to share in the profit.  1:12:17 Labor-management relations. Have not had a strike since 1968. 105 day strike, containerization had not reached its full potential yet. Was told containerization was not going to come in. New York had a contract, Management wanted Houston to settle for a lesser contract. Needed fewer men to work with containers. Tried to increase wages as knew containers were coming and didn't need a large workforce. 1:16:23 Strike was devastating for the workforce. Family to feed, rent to pay, no money coming in. It is tough. Union helped a little bit during the strike. Had a strike find which was minimal. It was worth it. Succeeded in bringing the wages under a good condition. Houston has done well with containerization because it has a port with facilities that are conducive. But a port like Beaumont, is not conducive to containers. Freeport has no containers since it is not profitable to put them in the port. Bulk of the load is right here in Houston. 1:20:32 One nephew - longshoreman in Galveston. Five children - 2 daughters, 3 boys. "All I have amounted to has come from the waterfront. This is where my life is, where my heart is."  
PortHouston;Alan Robb;1960;xxxx;Alan Robb, 1960, xxxx   ALAN ROBB Summary Alan Robb, a district representative reminisces about work on the waterfront, being a part of the ILA union, and a career in politics. He also discusses the merging of the locals and the process leading up to the merger. 00:40 Born in Houston, 1960. Father moved in 1948 from New York. Started working with company on Houston waterfront. Merchant Marine. Transporting troops and civilians during the war. Twin brother worked in waterfront for three months. Used to visit Dad who was ship superintendent. Naturally went to work on the waterfront. Started in 1976, at 16 yrs. Started steam cleaning equipment in the steam room. Went to work full time at 18 yrs. Father proud, made career of it. Partnership for progress. Started to ensure a partnership to survive and work together. Overcome conflicts. Father had incredible reputation for being honest. Made career in the ILA management. Started full time work in 1978. Worked at deep sea hold, loading and unloading ships. Good time to be there. Late 70s economy was good. Never missed a days work because work was always available. 12:00 Merging of the labor unions. Containerization was growing. Took maintenance job at one of the container depots as a welder. Business continued to grow. During the merger in mid 80s, had a regular job with overtime. There was black local and white local when started working. We worked side by side and everyone knew each other. One day black locals and white locals were merged together. There was opposition. Was in the middle of it. Was on executive board of local and made decisions that dealt with the merger. The problem came from the different qualifying criteria and not as much from the black and white issue. Trying to fix one criteria -- either hours or years -- to merge locals was the cause of the big rift. Many people were unhappy and left the waterfront. 1983 and there were still white and black local unions. Seemed to be a throwback to 20-30 years ago. Federal judge was involved. Local guys were given opportunity to sort out seniority system and work out details of mergers. But they were not able to do it and couldn’t come up with a system. There were a lot of internal deals made. Been pro seniority always. Easy to appreciate seniority when there is a good work ethic. Seniority was a good program.Would get good benefits if you were senior. Seniority meant you were here the longest and would therefore get the breaks. Running a seniority based organization creates a few challenges. Times have changed and seniority is not respected the way it was. Brand new set of rules in place now. 25:45 Got involved in union activity very young, early on. Union guys were notorious if work was taken away from them. In the 70s 100% of business was with the ILA. When economy got tougher, people started to wonder about alternatives to the ILA. Was a  believer in the union system and was not going to allow the non union to come and take way of life. Meant a lot of late nights and counteraction and was not scared to fight. Believed in the cause. Non union interference seemed to be a disruption in way of life. Got involved in union politics through this channel. Politics came along with the movement. Was recognized since willing to do whatever was necessary. Ran for executive Board and became Chairman. 2 good friends who did not appreciate the merger even after a few years got into a fight with each other and one almost killed the other. After the fight, some old timers insisted on picking a side. Action was necessary. Was asked to pick sides and to not be friends with them. End of political career. Someone else got the endorsement. 15 years later, got back into politics. In 1990 started own company. Went into business. Put a container yard together. started moving containers in for a few years. Saw the employer side of the fence. Was able to understand the challenges that employers have. Gave an ability to empathize and understand from everyone’s perspective. 42:15 Worked in that company for 4 years. Soon company changed business plan and moved business out of Houston. Went back to work on the waterfront. then worked half a year on waterfront and the other half went to work with a dotcom company. Stayed in Houston and did two projects and took some stock options. Went back to work on the waterfront in one of the warehouses. Mid 90s took a job at one of the warehouses as a Foreman and ran it for many years. A the warehouse, the president of the Local went AWOL. Went home one day and never came back. Was a little too overwhelmed and never came back No safeguards in place for something like that. Kept mailing checks to his house for a few years. Some members on the waterfront suggested I apply for the job. Still split up racially. Terrible relationship with employers. Politics was still black and white. Ran against vice president in unexpired term. Year left and won the election and held position for a year in 2000. Opportunity for both VP and me to recognize if supported eh other. Vowed to support each other. Divided racially down the middle. Developed good relationships with employers. Picked up new business. Business started booming. 58.00 Difficult to make case to companies about non unions. Pros and cons to the ILA. Businesses that are cyclical, sometimes hard to keep some men on payroll if there is no work. ILA can get labor when needed with a phone call and send labor back to union office when done. Antiquated work rules that state labor must be paid even when they are not working or not productive. Goes against everything that we have been trying to push. Tough sales call, selling the ILA. Wages are not far off as work rules are. Want labor to make good living. Makes selling product tough. Appreciate that everyone has retirement benefits and are not burden to community. 1:02:20 Back in 80s, air traffic controllers strike opened our eyes. Went and protested and found out later mayor had police in full riot gear ready to take the port by force. Give a lot of  credit to city officials who recognized that there may be trouble with union and non union working side by side. Lines drawn at the port that demarcated working environments of union and non union and so far they have not been crossed. Non union has the opportunity to work. recognized hat times were changing during the air traffic controllers strike. Realized we had to change our game plan. Made friends with the port and embraced partnership for progress idea. 1:06:00 Got elected into office and there were still some people who were apprehensive about the appointment. People appreciated that they could call and state their problem. Companies also appreciated the accessibility. In order to incorporate change after all these years they needed to trust the person bringing in the change. Was able to do business with non union companies because we changed the work rules. Was trusted. 1:14:12 Jump from local to district. Secretary treasurer at district passed away. Was local president then. Was asked to come and take job with the district office. Refused then. At the local level wanted to make some changes. Soon, another district rep talked to me. Was asked to take the job. Worked at both posts for six months. District rep - Collectively responsible for overseeing and managing all the local unions from North Carolina to Texas. Like baby sitting for adults. Take part and contract negotiations, dispute resolutions. For most part, dispute resolution. Between union and mgmt or internal issue. Thinking for the most part is really antiquated at the ILA. Resting on laurels will make us obsolete. Must change with the times. Bold move was when we decided to partner with the employers. Must continue that trend and start thinking out of the box. One of the things, till 8-10 yrs ago, was never had a battle internally. Never a group of guys who wanted to overthrow the company govt. Now there is. The younger generation demands to know what has been done lately and holds everyone accountable. Future leaders will have to be very involved on the ground level. See and be seen. 1:25:02 2 districts. South Atlantic and Gulf, which is North Carolina to Texas. ACD or Atlantic Coastal District which is from Canada to the Great Lakes, North East, and Puerto Rico. ILWU. Completely separate union. Do not deal with them at all. Some business gets forwarded from west coast. 1:27:05 Gulf Coast is the model. Employers recognize that the labor-mgmt partnership was really important. Places like New York and Philadelphia look to us for guidance. New terminals all being built form Virginia and Down. Not only because they are right to work states. Building terminals in the state because South recognizes that money needs to be made. Containers are all negotiated nationally. South of the Mason-Dixon line all right to work states. Container carriers have contract with people in the North East. It is all one contract. If you want to work in New York, must sign a contract which says must work the same in New York, Savannah or anywhere else in the country. Break Bulk is  completely different All negotiated on a local basis. Based solely on what competition will bear. In Brownsville, TX labor working for $10-13 an hour. Competing with Tampico and other places. Places up the coast things get better. Non union in every port in the gulf. With the exception of GulfPort which is all Union. Adopted work rules of non union and pay and benefits of union. have all the business. Perfect business model is to get competitive. Do not cut wages and benefits. Maybe not get all the work that we are used to but will pick it up in volume. 1:35:50 It is a tough start to make a career on the waterfront. Back then everyone made the same wages regardless of age. Changed in the early 90s with contract changes. With containerization in place, did not make sense to pay the same wages. in this economy, while starting out, people have to have some unique financial circumstance like working spouse or living at home. There has to be some subsidy. Work is not constant. Never make a career out of working one or two days a week. Can’t do that now. Have had to get competitive with non union and cut wages and benefits. Because it is tough to get work. There has to be someone who keeps you motivated. Great to go out in the docks and see people working down there. It is a good feeling. they are making a great living. 1:45:20 when unions merged, we slotted all guys. 4 locals merged into one. two locals had no business at all. Was a challenge to merge all four together. Watch your button. Number was called Button. Every year they reclassify and it is exciting to find out what your button number is. It is just a number seniority system. The most senior member is number 1 and the next is number 2 and so on. There are 800-900 seniority numbers in the local. Move up when someone dies or retires. Always want to know where you are. Most senior members making $100,000 - 200,000. It becomes a very comfortable living.