repository;interviewee;datebirth;dateinterview;text
TeaneckTownship; Miss Louise Jordan;1916;1975;My family lived in Teaneck from 1865 when my grandfather, Conrad N. Jordan, bought a farm on West Englewood Avenue which extended from Teaneck Road across the railroad tracks to where Whittier School is now. He and some other men built the West Shore Railroad which only went from Jersey City to Tappan. He wanted to build housing for employees of the railroad. My grandfather and his associates built the Weehawken Tunnel.  My father grew up in Teaneck. I guess my grandfather farmed his property as my father as a child rode to the New York market with the farmers, going down the hill to the Dyckman Street ferry and then to New York.  My grandfather was treasurer of the United States.  He lived here quite a while.  He later went back to New York. Frank Chapman was another one who lived here. His mother had been Mrs. Emor. She had divorced Mr. Emor after chasing him down the hill with a gun.  Mrs. Melfi, a music teacher who presented concerts, lived nearby. I remember Mrs. Gaylord, she drove an electric car which sat way up high. It didn't make a sound. She used to pick up her husband at the train.  The 78 bus was called the Flying Eagle.  It went up River Road, then over West Englewood Avenue to Englewood. Verlini owned it and the Weiss brothers drove for him.  Jack O'Brien lived on Elm Terrace across from our house on West Englewood Avenue, across from the Hazeltons.  We couldn't cross the street because of the heavy traffic. On the north side of West Englewood Ave. was Cutler's Pharmacy, The Greenlaws, the Larkins. On the south side were the Hazeltons and the McCrackens. There was Mr. Etten's store and Mr. Zitelli, the shoemaker.  My mother came here in 1912 as a bride from the Princeton area. My grandfather served two terms as treasurer of the United States in Washington and then was made assistant treasurer of the U.S. and worked in the old treasury building in New York. Among those who were here when he lived in Teaneck was Walter Hines Page, founder of Doubleday, Page Publishing House and former ambassador to Great Britain. Then there was Thomas Van Buren who lived where Volk's is now. His daughter was a fiery person. Phelpses lived in the Griggs place after the house, where the Municipal Building is, burned down.  My mother founded the library. Her husband's brother has left some books at her house when he moved out west. She circulated the books at first from her home. Later she and some ladies got the old slave house on Teaneck Road where the gas station is. They painted it and fixed it up. Miss Matte Scott's artist friend painted the windows because the women couldn't afford curtains. Those women sold the building at a $17,000 profit and gave the money to the town to build a library. They had a hard time making the town accept the gift. They finally agreed to accept it.  I remember Frank DeRonde, a large blustery man, made the dedication.  It went on and on.  Mrs. Caddy had been one of the workers and he called out for her saying, "Mrs. Caddy, we call but you do not answer." We used to skate on DeRonde's pond near Bryant School.  When the town got the 13 acres for the high school. Mrs. Campbell offered to buy the property behind the high school down to Teaneck Road and give it to the town, but the town refused. She was a Democrat and the town fathers were Republican. Mother tried to persuade the board that it would be better to build one senior high school and a junior high in each end of town. She was far sighted.  I met Dickey Hawkey in San Francisco in about 1958-59. He was with Aramco and had been in Saudi Arabia for many years.  We moved to this house on Larch Ave. in 1922, I went to kindergarten at Emerson School. I remember Mrs. West, a teacher at School 1.  I'm sure she went down in history. Kitty Keener and Miss Tepper were great disciplinarians. I remember Mr. Lee at School 2. School board meetings were something. Lots of fighting. I've heard they had to check their pistols at the door.  Jess Witham, the cop. He used to go barefoot. Soke group from New York organized a Purity League and wanted to start up in Teaneck. He draw a line with his toe and dared them to come into town.  Nelson Ayers became a real estate developer. He wanted to put a cemetery between West Englewood and Forest Avenues extending to Sussex Road. It was Fred Andreas that wanted to close West Englewood Avenue at the railroad crossing . He thought by putting a bridge over the tracks, that area would grow.  Mr. Andreas, Mrs. Sample, Mrs. Hawkey and mother were all interested in the town. They had some hot board meeting.  Mrs. Sample. Mrs. Hawkey and mother wrote a column for The Record. It was signed Hiram Sez. They were sharp cookies. Mr. Andreas' glasses would shake when he got excited. My mother was definitely a woman's Libber. She was a doer. She could see no reason why you couldn't do anything.  I remember when Alice Hazelton accidentally set a fire in back of Ackerman's farm. Set the whole field on fire. I remember Mr. Ackerman's guinea hens. He had sheep too. Washington Hazelton was an organizer. There was a tulip tree on West Englewood Avenue, It had a hornet's nest in it. He organized the neighbors to get ride of the hornets.  My father was a sugar broker in New York, also a lawyer. He helped the VFW get the old town hall. He went to school in Englewood. The land in West Englewood was my grandfather's farm. We used to go to New York once a year on the West Shore.  I went to Teaneck High--graduated in 1934, the first class to go all the way through Jr. and Sr. high. Conrad, my brother, was a year ahead of me. You got a very good education at Teaneck High.  Mother was first president of the Library board. This was all farm when we came to Larch Avenue. There was a store on each corner of Garrison Avenue. You went to Hackensack or Englewood to buy things or went to Bogota and took the trolley.  The Arnold Johnsons lived on Kipp Street. The Grahams lived on our street. He was shot by a man in West Englewood. He had been calling on this man's wife. That was quite a scandal, Teaneck's first murder. It was a big trial. He got off on the Unwritten Law.  (The man was Harry Elbers of Pinewood Place who made chocolate candy, according to George Ahrens.  It happened Nov. 19, 1930 or 1931).  Graham was a plumber.  My brother Conrad has seen Teaneck people in California. He lives in Pasadena. He has seen Keith Monroe, the writer, and the McCracken sisters. Milton Anderson is now head of United Press. Hildegarde Grosser Bulwinkle got them together for the 40th class reunion.  It was all forest between Cedar Lane and West Englewood Avenue. Garrison Avenue scarcely existed. There was a farm near School 4, around Maitland Avenue where the tennis club was. Larch Avenue was dead end at North Street. There was a farm there, I think the house was on Linden Avenue. They raised lots of cabbages.  The race track across from where the Casa Mana used to be was abandoned. We learned to drive cars there. We learned at 9 or 10. Mrs. Sample, was the first lady to drive a car in Teaneck. My mother drove fast, but she would lecture us. She drove a Packard Twin 6. Jackie O'Brien remembers. He'd rip up Teanack Road and get it up to 100 mph. They had great cars then.  The Butterfields were artists. I remember them pulling a wagon with their paints and easels in it. She painted a picture of me. Mother didn't like it. I remember Miss Kennedy the music teacher who came to class with her harmonica. She got married in Christ Church. The reception was somewhere else, so we all lined up on West Englewood Avenue to watch them get into their limousines. She was tall and good looking. She and her husband, Mr. Madison, had a successful restaurant. First it was on Palisade Avenue across from the railroad station in West Englewood. Then it was on Cedar Lane where the New England Shoppe is and later on Route 4, The Hans Christian Andersen Restaurant.  The Hart family had a big home on River Road. Archibald Hart was a prominent man. I think that house later became a restaurant. I met Captain Phelps as a child. He lived in Red Towers on River Road. The Weiss brothers were great. I had a bracelet they gave me as a child. They used to drive my father. Lavonne Muller who lived on Elm Avenue flies for George Brewster.  Frederick Warner was a fine man. He designed the first library without charge, a man of vision. The apartments on Cedar Lane near River Road were really condominiums. His son, Beverly Warner, became treasurer of an international corporation. I met Walter with Allen Dulles brother.   I knew Miss Agnes Norton. She and Miss Alice Rust were our two librarians. I came across a letter of thanks from Miss Norton to my mother expressing appreciation for the job. She was a magnificent organizer. Miss Rust was a people person. They did a great deal for the library.  Afterthoughts by Miss Jordan-- Mrs. Ferry had a boa constrictor. Mrs. Whipple had a crow, Benny Lippman was a bootlegger.   
TeaneckTownship;Miss Eleanor Encke;1904;1970;Miss Encke lived in Teaneck from 1904 until she moved to Florida in 1970. Her father immigrated to this country from Germany in 1901 and worked for a nursery man in Carlstadt. He later sent for his family and found a greenhouse on Park Avenue, Teaneck, he could rent. He leased the property for two years and then bought it from Mr. DeGraw. Part of it was in Bogota. (Herman Encke)  He cleared the land which was thick woods from Park Avenue to Queen Anne Road. He built three long sheds close together on Fort Lee Road. The family lived in these quarters until he built a house in 1916. The house, built behind the sheds, was in Bogota. The sheds were moved to Cresskill during World War I and used as barracks. He replaced the sheds with a large greenhouse.  Mr. Encke built up his greenhouse business with the aid of immigrants whom he met at the pier in New York. He used to grow mums, sweet peas and .other flowers and take them to the train station in Leonia after working all night picking and bunching the flowers. The whole family worked hard, but the children had a happy childhood. Later, when they had a good horse drove a wagon with boxed flowers to 28th St. in N.Y. Later they got their first car--an open air Chandler.  Miss Encke attended the little school on Fort Lee Road. Miss Howland, the teacher, knew how to handle children in all 8 grades. Rae DeGraw was in her class. She had a language problem when she started to school. At home they spoke Polish and German. Miss Encke taught in Teaneck schools for 35 years--the last 7 or 8 doing classroom testing.   She remembers the day they moved from the little school to the new Longfellow School. For a year they had had an extra teacher, Miss Taylor who taught the first four grades and Miss Howland the upper four. After eighth grade she went to Leonia High for four years, taking the trolley. After high school she worked briefly, but decided to go to Normal School in Trenton.   Her first job was in Cresskill. Her brother drove her to the Northern Valley Railroad in Leonia. She got off in Cresskill and walked to school.  Her father, who died at 93 in 1961, gave up the wholesale flower business in later years and converted to retail. Her mother died in 1947.   
TeaneckTownship;Ada Mantena;1904;1977;Ada Mantena, 1904, 1977 (Interview taped 6/13/1977) We came to Teaneck in 1909. My father built the house on Congress Avenue. My father was very strict-- didn't want you to have company.  There was my sister, Hattie and Josie who married Henry Crede. They got married on the sly on account of Papa.  My brother Jimmy was the oldest. He was in World War I and belonged to the Legion. Then there was me. Laurence had the ice business. He palled with the Clausen boys.  On our street there was Brunos. They farmed around West Englewood. My brother would go along when the Brunos went with a horse and wagon taking a load of vegetables over Fort Lee Road. Louie used to sell milk. Laurence likes horses. Then there was Ben Lewis and Agnes and Marion who had a farm in the woods back of us. There was a dirt road. Our playground was where Route 4 is. We played in the sand.  Stevenson was a farmer--he had apple orchards. Matt Scott lived on Teaneck Road.  De Ronde had an apple orchard in back. We had fine apples on the ground. If Mr. Stevenson would catch you,  you would get chased. He grew corn and pumpkins. We'd steal them around Halloween.  Emily Kaltenbach lived next door to us. Then there were the Lellonses. The Phillips's -- John, Teenie, Jim and Anne lived near where Peinecke is now. My oldest sister was friends with Teenie. Jim was kind of a tax collector. He lived on Tuxedo Square, my oldest sister lives on Summit Ave. The Montgomery house is next to my sisters. She is in Florida.  Dick Verlini's sister still lives in that bungalow style house. George Ahrens lives on Robinson Street. I graduated from school with George. My brother Conrad married Ethel Ross on Garden Street. She worked for the Phone Company. He worked for the gas station. My brother Freddie was a manager. My brother Connie went to Monticello on his day off. We tossed a coin if I should go with him but I went to work. He went fast, went over an embankment, ended up in a hospital. He was buried from the Rossi home on Garden Street.   I was with F. W. Woolworth over 25 years. I have had two eye operations and a gall bladder operation, I went back after my operation. When I was getting ready to retire after 25 years, we had a dinner. I didn't work full time all the time. After father died, I couldn't leave mother,  My father was so strict. My sister Hattie got friendly with Milton Vanderbeek. He'd come with a horse and carriage but Papa wouldn't let her go.  Mrs. Prigge had a store on Congress Street. She was related to Bublitz. She had a son. He had to walk a couple of miles to my house. He come to see me but when he got there I was gone.   Papa was a plumber.  My brother Jimmy was a plumber. He was in World War I. When hard times came he was a janitor at the high school in later days.  Woolworth used to be in the center of the block on Cedar Lane. There was a delicatessen there. Then they enlarged Woolworth (at the Corner of Garrison and Cedar Lane--NW corner). I got $10 a week from 9 a.m. to 10 p.m. with either lunch or supper. I worked on the lunch counter. When they started with hot dogs and ice Cream sandwiches. You couldn't keep up with the business.  Papa built our house at 1098 Congress Street. There were no improved streets, no electricity. Neighbors gave us water. Papa and Kaltenbach had to dig from Congress to Summit when the well went dry. Mama caught rain water to wash clothes and cook. We had a coal stove and a kerosene stove. Later we got a furnace. Papa was a plumber. In later years we shut off 2 back bedrooms. We didn't have a toilet till the sewer came in later years.  When Camp Merritt was dedicated we put a wreath on the monument in town. Mrs. Gertrude Guthrie and I rode up Teaneck Road when they unveiled the monument.  We were with the Ladies Auxiliary VFW,  There was an apple orchard on Robinson Street. Larry was in the ice business through John Phillips. Connie worked in the fields at Brunos near Teaneck Station. Katie Bruno still lives on Congress Ave. During the Depression I had to get a job. They raised the bus fare. If I worked in Bergenfield, how much would be left?  Sunday afternoons we would take a walk around the woods. Freddie was friends with George Ahrens. There were black walnut trees. We'd put the nuts in the attic and crack them in the winter  Inez and Dorothy DeBaun was my teacher in 1911. I remember Bessie Murphy, the chief's daughter. She was my best friend. They lived in the Selvage section.
TeaneckTownship;Agnes C. Norton, Teaneck Library Director;1895;1975; Teaneck Library Director, (1929-1961) Agnes C. Norton, Teaneck Library Director, 1895, 1975  Teaneck Library Director, (1929-1961) (Interview taped 7/16/1975) I came to Teaneck March 19,1929 and began work at the library the day President Hoover was inaugurated. I was born in Proctor, VT, and before coming to Teaneck had been assistant librarian in Hanover, N. H.  I saw an ad in the library Journal ,applied for the Teaneck job and was asked to come for an interview. I had never been in New York before. I met Mrs. Jordan, Mrs. Sample and Mrs. Hawkey in the tiny library office. I sat outside all afternoon. Mrs. Ethel Ward was running the library. At that time the library was the small central part of the present building. Frederick Warner, an architect, had given his services to design the first building with its white columns.  Mrs. Jordan was a very distinguished white haired lady who wore beautiful hats. Mrs. Hawkey and Mrs. Sample were sisters. During the afternoon we listened to Hoover's inaugural address. Mrs. Sample had a nice home near the present Route 4.  Mrs. Sample and Mrs. Hawkey were Stevensons.  The trustees got me a room on Queen Anne Rd. near Johnson Ave. with Mrs. Clarke. Dr. Pindar bought the house soon afterwards. I walked to work over muddy streets.  The library was under state law, established as a municipal library. It was started by a group of women who had an opportunity to buy a slave house on Teaneck Road -- 1279.  Mrs. Greenlaw  signed the note for $2,000. Mrs. Frances Quasdorf who lived on West Englewood Avenue near the top of the hill was another director.  There were 2,000 books when I came. They were not catalogues. I suggested they call in a specialist who did that job. When I left there were over 100,000 books.   The original library had had two additions, one in 1936 built with F.W.A. funds ($66,000) and one in 1952 when the council appropriated $237,000 for two more wings. I worked very hard, especially for the second addition.  I did much public speaking. Council Haggerty (Cecil) told me he didn't like all those things about libraries I was sending to the council, but it worked.  I always tried to work with groups. There was a friendly feeling toward the library.  George Cady was the architect for both additions. I helped with planning, but architects all have definite opinions. I suggested we call James Bryan, an expert from the Newark Library.  During the 1936 building, we moved all the books to a little store across from St. Anastasia School -- built shelves and moved all the books. We were there for about a year. We had professional movers in 1952. We continued operating throughout the building project.  The founders of the library, sold the slave house at a profit of $15,000 which they committed to the town for a library. There was a public referendum for $20,000 to erect the building on Municipal Grounds.  The Greenlaws were well to de People. He was a fine man and she was too. She was on the board of education and was later on the library board.  Dr. Franklin Gaylord was on the board when I came.  The Gaylords had lived in Russia for many years. He was with the Y.M.C.A. She fled before the Revolution and they had a house in England. Mrs. Gaylord was active in Girl Scouts.  They are charming, cultured people. They took me to New York often.  Miss Mabel Moore lived with the Gaylords in Russia. I lived with her. She had a black servant named Torina who drove a motor cycle all over town. She had attended operas in every capital in Europe.  Later I lived with Mr. and Mrs. Bower on Carlton Terr., then I took an apartment on Red Road--one of the first apartments in Teaneck. Then I moved to 34 State Street. That apartment had stood vacant for some time, the windows were broken. Nelson Ayers built it and went bankrupt before it was finished. It was a fine building with 2 elevators, 5 stories high and casement windows. I lived there for 30 years. The tenants were nearly all Episcopalians. I remember Mr. and Mrs. McCloud. Charles Stool lived there later and quite a few teachers--Jeannette Pfeil, Dorothy DeVanney.  We wouldn't think of going on Cedar Lane without a hat and gloves. I went to Now York a great deal--to the theater and restaurants. There was good food at Ella Barbour's. The bus fare was a quarter.  Mrs. Gaylord's father had been pastor of a well known Now York Church. She burned to death when her robe caught in an electric heater. That was after her husband's death.  I enjoyed my job. Mrs. Jordan was a strong personality. The library board of five members was appointed by the mayor according to state law. Once the mayor appointed someone the women didn't like and they resigned is a body.  I think it was when Mr. Greenlaw was appointed and they wanted Captain Wilcox. There is a plaque in the library honoring the original library group, including Mrs. Caddy and Matte Scott.  It got cracked. The women called an expert and they all sat around watching it being fixed.  In a community like this social life nearly always involved couples. I went to New York because that was where the action was. I often took a bus to shop in Hackensack at the little shops.  There were no big stores. The Now York Trimming Store was there. I used to sat at the Colonial Restaurant in Hackensack which was quite good.  The Blue Bird Inn was standing when I came,  but it was past its heyday. The Rotary club met there and I spoke to them. It was the first time I had addressed an all-male group.  Mr. Volcker came shortly after I did. I know his wife and children. Ruth was going to Simmons College to study library science and worked in the Teaneck library as part of her training. Mr. Volcker used to go over the bills and kid me about the title of some of the books. He had a dry sense of humor. I still hear from Mrs. Volcker who lives in Lyons, N.Y.  When Mr. Votee was mayor he entertained all of the Republican mayors in Bergen county. They started in the library because he wanted to sell the library idea to all the politicians. He entertained them at another time on a Feb. 14. There was a big snow storm and no one came but Mr. and Mrs. Votee, Mr. and Mrs. Volcker and me. Mrs. Votee had prepared loads of food -- hams, cakes, etc. Mrs. Votee used the library quite a lot.  Many local groups were born in the Teaneck Library -- The Teaneck Symphony, the Garden Club, Teaneck Camera Club and the Bergen County Artists Guild all started there. In the 40s the library sponsored a Children's Theater. Six professional people ran it. Once they took a pony downstairs to the auditorium. The auditorium would be filled with 200 children at 1 p.m. then for another show. Mr. and Mrs. Flannigan helped. The theater cost $2 for the season.  During the 30s we had a lecture series with top speakers like Clifton Fadiman. Interest lagged after television developed. The Teaneck Symphony which is now the Bergen County Symphony rehearsed in the library. Otte Radel was the director. Among the active members were Mr. and Mrs. Raymond Bonz and Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Berhorn.  We had exhibits by many local artists like Harry Bressler. Hazel Kitts Wires exhibited the work of her students once a year.  I remember Teaneck Author's Night put on in 1946. We had 14 authors all from Teaneck. Alice Papin was the time keeper. There was an editorial in the Record saying how well timed it was. Jim Bishop, whose book "The Glass Crutch" had just come out. Other authors were Thornton Bishop, Herbert Stack, a safety engineer who had a book on that career  Walter Storey, antiques editor of the N. Y. Times  Mrs. Storey who had a book on home decorating  Bucky McDonald, the postman who had a book of poems called "It's Spring Again " Geraldine Huston who had a little book on "It's Fun to Be Safe " David Tobey wrote on Basket Ball Officiating  Mrs. Helen Davidian who wrote "Parallel Destiny " George Foley who wrote "Sinbad of the Coast Guard," Thomas James and Edward Sinclair Smith who gave an interesting talk on Automatic Control Engineering. Mrs. Catherine Humphries who wrote "Let's Pretend" and Robert Weaver -- a wide variety of Subjects and this was 30 years ago.  We did a lot of work with children. I did it in the early days. After 1936 we had a children's room. Mrs. Ward was my only assistant when I came. That June we got Miss Alice Rust, a trained librarian and a capable woman. She made a good basic catalogue. She stayed 13 years until she resigned--a great loss. Betty Brown was my next assistant. Bobette Vandenberg McDonald came after that. We had programs in the park and reading clubs in summer. In the early 30s we had book deposit in the elementary schools. Mrs. Josephine Gabriel visited the schools. This continued to the early 50s.  We had story hours let by Bobette and later Adele Taylor.  Baseball was the theme of one reading club and we had Alex Gaston formerly with the Boston Red Sox speak.  In 1948 I addressed a combined Jewish and Methodist group in the building where the Christian Science Church is now. It was the Jewish Center then. I also spoke at the Ba'Hai center and for all the PTAs, the Woman's club book group, the College Club.  We displayed hobbies in the library. Mr. Lufberry had a collection of photos of Coney Island in 1908. Mr. Zenerin exhibited fantastic doll house furniture. Mrs. Fourgette, Valentines. Mr. and Mrs.Meek, small boxes and cartoons by George Wolfe who now lives in Glen Rock.  Staff members were all active in professional organizations. I served as vice president of the N. J. Library Association and on the Public Relation Council. This way we kept a finger in professional activities.  During the war there was an interest in books on Iceland, the Pacific and other places where our boys were stationed.  My sister was married in the Greenlaw house. She came to live with me after my mother's death. She was engaged to a man at Fort Monmouth. Mr. Trombath performed the ceremony about 32 years ago.  I have been so fortunate in having many friends. I led discussion groups which met in people's houses and enjoyed them so much. The people had so much intellectual curiosity. The Council of Jewish Women had one group. That is one of my pleasantist memories. We had a fine reference room. A man from the N.Y. Public Library said our reference library was outstanding.  I found going out in the community interesting. We had one of the first record collections in the area. Started it with $100. We also loaned prints of masterpieces. Teaneck was one of the first in this field. We didn't spend a lot of money. I think books should come first. Now there is a category for non-print material.  We had some of the New York Times microfilmed. I retired in 1961--now they do a great deal of microfilming. So many things have changed. When I left we had one funny duplicating machine that you had to pour ink on. Now libraries can rent all kinds of things and children seem to have plenty of dimes. I have worked in other libraries since and observed the trends.  I try to appeal to the young that destruction of public property is also a disservice to their classmates-- this is not now.  I don't believe a public library should be a depository for ancient books--they belong in museums. Books must constantly be discarded but you have to know what you are doing. For instance, Ida M. Tarbell's History of Standard Oil is a rare and valuable book.
TeaneckTownship;Alice Miraglia Hoek and Eleanor Kennedy Madison;1903;1976;Alice Miraglia Hoek & Eleanor Kennedy Madison, 1903, 1976  (Interview taped 3/6/1976) Mrs. Madison:  I started teaching in School No. 3 before it was finished. Children in that area had to go on the trolley to School No. l. I taught fifth grade and all music. The next year Mr. Jay moved me to Washington Irving where I taught sixth grade and music. The next year I was made music supervisor.  I had no car and walked from school to school. Sometimes I'd ride with a truck driver They were wonderful in those days.  Mrs. Hoek:  I started at Washington Irving teaching seventh and eighth grades. Miss Lucy Marsh was the principal. She always carried a pad to write notes about how you were doing. She carried a clock. This bothered me so that one day I set her clock ahead and school was dismissed early. She never knew who did it.  Mrs. Madison:  She amused me because she was so sarcastic, but on my wedding day she sent me a dozen red roses. Half the teachers were afraid of her.  Mrs. Hoek:  One day I saw some words on a back wall of Washington Irving. They were shocking to me. I told Miss Marsh about those sexy words and she said, "That just shows that I'm different.  Mrs. Madison:  Most of my former pupils are now retiring--George Beaumont, Peter Christensen and Sam Dunne, the boy who rode a horse on the playground.  He had a hard time getting out of grammar school. I had a Glee Club.  We used to go on outings.  I told him if he didn't get out of the eighth grade he couldn't go on any more outings. Of course, if he got out of the 8th grade, he wouldn't be there. He made it. Billy Hawkey was a character. He never had enough money. One time I took the children to Bear Mountain. I was wearing an orange cap so they could see me. Billy took a girl rowing. Soon there were cries of distress. We rowed out and found that he had thrown the oars over because she wouldn't let him wear her ring. We took the girl back and let him get back the best way he could. He rowed with his hands.   Mrs. Hoek: There were no real discipline problems because we didn't expect them. Parents expected their children to behave.  I can scarcely remember two or three youngsters who were problems. We had no teacher aids and no supervision. Technical know how is not the answer.  Mrs. Madison:  I kept them after school. They don't do that now. That's my objection to busing. I told them if you don't do it now, you stay till it's done. School ended at 4. After school was when you gave individual instruction. Teachers won't stay after school now.   Mrs. Hoek:  I remember Charles Berger. He later owned the Plantation. He was a problem. He thought he was lucky to be kept after school. He was a good looking fellow and a little devilish.  Parents' attitudes were so different. I remember Murray Selden had gum in his mouth. I motioned him to put it in the basket. After repeated inaction, I took him to the principal. His mother came to school and told him she was ashamed of him. Parents were different--it was a different climate. I remember a family who lived on River Road. They had four sons. When the little one entered kindergarten and was difficult I taught him to spell BOSS. I told him what it meant and that the teacher was the Boss and don't you forget it. He didn't.  They thought they'd got better teachers when they started raising salaries. It was quite the other way. When I started teachers were there because they loved children. I was a teaching principal. I started in Washington Irving in 1923. I went to Whittier Feb.1,1926 and was there 41 years.  Whittier school was two rooms over two rooms until 1926. In the fall of  '25 they added a large auditorium with two partitions. That provided a community room. The only other place around was Christ Church. They later closed the partition and added fifth and sixth grades. At first we just had kindergarten first, second and third--fourth fifth and sixth walked to Washington Irving.  Mrs. Madison: I was like the pied piper. My office was in Washington Irving. The children followed me as I walked along. When I first went there all the eighth grade boys were dismissed when they sounded the fire gong. The boys went out to pull the hose cart.   Mrs. Hoek: In 1926 there were no houses across from Whittier--it was all open country--no houses between the school and River Road. It was all furrows except for the Andreas house and a little spring house. There were houses on West Englewood, Ogden and Rutland and a few on Warwick.  Mrs. Madison:  I came to Teaneck in 1917 from Vineland. I remember Nov.11, 1918, Armistices Day. We had a parade and marched to the park at the West Englewood Railroad station. There was a bandshell and I led the singing. I remember that park. There was a sign that said "Those who Enter West Englewood Never Leave," Sounded like it was the end.  Mrs. Hoek: Teachers I remember? There was Mrs. Osnedo, Kitty Keener, Miss Tepper. Teaching was so simple then. We didn't need psychiatrists and psychologists.  Mrs. Madison: I remember the big boys in the eighth grade would run up the stairs. The principal had me stand at the stairs and make them come down and walk, not run, up.  Mrs. Hoek:  Kitty Keener was a strict disciplinarian. I remember a big boy telling me he couldn't get along with her, I suggested he pick a bunch of flowers from his mother's yard and take them to her. She was wonderful after that. Once I went after school to look at her exhibits. She wasn't there and I told the janitor why I came.  The next day she called me up and scolded my for snooping, saying I just wanted to copy what she was doing.  We used to have annual physical education and game contests. Each school entered and had effective costumes. I used to go to the Roxy and take notes on how they did the dances. It was a lot of work but it was good. Six schools took part. We had it in the athletic field.  Mrs. Madison:  We had music demonstrations. They couldn't do it today. There was the coordination of the various disciplines. Rhythm bands, etc, We did it two nights with 300 children each night--first, second and third grades with their rhythm bands, xylophones and water glasses. We amplified a recording. The theme was different each year--The Cazrina music one year, Austrian with the Blue Danube another. One year it was the North Pole. We charged 25 cents and couldn't get all the people in the high school. We called Dr. Neulen, our Cecil B. DeMille. I had to tune the water glasses--we used Coca Cola glasses on a special board so we could carry them. We'd have a child lead.  There were strict orders to go to the bathroom.We had to get the blue birds at the top of the stage seats. One time one of the Penguins hadn't gone to the bathroom before hand and the whole audience was aware of it.  Mrs. Hoek: If you haven't been in it you don't know the precise timing. involved. Every once in a while measles would hit.  Mrs. Madison: I was a supervisor but I liked to teach. The teachers and I worked together. Now the teacher walks out of the room when the supervisor comes in. That is her free time,  Mrs. Hoek: It seems to me that busing for integration was unfair. It was assuming that blacks couldn't do what white children could. I had a good experience with Teaneck's first integration--the Jewish children.  Before the last additions were built at Whittier we had five classes in the basement. One was in the coal bin. There was a class in the stock room. Today there's a feeling you have to have a splendid building. You don't have to keep spending terrific amounts of money. Better Schools? They are not teaching respect for the history of this country.  When I first went to Whittier we had small classes--16 or 18 for Kindergarten through third grade. There were 101 children in the entire school. When they went to K-6, they had nearly 1,000.  We had excellent Jewish families. I put on programs which fitted Jewish history into all history. I had Chanukah and Christmas programs separate. I went to New York on Saturdays and attended many Jewish services to get the background. That was our first integration problem. I don't think the second has been achieved.  I spoke at the Teaneck Jewish Community Center when it was where Christian Science Church is, I stressed that a child's development is physical, intellectual and spiritual.  Mrs. Hoek:  I recall the Caddy house on Teanck Road between Church and Bogert. There's an apartment there now. I knew Matte Scott, she was associate editor of Architecture Magazine, a brilliant woman. David Cady was her sister's son. The front door of the Caddy house was not the main entrance. At the back there were large double doors. They opened on a staircase 8 feet wide. There were large, beautiful rooms upstairs. That is where they used to have Tammany Hall meetings when Sheriff Orser lived there. No one would know of the secret meetings. Matte Scott had a summer place in Old Lyme, Conn. DeLora Norman, her closest friend and she shared a large house. DeLora painted murals--those in the library. Later they built a more modern home on Rogers Lake. It had a studio with a cathedral ceiling. DeLora died before it was completed. Matte Scott was so interested in the library.  I look back and realize what people did for a town.  During the integration struggle after I retired I went to Washington, D. C. to see the superintendent of schools there. Dr. Harry Warner of the school board was going down but he got sick so went later with Bennington Gill and Dr. Warner but we couldn't get a plane because of snow. Finally I went with Jules Wolfe to see how Dr. Hanson handled things in Washington. He had fast, slow and middle tracks which were meeting needs of the pupils there. He offered me a job because he said Teaneck schools are outstanding in the U. S.  When I retired after 41 years, parents thought it was because of low social security and offered to make up the difference if I would stay. I was so touched. I retired because of my mother's heart and because of the  school set up. The superintendent would not visit teachers' classes. One day I invited Dr. Scribner to come in saying "You've never been in my office in al1 these years!  He put his foot over the threshold and said "Now I've set foot in it."
TeaneckTownship;Alma Crotta Brennan;1912;1976;Alma Crotta Brennan, 1912, 1976  (Interview by Janet Schmitt & Jane Talbert, taped January 1976) I have lived in Teaneck since September1915, I came here with my father, mother and sister Carol from New York. We first lived at 1615 Teaneck Road, then on Washington Place and then in our home at 1623 Teaneck Road.  We had a coal stove in the kitchen and a coal furnace. We always had electricity as I recalls but we had gas jets in the kitchen and bathroom because the electricity would go off. We always had a bathroom.  I went to Washington Irving School 2. In the early grades I recall going to school in the old fire house across the street. We were promoted every two years. There was Reception A and Reception B and class 1A and 1B. Mr. Jay was the principal later, Miss Marsh. I remember Miss Keltner in the second grade. Mrs. Keener in the sixth grade and Miss Miraglia, later Mrs. Hoek in the eighth grade. I went to Englewood High School. I was a member of the last Teanack class that graduated there. Teaneck High was built in 1929. I graduated in 1930 with my class from Englewood High.  Our neighbors were fairly close. You remember the Liebl Printing Company--the Liebls were our neighbors on Washington Place and the Dayson Lamp Company family lived across the street. There weren't too many farms. The Ackerman property where the telephone company is was the largest. He'd let people cut through his property to go to the train.  I never traveled to the city to work but my sister did and my father. Where the Armory is was farm area. We had a bus that ran on Teaneck Road to Englewood Avenue. We'd take the bus to go to DeGraw avenue to get the trolley to go to Palisades Amusement Park.  We always had milk delivered. Man came around selling vegetables. The ice man came. Winters must have been colder then, many people just put a box in the window to keep things cold. We had a garden. My mother put things up. There was a store at Washington Place and Teaneck Road.  As for entertainment, my parents didn't become too much involved. I took piano lessons and belonged to the Girl Scouts. We had a ball team and almost every Saturday we'd go to the fire house where we had a good night's entertainment. I have gone to St. Anastasia Church all my life, I was married in the little old church by Father O'Neal. There wasn't too much in the line of social activity in our church. Some of my friends went to other churches where there were activities. Viola Lebeck was a good friend. She went to Christ Church.  Restaurants? My father owned what you might call a restaurant, It was what Italians call a "ponsione" or boarding house. He served meals. He was in the wine and liquor business before prohibition, He used to bring grapes home for wine, He worked in New York.  Some Teaneck children went to Leonia High School--from the other end of town. I guess the dividing line was Cedar Lane or Forest Avenue. From Forest Avenue north they went to Englewood.  One mayor I remember was Kelly. He built all the streets. When he them built they were no where -- like Windsor Road or West Englewood. We have a big block dance when they were completed. I feel the town has fallen off in celebrations like Memorial Day and the Fourth of July. We Girl Scouts used to celebrate all day. One year I was the one to put the wreath on the monument at Camp Merritt. We'd have the governor and big politicians from the state. There would be all kinds of track and field events. The Girl Scouts had a big routine. Our leader was Elizabeth Gilmore.  I have a picture taken at the Blue Bird Inn in 1927 complete in Girl Scout uniform. Every one went to the Blue Bird Inn. Two of my uncles worked there. It was on Teaneck Road at Cedar Lane--where Volk's is. It was a restaurant. Most political things were held there for many years. Burned Down? I don't remember. That's what I have heard.  The Municipal Building was at Teaneck Road and Church Street in front of what is now the playground of Washington Irving School. Later it was moved to Bedford Avenue and Teaneck Road. The library was there before that. I believe it was started by the D.A.R., because Mrs. Greenlaw was active in both the D.A.R. and the library.  The first Police Chief I recall was Murphy. The policemen were Davis, Bublitz and Jess Witham. I believe he still lives here. I saw a picture of him when they were having that problem with the high rise in Glenwood Park. The Fire Department? I don't recall that very much. We never had a fire. There was a fire bell at Teaneck Road and Tryon Ave., across from the school. If there was a fire, so many rings would tell where it was and bring the fire department like the siren now. It was strictly a volunteer fire department. Most of the services for the town were around Forest Avenue and Teaneck Road. There was a fire department in Glenwood Park and Morningside Heights.  We used to have like spelling bees contests when we'd go from one school to the other. You had to walk. We took our lunch to school because it was too far to walk although we had an hour for lunch. There was a bakery and a delicatessen across the street on Forest Avenue where you could get a sandwich.  Transportation? There was a taxi. People like the Ackermans, the Roemers and the Andreases had transportation. Every one else had to walk. Forest Avenue was a main road. We has bus transportation to Englewood High. I graduated from eighth grade in 1926. I had Miss Tepper in eighth grade. Miss McGeown was well liked by all. Mr. Jay was principal later Miss Marsh.  We had one of the first telephones--a stand up phone. We shopped off Washington Place and Teaneck Road. Bread was delivered by a man from Englewood. My father brought things home from New York. Onee he came home with a big box of Italian cookies and a fruit cake. He put it in the rack over head and when he got home and opened it he had two or three boxes of Christmas ornaments, My father and mother thought that was fine, but we didn't.  My mother never sawed. People used to come from Englewood and sold clothes, linens and things. Either in a horse and wagon or carrying a satchel. I don't recall a newspaper. The Bergen Evening Record was one of the first in the county.  I think the parades we had were one of the biggest events. Every one came out. There was always one or two in organizations that took over. Mr. Guthrie was very active in the Legion. One of the service clubs had charge of the July 4 celebration. Captain Wild was always active.  We had no hospital at first. Holy Name just celebrated its 50th anniversary. I had my appendix out in 1926 and went to Englewood Hospital. That was where my doctor went. Holy Name opened the year before.  The Phelps estate was still open then. It was where Holy Name is now and on both sides of Cedar Lane.  West Englewood was the main station then. This was more West Englewood than Teaneck then. There was a station in Teaneck. Mr. and Mrs. Hanks was in charge of the West Englewood station and the post office. There was a path from Teaneck Road to the station. It was farm lane--beautiful orchards but just don't get caught trying to take one of Ackerman's apples. Mrs. Cady--her husband was an architect--lived in a house with beautiful lilacs. There's an apartment there now. The area around Bryant School was called Knickerbocker Heights. Some people who moved there lived in tents before they built their houses. My aunt and uncle. Mr. and Mrs. Silvestri, lived behind where Bryant School is.  My aunt and uncle the Crottas lived across the street.  Dr. Nelden had a sanitarium on Englewood Avenue.  Mr. Buffet built in that area. They named Buffet Terrace for him. There were the Fields. Mr. Black and Mr. Deissler who later became mayor.  Teaneck Road was the main artery. Ackermans where the telephone company is and where the Food Fair is lived two elderly women, the Loziers. They used to stop children on the way home from school and tell stories. They showed us a place where slaves were buried. When I came home from a Girl Scout meeting I used to run. Below Route 4 were the Stevensons. Miss Fickerman, the music teacher lived at Sheffield and Teaneck-Road, now a liquor store. I took lessons from her. She held her recitals in some of the old homes because there were no large meeting places. On River Road, next to the Andreases was an old military academy.  What is now Votee Park was Central Park  I remember in grammar school they'd tell us to wear old clothes to play in and we'd have a picnic in the park. There wasn't a dress code then, but no one would go to school in dungarees. I remember some children would wander off and we'd have to hunt them. There were so many lanes in the park they could get lost.  When I was growing up I only knew the area from Liberty Road where the Armory is now located to Forest Avenue and the Catholic church. To got to DeGraw Avenue we took a bus to Hackensack and the trolley from there to Palisades Park across the street. 
TeaneckTownship;Andy and Tony Limone;1927;1975;Andy & Tony Limone, 1927, 1975  (Interview taped 10/31/1975) I have lived here 48 years -- I was born here.  There were eight children, five boys and three girls.  I was the youngest. My father (Jimmy Limone) came here from Union City around the turn of the century. He lived here 65 years. First he lived in a farmhouse where Sagamore Avenue is today. We have lived at 892 Palisade Ave. for 52 years when he started selling retail. Before that we went to the Paterson market. The sons, daughters and Mom all worked on the farm. It was large enough to support a family. We lived good.  When we went to market my brother drove a truck--a model T, then we got a Model A. We went to market every day. We plowed with horses. I remember plowing when I was 12 years old. We never had a tractor, We had a team of horses and they meant more to us than anything. We took good care of them, brushed them down, kept the barn nice and clean.  Yes, my father was very successful. He was a real individual. He lived to be 93. He came to Taaneck from Union City. He first worked on a farm in Brooklyn for $9'a month.  He came from Europe when he was 19. He worked on a farm where Fort Hamilton is now. He decided to go on his own and went to Union City--it was Union Hill then.  He met my mother there and they were married in a church on Bergen Boulevard. They came to Teaneck on their honeymoon. This is where they settled in the house you see in this picture. He would have loved to tell you about it. He loved Teaneck  He gained a lot of friends in this town. He was friendly with everybody.  You say were there any stores--from Garrison Avenue down there was nothing but Woolworth's and Sherwin-Williams. There was a big lot where they used to have carnivals. Palisade Avenue ended about here. There was a cinder road . My dad's sister lived in the house next door. She is 90 and works every day with me.  At first my father farmed 7 acres where Teaneck High school is now. It went down to River Road. Where Lowell School is was part of it. Yes, he needed his children to help him.  We all helped our neighbors. Everyone pitched in. Yes, we still have grapes. The neighbors I remember were just about what you see here. They've been here as long an we have.  I remember Sheffield Farms Dairy. They used to deliver milk with a sled in the winter. The farmers used to take their produce to New York. They'd need an extra team to got up the long hill. That's how George M. Brewster got his start. He had a couple of teams to help wagons up the hill on the way to the ferries. The George Washington Bridge wasn't built in 1927--the year I was born.  There was not much in the way of entertainment. We were entertained in homes. You'd go to see your uncle or your uncles would come to see you. We'd sit under the grape vine drinking and eating and playing games like bocci or horse shoes. That was about the size of the entertainment.  What about churches? There was St. Francis in Hackensack. It was an Italian church where Mom could understand the masses. We went to St. Anastasia's. The little church by the school. I can remember the first school. It was constructed of wood.  The Town Hall and the library were there when I was in school. We swam in the little lake in front of what is now the police station. As kids we went to the dum at the end of Cedar Lane and shot rate with a 22. Target practice. We swam in the Hackensack River. There used to be a beach there. It was a nice life.  What my father said, that was the law. That's what we have gotten away from. We ate what Mom cooked--she could cook special things for eight different children.  We raised a few hogs. My father butchered them in the falls after the cold weather, A pig sticker came around and killed pigs for farmers. My father butchered. Yes, we made blood pudding. Mom made sausage and smoked the salami. We kept it all winter. We didn't eat pork in the summer. We had goats for milk. We didn't have cows. Mom canned tomatoes and everything. In the back yard we had a cellar where we kept beets, cabbage, carrots and celery. I remember I had never seen mashed potatoes--we had them fried and baked, but we didn't have them mashed. We had our own chickens. Each of us had to have a raw egg in the morning. It was hard to get it down. And every week we took a physic. We'd get a little piece of orange. We wanted that.  There were a lot of deer -- plenty of dear in Teaneck where Central--Votee--park is. My brother got a job working in Central Park when they made it.  The neighbors came here because we had a stand.  There were quite a few vegetable stands in Teaneck. There was the Green farm east of River Road and Rekow's--that wasn't so long ago.  My two sisters and I used to go through the streets peddling vegetables Mom had fixed up for us. We had a regular route. Sometimes we'd sell out and have to go back. This soil is suited more for vegetables than fruit. You need sandy soil for carrots.  We have insects now we never had before. There's a lot of things being imported. New Jersey and Pennsylvania are among 5 states where you couldn't bring geraniums from California because of some kind of disease.
TeaneckTownship;Beatrice Schwartz Diggelmann;xxxx;1977;Beatrice Schwartz Diggelmann, xxxx, 1977 (Interview taped 5/4/1977) I have lived here since 1913 -- 54 years.  My mothers and father came from Brooklyn.  It was July 31 -- then came a beautiful hurricane.  There were no sidewalks.  There was mud everywhere.  West Englewood was a dirt road.  Teaneck Road was gravel. The men had to leave the truck at the entrance to our street and carry everything, including the baby's crib.  Ed Knowles built this house.  They moved to Maryland.  In our family was my brother Har fold, my sister Gussie who married a Conklin and lived in Englewood, and myself.  I had two brothers who died.  My mother's name was Mao Rost, my father was Emil Schwartz. I went to the little wooden school on Church Street and Teaneck Road.  Then to School 2 where the Town House is.  I remember Mrs. Marsh the principal, Mrs. Judd and Miss McCracken.  Our neighbors were Mrs. Imhoff, the McDounals, the Madlers -- we came here because of them from Brooklyn.  My father, a printer, took the train, the ferry and the trolley in New York to get to work.  There was no Queen Anne Road of Palisade Avenue in this section.  The Jordans lived across the street on West Englewood Ave.  This was all woods.  There was a road going through the woods to Clausen's Fat Factory -- they used big boilers to render the fat.  Talk about pollution!  Our house had modern plumbing.  We had a 40-foot driven well.  People came for miles to get our water -- the best you ever drank.  But it got to be a nuisance -- a big mudhole -- so we closed it up.  We used coal stoves, one in the kitchen and one in the basement with holes of opt air registers to heat upstairs.  We almost froze the first winter.  We had 3 and 4 foot snows.  Like the one in 1947, the year my father died.  I went to beauty schools in New York -- Mullins, Wilford Academy and Marinella.  I worked while going to school.  Ten years ago I took a brush-up course at Parisian.  I worked 10 years with Jay Schneider at 42nd and Fifth Avenue, 20 years at Stern's then I spent 20 years taking care of three sick people.  My husband had a nervous breakdown.  He lost his mind, but I stayed with him.  There were no stores in this part of town.  We walked to Englewood, Hackensack or Bergenfield or Bogota.  There was nothing in Teaneck.  Then a man opened a store on Forest Avenue near Teaneck Road, a Jewish man.  He sold practically everything.  We used to take the cart to school, leave it in the hall and after school go to the store with a list and bring home the groceries.  My mother and Mrs. Imhoff used to walk to Englewood to get groceries, taking a clothes basket.  After shopping they would go to the movies and walk home over Dutch Town Hill carrying the basket between them.  One day the weather changed and there was a heavy snowstorm.  My brother and I took the sled with a rope, walked to Englewood, got our mother and Mrs. Imhoff and pulled the basket home on the sled, making tracks for them to walk in.  We had no refrigeration.  Across the street was a spring.  Some man dug a big hole there and we stored our food in cricks.  In the winter we used a window box.  On July4 every one gave a donation and we had fireworks in Borden's fields.  Friends were coming from Brooklyn.  My father brought a 28 pound fresh ham.  We walked to River Road to Peter's farm and got eggs and vegetables, put everything in cricks with a rock on top.  Came the morning of July 4 and so and there wasn't a thing in the spring.  There was a hobo camp nearby and when we got up at 5:30 a.m. so Mama could cook the ham, the hoboes had taken everything -- ours and everybody else's.  Not even a brick of butter was left.  I took the wagon and walked to River Road, got a bushel of potatoes, eggs, corn and milk.  My mother made potato salad, hard boiled eggs and with corn we had a feast.  There was no doctor here.  Dr. Sullivan came from Englewood, at first on a bike, then on a horse, then with a horse and carriage and then he got a little automobile, but he was too old by that time to come.  If you had to get medicine, you walked to Englewood.  There was Dr. Louis Ruch and later Valentine.  The first store in West Englewood was Abe Etten's butcher shop and grocery.  Then there were more stores Zitelli the shoemaker, then an A & P came.  One the corner of Palisade and West Englewood , there was a little drug store where they sold ice cream in the back.  Where the post office is now.  Mr. Manno, the Barber, moved in there later and there was a big room with lattice around it.  That must have been the ice cream parlor.  There used to be band concerts in West Englewood Park by the railroad station on Wednesday nights.  There was a gazebo there.  There was a lake or a pond.  One night my father came home from work late, got off the train and walked over to hear the band concert.  He fell into the lake and the water wasn't fresh -- full of toad stools.  DiBella had the barber shop with Mr. Manno brought.  I remember when they cut Queen Anne Road -- Westfield Ave. through to Cedar Lane.  I remember the Blue Bird Inn on Teaneck Road and the Phelps mansion where we used to go to get horse radish.  There was a big field of it.  Hagens had a store where she sold dresses and he fixed clocks.  On Teaneck Road at Bogert Street was the old clubhouse.  They used to have dances on Wednesday nights, Saturday and holidays.  There would be masquerade balls.  We had a party there every Saturday night.  All the neighbors came and had coffee and cake.  In the clubhouse was a bowling alley and a stage downstairs.  Upstairs was a pool table.  As for the fire department, there was a barn or garage opposite the Town House.  There were tow big wheels with a bar across, the hose was wound around that.  That was the fire department.  When the alarm sounded on the big steel tire, the men and big boys would pull that to the fire.  They didn't have water at first, they used water from your house.  Murphy was the policeman.  He used to ride a bike.  I remember one Halloween, Mrs. Imhoff had an outhouse.  The big boys stole it and hoisted it on a pole at the railroad station.  She make them bring it back.  The boys were Al Pierce, Red Uber and probably the Imhoff boy.  We swam in the Hackensack River where the disposal plant is.  It was cool and clear. Once or twice a week we'd put our lunch in the wagon, take a sheet which we draped around a tree to make a tent for a dressing room and go swimming.  We'd put our clothes on the grounds.  Once the ants got into our clothes.  In the summer we'd go to the store for people and cut grass etc.  We'd get a nickel or 2 cents.  My mother had a gallon jar on the porch where we put our pennies.  Before we went back to school, my mother would take us to Coney Island -- to the Steeple Chase.  The last time she took 14 children.  We left at 5 a.m. and came back late at night.  We took bathing suits, and baskets of lunch.  We took the train, then the ferry, walked to 7th Avenue and took the subway.  They were all neighbor kids, the Moores, Imhoffs, Alphonse Singer, Sammie Dunn, Joseph Oppelt and our cousins.  Before we went my mother would empty the jar on the dining table, the kids would count the money, wrap it and go to the bank to get bigger pieces.  It was a great summer adventure.  We left the jar on the porch all the time.  Once we went away for two weeks and never locked the door.  We didn't have a key.  During the War you couldn't get coal.  We saved newspapers, cut down trees in the woods and saved the sawdust.  Then we'd pick up coal along the railroad tracks, sometimes the fireman would throw out a shovel full.  Then we'd spread out the newspapers, spread on the sawdust and the coal, roll up the papers and leave them in the sun till they dried.  That's what we used for coal.  The first road to Englewood was a toll road. I think it was Franklin Road to Lafayette -- a dirt road.  It was 10 cents to go to Englewood.  Then there was Dutch Town Hall at Palisade Avenue.  There was water on either side of the railroad tracks.  In the summer we used to take logs and make a boat and paddle along. In the winter it froze and you could skate almost to Bergenfield and Bogota and the east side of the tracks.  Mr. Hazelton showed us our first movies.  He was in that business.  He showed them in the clubhouse.  10 cents for kids, 25 cents for adults.  You moved your own chairs.  After the movie we'd all sing.  My sister and Lily Imhoff played for the movies.  We had good shows.  Our first radio was made out of an Oatmeal box.  You wrapped it with coils then put it under a card board box, brought the top through the box and then there were the cat's whiskers.  You tickled these till you got a sound.  You had ear phones.  My brother used to put the ear phones in a mixing bowl on the table so we could all hear.  It was a lot of fun.  We kids has chores. My mother got a 2-quart ice cream freezer.  Later we got an ice box and no one dared open that.  She's get extra ice in a crock and make cream.  We put names in a hat to see who could choose the kind.  then who was to crank and who was to lick the dasher.  Later she got a 4-quart freezer and we could have 2 kinds.  We made our own ginger ale and soda and bottled it.  It had to set in the sun so many hours, then we'd put it in the cellar.  One day, the whole house shook during a thunder storm.  We went downstairs and the foam was a foot deep.  We really had togetherness in those days.  Every one was equal.
TeaneckTownship;Chris Sheffe;1894;1979;Chris Sheffe, 1894, 1979  (Interview taped 7/18/1979 by Lucille McBride & Mildred Taylor) I came to Teaneck from New York in 1910. We lived first at 392 Ogden Ave. and then at 550 Warwick Ave. I was in the fire insurance business.  Teaneck was countrified when we came here, but it was beginning to grow. On the top of the hill at Ogden Avenue we could see Rekow's farm, Zabriskies and Roemer's. Roemer Avenue is named for the Roemers.  Our neighbors were the Whipples, the Bretts, the Races, Obriens, Pecks, Ferrys and Rittzmers -- Freddie used to have four bloody noses a dat--they couldn't cure it.  There were the Carrol Hudgens, Nolans, Thurlbys, the E. A. Smiths and the Lloyd Schroeders -- they lived where Les Neulen lived later -- he bought the Schroeders' house. We go back a long way.  I was president of the school board for 13 years and on the board for 17 years. I stayed out of town politics. On the school board I remember Cuff, Al Maurer, Bill Keicher and Augue Fleck, I remember Bodine and Gloecker as mayors.  My son graduated from Teaneck High in 1938.  I presented him with his diploma. There were six board members with kids graduating.  When I came here there were two elementary schools--Oakdene and Washington Irving. Emerson was built later then the first part of Whittier School -- four rooms. They added the auditorium later, then built to the east and north.  I was a friend of Paul Volcker, the township manager.  I'm 92 years old. I was born in New York City and remember swimming across the Hudson. I had a good fishing friend in Ralph Hacker, the architect for Teaneck High School, Hawthorne School and the addition to School 2.  Teaneck High school cost about $200,000. They later made an addition and after that built the gymnasium. Building Route 4 made a difference in the high school location. I remember Jim Brett, who became mayor, used to work for the good of the town.  Miss Alice Miraglia, later Mrs. Hoek,  was a young woman when our children went to Whittier. She was a good principal.  Sheffe Jr. remembers Miss Moore, a 5 by 4 lady, used to go in the ante room and bawl her head oft.  We lived in West Englewood Park. Ogden Avenue was the entrance to West Englewood Park. We had two sons, Hal and Tom--Tom died.   Hal:  I was born on Ogden Ave. 57 years ago. My father was here when they built the Little Christ Episcopal Church.  They put on a minstrel show at a bazaar--every one in black face.  Sam Cutler, the druggist, was on the corner of West Englewood Ave. Joe Weiss had the taxi service. There was the Comfort Coal Co. and Sheffield Farms.  There were 4 tennis courts at Warwick, Essex and Maitland, where the present Christ Church is now.   We had picnics in the woods where the B'Hai temple is now. There was a bandshell at the foot of West Englewood Ave. where they had concerts--this was long before we had Votee Park.  Hal: I palled with Charlie Steele's son. I remember five of us would each put in a dime and get 50 cents worth of gas and drive my brother's car around. I walked 2.9 miles to Teaneck High and thought nothing of it.  I watched them run the cable for the George Washington Bridge. My brother was on the high seas. He was on an oil tanker and came home when he had leave.  Mr. Sheffe:  I was with the Manhattan Fire & the London Assurance companies.  The real estate company put in the streets before there were houses in our neighborhood. Dick Majors may have had something to do with the development of our section, not Mr. Ayers. He was east of the railroad tracks.  
TeaneckTownship;Clare Christensen;1908;1975;Clare Christensen, 1908, 1975  (Interview taped 7/2/1975) We came to Teaneck May 27,1925. We lived at 1235 Longfellow Ave. I went to work for the town an June 15,1925--you can't say I know the politicians. I went in as a clerk to take council meetings. William D. Wilson was the Deputy Township Clerk. I was deputy clerk the following year.  We had a brand new house--my parents, brother Peter, sisters Olga and Amelia and myself. Mother didn't like it at first because she heard the Borden cows mooing all night. She wanted to go back to the Bronx. It wasn't too long before they took the cows away. The Borden's lived in Miss Scott's house on Teaneck Road. Now an apartment house.  When I started we had the township form of government. It changed to council-manager form in 1930. When I first went in there were mostly Republicans, then the Democrats with Kelly, Gleockler and Reilly. They had many wild council meetings about the time the council-manager plan was adopted. I can't remember about them bringing in chickens under their coats. But I've heard about it. People expressed themselves in these days. Charles Wisner kept strict tabs on everything. The Taxpayers League backed the Council Manager plan. Among the members were "Pep" Jessurun, Donald Waesche and Everett Maguire.  I went to work for Mr. Volcker when he came. At first I sat in his office to introduce him to the people. When he got better acquainted, I had a separate office. Henry Diehl was township clerk. I became clerk in 1947. I acted as manager whenever Mr. Volcker was away or was sick.  I remember Karl van Wagner, a councilman, objected to my acting as manager because I couldn't slide down the pole at the fire house. I asked Mr. Volcker how many times he had slid down the pole, he said never. Mr. Van Wagoner was really very nice to me. When I hear about women' lib, I wonder. I never had any trouble.  I worked under all the mayors from Bodine on--Lacey Walker, Christian Gloeckler, Van Wagener,  Clarence Brett, Henry Deissler, Milton Votee, August Hannibal, Lacey Walker, Thomas Costa and Matthew Feldman. I retired in 1966.  When I first went to work the town offices were in the old school on Church St.& Teaneck Rd. It was turned ever to the town by the school board. I shared a desk with Dr. Reynolds, the plumbing inspector. There was one girl in the engineering department. Mr. Graffin was the collector. Mr. Wilson was there during the day. There was a large engineering department. There was a lot of improvements of streets and all. The police department was downstairs, also the jail and council chambers.  We moved to the new town hall in 1926. We had a finance department and tax office--before the assessor did his work at home. The plumbing and building inspectors were downstairs. We had a nice council room which is still being used. In the old building we had to keep the doors to the council room closed because the police department was operating there. Jake Brinkerhoff was the custodian, he used to walk around with old fashioned peppermints in his pocket.  Our neighbors were the San Georges, Metcalfs, Stricklands, Diggelmans, Burgers and the Volckers. The street was named for Longfellow of Hallberg & Longfellow realties. They had an office in what in now the parking lot next to the Presbyterian Church. That's where I met Mrs. Bodine, the wife of the mayor, when we first came. She asked if any of us know stenography. The town was looking for a girl to write up the council meetings. I took a test and got the job. Some times council meetings lasted till 1 or 2 a.m. and I had to be at work at 9.  I remember when Henry Deissler was clerk. Before they had voting machines, we stayed up till 4 or 5 a.m. on a presidential election.  We had a nice group of people at the municipal building.  Working for Mr. Volcker was a pleasure. He used to go all ever town checking things--he was an engineer.  Peter started working at the West Englewood National Bank. Now the Garden State National. He is now president of the Peoples Bank in Montvale. He went to School 2 and to Englewood High.  We used to conduct sales once a year. Ellie Norton was the auctioneer, Bill Hacker was the treasurer and I called the sale. We sold bicycles and even men's clothing. We also sold property which reverted to the town after foreclosures. This was acquired during the depression when people couldn't afford paving assessments, etc. We sold some property on side streets in many of the best sections for $15 a feet--Trafalgar and Pennington. Many who bought sold it at a profit. Buyers had to got a search to see if assessments for street improvements were pending.  I was in complete charge of municipal elections--getting out the ballots, accepting petitions, setting up voting places. I was Mr. Vo1cker's secretary and took his dictation until I had an assistant. After he left I worked with Mr. Welsh and with Warner Schmid. He came as an administrative clerk while Mr.Welsh was manager and than came in as manager.  Shopping? We bought our clothes in New York. Groceries at the City Market.  I got a car in 1926 when we went to the new town hall and worked nights. I worked for the assessment commission at night. They worked on street improvements and sidewalks. I bought a Chevy from Mr. Flannery and he taught me to drive.
TeaneckTownship;Clarles Clausen;1905;1976;(son of Henry Clausen) Clarles Clausen (son of Henry Clausen), 1905, 1976  (Interview taped 4/30/1976) I was born in Teaneck in 1905 on my grandfather's farm on Queen Anne Road and Route 4. My mother, Nellie Kuntze, was also born on the farm her father bought in 1867, part of it from Phelps and part from a neighbor. 13 acres, part in Englewood and part in Hackensack, Queen Anne Rd. was then Westfield Avenue. The railroad came about 10 years after he bought the farm. The original owners of the railroad went bankrupt and for two years the road was inactive. It was reorganized as the "First Albany and Hudson". My grandmother told how she'd flag the engineers with her handkerchief, go to New York in the morning and come back on the evening train. There were not too many commuters before the turn of the century.  We lived in a cold-water brick house. We had all the meat animals we needed--beef, pork, chickens, turkeys. My father started a rendering business before the police department was established. My grandmother had a loaded shotgun behind the door to keep people from picking the cherries and other fruit. The sheriff was in Hackensack. Sometimes my father would put me on a horse and tell me to go to Hackensack and got the sheriff. It was like the wild west--robbers and horse thieves.  My mother had a beautiful carriage horse. Among the help my father recruited from Greenwich Street in New York was a man named Peter Springer. He was from Schulenberg, Texas, a real cowboy. Mother told him about her horse and he found it in Newton, N.J. He got another one in Hoboken. He was with us 20 years, a dependable man and courageous person.  My grandfather and grandmother worked for Phelps. He was superintendent of the farm and my grandmother a dairy maid--she did all the menial tasks --took care of cows, calves, butter, cheese and took the milk in cans to the Englewood railroad station to be sold. Grandfather took his produce to New York with a horse and wagon.  I had three brothers, one still living--Sylvester. My brother Henry fell out of an airplane and lived and died later after slipping and failing on a sidewalk. He was in a terrible airplane accident in Newark in 1956. His wife was killed. His daughter lived. My brother Ed was with the post office in Teaneck. He served in the Second World War and became a sergeant.  It was my grandfather's neighbor Blanke that got the Sagamore Avenue bridge. His property extended from Garrison Avenue to Route 4.  When they laid the railroad tracks, it cut his farm in half. He explained this to the railroad and the railroad built the bridge at Sagamore Avenue.  Our farm was at the north end of Votee Park, east of the bridge where the high school is and extended over the present Route 4 to the Little House (PAL). My father, Henry Clausen, served four terms on the Township Council. In those days they spread responsibilities--he was fire commissioner, and drove the Seth Thomas fire engine  he was police commissioner when the policemen ride bikes  he was road commissioner and then a Council member.  My father came here from Ridgefield Park. Before that he farmed a part of Central Park in New York around 5th Avenue. His father had a stand under the elevated at 69th and Fifth. He had 30 acres in Ridgefield Park with hot beds where he raised vegetables all year around.  This area was nearly all farms. Hundreds of wagons went to New York at harvest time. In the summer they were all lined up on 9W. Dan Kelly's hill had tows--single and double. Sometimes you'd wait half the night for a tow. This was a beautiful part of Teaneck.  Fiss, Doerr and Carroll had a horse farm during World War I. They brought hundreds of carloads of western horses and blocked off Cedar Lane to get to the railroad. They had cowboys. Palisade Avenue just ran from Cedar Lane to where Limone's farm is at Cherry Lane. Blanke planted the cherry trees on Cherry Lane. There was a boarding house for the hands on Palisade Avenue. Mrs. Stranz ran that boarding house for Fiss, Doerr and Carroll men. You could get all the help you wanted from New York. Greenwich street had two or three blocks of stores with signs advertising Danish, German, Polish or other help. My mother would have to talk in three languages until those greenhorns learned. Italians built the railroad. Mr. Encke used to take his flowers to 28th Street in New York. They had a terrible race riot in New York. My father brought a couple of black girls in his wagon. He got the address of their church, brought them home. They wouldn't leave until they heard from the pastor. My grandfather then put them on a train for South Carolina.  I went to Englewood High School, walking or by bus. If you missed the bus, you walked. My wife was Miss Evelim Shodd, a teacher, Dr. Neulen brought here.  My dad built the fat factory in about 1900. My grandfather had his own animals. My father had 18 horses and lots of help. My mother fed 16 men. We sledded from November to Easter. My father shipped a carload out every week and a carload of hides. There were no synthetics then. We had a bunkhouse for six man all the time. We had what they called inedible tallow--a good grade. Colegate Palmolove in Jersey City used it for soap and cosmetics.  We had trouble with hoboes. Some would ask nicely. The railroad was up a hill from Bogota and the hoboes could get off. They'd steal the fruit. My dad had one of the first autos in town. He had auto trucks which  scared the horses. When the auto would get stuck the teamsters would yell "Get a Horse." I remember my uncle would take me to Englewood or Tenafly and buy me a glass of Birch beer. We used to stop at the Clinton Inn. It was the same in 1910 as it is today. It was at the end of the carline from 125th street.  I remember we had a graduation party. Took the trolley to Edgewater and took the Day Liner to Bear Mountain. As for teachers, we had one for every grade. Miss Kennedy was the music teacher. She married Hans Christian Anderson Madison and they had a restaurant where the Sha-Tee is now, then one where the New England Shop is and later one where the Steak Pit is.  I sold what was left of our farm--two acres--to the township. It is now part of Votee Park. Our biggest year was 1927. We had nine vans and went cross country in the moving business for years. Now they have Piggy Back. Most every port is fitted for containers. Japan, Spain, Norway and some outlying places can only accommodate 20-foot containers because of the narrow streets. During the war they had to tear down some buildings to get materiel through the narrow streets.  When I was a boy I walked to Hackensack. There was no house between Fiss, Doerr and Carroll and Richter's house at Cedar Lane and Palisade Ave. There was a farmhouse where the Teaneck Theater is. Garrison Avenue was a pine forest. There was a small red house where the PathMark is and across from it was a race track parallel to River Rd. There was a big house at River Road and Cedar Lane (Hart's) and the bridge tender's house. Garrison lived opposite the PathMark. They had daughters: Belle,  Ester and Beatrice. I was born in our old farm house.  Dr. Valentine Ruch was the doctor. His father had a butcher shop on Palisade Avenue.
TeaneckTownship;David and Edna Musicant;1915;1976;David & Edna Musicant, 1915, 1976  (Interview taped by Edna Spath & Mildred Taylor 8/16/1976) We came to Teaneck from Garfield in 1935.  We had just been married. We opened a flower shop at 402 Cedar Lane where Lou Fink was.  The bowling alley was downstairs.  It was quite a nice size shop. I had worked for my brother-in-law who was in the flower business in Garfield. Our first home was at 49 Robinson St., a duplex.  Teaneck had a population then of about 21-22,000. It was still country.  Edna: We used to go to Ayers Court to pick greens for our pieces. It was all woods there. We used the greens for the base of our arrangements--to fill in. We had to conserve in those days.  Dave: The Golf Course was still here. Gus Rothenbach had a restaurant east of Teaneck Road. He sold that and opened one in a house on Canterbury Court. Later he had the Rathskellar where the Fashion Barn is on Front St. and Cedar Lane. I remember the golf course because we used to get ambulance cases from there.   The Ambulance Corps was organized in 1939. I was a member 31 year before going off six years ago. The first members included Corneliu Van Dyk, Fred Dolch, Vincent Ridley, Walter Cawley, Frank Delany, Leo Botyos, Art Fortuna. Dr. Bookstavor, myself and one or the Wachas. At first our headquarters were behind the police station. Then we moved across from Holy Name Hospital. We let that property go back to the Township when we opened the headquarters on Windsor Rd. We had one ambulance at first. My son Arthur has been with the corps 15 years.  Edna: Both of our boys are in business with us--Arthur and Alan. Dave decided to go into the funeral business 29 years ago. I stayed with the flower shop. I have been retired six months and I'm still busy. We had a war. Dave had a defense job. He worked from 4 to 12 p.m. He would open the flower shop in the morning While I took the children to school.  I went to the store when he went to work around 3 and I'd take deliveries with the kids in the truck.  Dave: I was with Groove Pin Co. in Union City. Mr. Theurer of Teaneck owned it.  Edna: Gas was scarce. We had to deliver our flowers. We got so much allowance because we were in business. but the flower business was not considered essential.  We lived two years on Robinson Street, then moved to Selvage Avenue. We were there 25 years. The kids went to Washington Irving and Teaneck High School. The high school was beautiful in those days. Have you seen it lately?  Twelve years ago we moved upstairs in the building that was the funeral home here in Hackensack. We were on hand for calls. We lived there seven years, then we decided to build. The house was knocked down to make way for this building. We now live at 514 Tilden Ave., Teaneck.  Dave: I was president or the Chamber or Commerce in the 50s. There is a plaque in Carl Mellone's store. We used to give picnics for kids. We had big turnouts. There are a lot of younger people in business now. They are not interested in a Chamber of Commerce. The business districts are divided and it is hard to get together. What is good for one section is not good for another.  Dave: I was the first house chairman of the Jewish Community Center when it was on Queen Anne Road. I am now a life member of the board. I remember when we were building the center and a storm blew out all the windows. Capt. Harry Davis of the fire department put tarpaulins at the windows so we could conduct services. That was when we built the first step of the Center on Sterling Place--about 27 years ago. Arthur was Bar Mitzvah then and he is now 40.  Our first patient with the Volunteer Ambulance Corps was Joe Devine. He had a drug store on Cedar Lane--later Pfeiffer's who used to work for Devine--599 Cedar Lane. Joe was a World War I Vet. We took him to the VA hospital in New York--Kingsbridge.  I am a past president of the Teaneck City Club--1949, past president of the Teaneck Kiwanis Club--1957. It used to be Ridgefield Park--Teaneck Kiwanis Club.  I have been a member of Teaneck Masonic Lodge 274 for 30 years and am a 32nd degree Mason.  Before we had the temple on Queen Anne Road, Dr. Bookstaver and I carted drugs and things from the temple to the Masonic club on Monterrey Terrace. for the high holy day services. We sold the building on Queen Anne Road to the State Police and they sold it to the Christian Scientists. There are now six temples in Teaneck. Two Conservative, two Reform and two orthodox.  I was Man of the Year of the Jewish War Veterans, Schweiger-Dobrow Post in 1965 and Man of the Year of the Y. M.-Y.W.H.A. in 1970. I am a board member emeritus.  I am past chancellor commander of the Knights of Pythias, on the board of Jewish Funeral Directors of America and an advisory board member of the Bergen State Bank.  I am president of Gutterman-Musicant-Kreitzman Funeral Directors, vice president of Temple Beth El in Hackensack and chairman of administration. It used to be on State Street and has now moved to Summit Avenue.  Edna: I am president of Cancer Care, Bergen County Chapter.  I've been president 4 years. It is a different type organization. The money we raise is all used for the patients. In homes where a patient terminally ill is sent home from the hospital and one in the family has to go to work, we send a home maker to be there when the bread winner is at worl. We counsel the family and help them not to be too hurt. Our money is used only for that kind of work--direct help. We raised $21,000 last year--bingo games twice a month--flea markets, art shows. Fund raising changes. This year we'll have a Chinese auction. I run a boutique in my home -- pants, suits, blouses, etc. All profit goes to Cancer Care.  Dave: We weren't the only florists in Teaneck when we came. There was Osmer Einhoff down on Pomander Walk--he was more a landscaper. Steinhoff was on Cedar Lane below Queen Anne Rd. I understand Theresa Steinhoff is working for Hotel in Fort Lee.  Edna: I love living in Teaneck. We were there 41 years. The only thing I miss now that I'm retired is not knowing what's going on. In the flower business we knew what was going on--cradle to the grave--weddings, and all. We did weddings for the children of some people whose weddings we did.  Davs: I was with Dr. Bookstaver when he died in that fire at St. Anastasia School.  Teaneck was a smaller town when we came. We were all trying to make a go. There was a lot of civic pride. When we would say we were from Teaneck everyone would say God!  We used to go from house to house asking a dollar donation for the Ambulance Corps. Some people would close the door in our face I was glad when later they'd call us and we would respond although they woutdn't contribute a dollar.  Edna: He'd go out on a call and leave the flower shop empty. I'd come in and find people waiting.  Dave: Harry Zimmer left his stationery store--office supplies-- many a time to go out on call. We were the day men on the corps. Van Dyke, the dog catcher was always around and there was Vince Ridley who worked for the town. It's different now they have women in the corps. We fought against the sleep in. but things change.  Edna: My mother lived with us. Once we were going to buy a property on Windsor Road. It was all woods. My mother said she would not live there--she'd be scared. That was where the junior high is now.  Dave: We are the third oldest members of the Jewish Community Center. Mr. Zelnick whose son is a dentist is the oldest. He used to handle the delivery boys of the Bergen Record in Teaneck.  Our son Arthur lives in Teaneck--on Hanover Street. But he is moving to Edison in two weeks. We are opening a funeral home in Union. He has two children. Alan lives in Park Ridge. He has three children. 
TeaneckTownship;Dorothy Mantena;xxxx;1976;Dorothy Mantena, xxxx, 1976 (Interview taped 7/23/1976) I lived in Teaneck until 1953. Our family came in 1909. I went to Washington Irving School. Among my teachers were Miss Tepper and Mrs. Keener. We went to St. Anastasia Church. We did our shopping in Englewood--clothing and that we got in New York. I remember we'd get a nickel on Sunday and buy a big dill pickle and go to the woods over where Clausen's is.  My father was a plumber and he carried his tools in bags from Teaneck to New York. He'd walk from our house on Congress Street to Englewood to go to New York. He was one of the first volunteer firemen. My sister Hattie headed the bucket brigade where they were putting out fires. My sister Ada and I belonged to the American Legion. We were flag bearers.  For transportation -- Dick Verlini had a bus that went from Hackensack to Englewood. Later we rode the big blue bus to Hackensack for a nicke.  There was a murder at Forest and Overlook avenues. When the husband came home from work he found his wife dead.  Ben Lewis had a farm at the end of Cedar Lane. He had a milk route and we'd go there for vegetables. There were lots of wild flowers, like Jack in the pulpits. Flowers you don't see any more.  I remember when we got electricity and when we got the telephones. We'd all hurry home and call each other up. They had four-party lines. My father had hot water in our house. We burned wood and coal in the kitchen stove. We'd roast chestnuts and my father would keep busy peeling them.  We'd go down to Mrs. Sitzman's store and get our candy, come home and play dominoes or cards. At Mrs. Sitzman's you really got a quart of ice cream. She piled it high and packed it down. Mrs. Loray had a store at Tuxedo Square. I remember when the Kilmurray house on Prospect Terrace caught fire. Every body tried to help but they couldn't save the houses. George Ahrens lived on Robinson Street -- he still does. Miss Alice Boucher lived in our neighborhood she was a teacher at the high school for many years.  When we'd go down to Mrs. Sitzman's in the evening we had nothing to fear. I was the youngest of a big family.  My brother Connie was killed in an auto accident in 1932.  Lawrence had an ice route.  On Saturday every one would call up to make sure they'd get ice for Sunday.  Fred opened a gas station on Teaneck Road. My brother Connie worked there. My sister Ada lived in Brookchester in New Milford. I have a daughter, Dorothy Carroll. I'm proud of my grandchildren. One boy is studying to be a chef, another is studying biology in college and the third boy is at Rutgers.
TeaneckTownship;Edna DeGraw Schuh;xxxx;1970;Edna DeGraw Schuh, xxxx, 1970 (Interview taped 10/6/1970) I was born in Teaneck at corner of DeGraw Ave. and Teaneck Rd. My father John DeGraw, son of William and my mother a Demarest. Grandfather DeGraw's farm is several hundred acres extended south of Ft. Lee Rd-- west to Bogota line and east almost to Leonia. My grandfather gave land for the turnabout of the trolley in the meadows. He had DeGraw Ave. paved and planted a long line of maple trees.  The Brinkerhoff-Demareat house is the oldest in Teaneck, built in 1728-29 and has been occupied continuously by members of the families ever since. It was given as a wedding present by Brinkerhoff when his son married Miss Demarest. Now has 11 rooms, wide hall, front and back parlors, dining rooms, kitchen on first floor, Dutch doors north and south sides. There were three in kitchen until 1899 when grandfather thought he'ld like more modern doors. Back parlor has a Franklin stove, better heat than a fire place. Walls were over 18 inches thick, hand made nails, original oak floors. Bulls eye glass in doors leading to parlor and dining room.  Gables added to north and south side of house in 1912. In 1940 town cut off half of their kitchen when Teaneck Road was widened. In so doing removed the huge fireplace and the Dutch oven. Nothing could be done about it. They could have widened the  road on the west side where there was no building. Change brought the kitchen window within 5 feet of the sidewalk.  My aunt Miss Saretta Demarest was very active in the SPCA and vice president of Constitutional society. I was past regent of Red Mill Charter, D.A.R. American Legion was my pet project. I became a member after World War I.  I started and finished in the little old school on Fort Lee Road. Miss Emily Howland the teacher, later became principal of Longfellow school. Never had any other teacher except a substitute when Miss Howland got scarlet fever and lost her hair. When she came back she wore a wig. I graduated from the school in 1906--never went to the new school. Lily Thiede was in my class, 2 other girls and 4 boys. About 40 children in whole school.  Went to Hackensack High by trolley. Up to 1900 trolley only went to River St., Hackensack. Later went on to Paterson.  After high school I went into nurses training at Hackensack Hospital, became an army nurse stationed at Lakewood where they had 19000 patients. During flu epidemic called for volunteers to open a hospital at Camp Humphries at Fort Belvoir, Va. I was discharged in May.1919 and then did private duty in Hackensack and Englewood hospitals.  When I was a child there were no stores in Teaneck. We shopped in Leonia. My grandfather had 8 or 10 teams of horses. My sister Rae and I had a shetland pony and cart. Used to go across the meadows to get the mail. The post office was in the general store.  My husband and I have a son, Dr. Frederic DeGraw Schuh, a plastic surgeon in Charleston, S.C. He has three children--2 sons and a little girl who is to be christened next week.
TeaneckTownship;Elsie Von Scholda Butler, Helen Monahan, Helen Haywood, George & William Beaumont;1910;1975;Elsie Von Scholda Butler, Helen Monahan, Helen Haywood, George & William Beaumont, 1910, 1975  (Interview taped July 1975 by Lois Stiansen & Gwen Dodd) Elsie Butler:  The name Teaneck meant Place Where there are Woods. It was first spelled Tien Neck. I remember Cedar Lane when it was nothing but a dirt road. Later they put in cobble stone. Windsor Road was a swamp with quicksand. There used to be horses here and one time something frightened them and made them run across the railroad tracks and they got in the swamp. The West Englewood Bank was built on piles to keep it from sinking, The first bank was across from the station, The Ackerman property ran to Loziers and took in where the phone company is now.  The library was started with a few books by Mrs. Archibald Jordan, later moved to Cutler's drug store and then they bought property on Teaneck Road for $2,000 and sold it at a profit. The library was dedicated March 8, l927,  The fire house was where Kobbe & Flannery in now, You called the fire department by hitting a railroad tire rim with a hammer. The first paid fireman was in 1920. They added a man a year to 1924 when they added four. They had 24 paid. They had one chief, a captain and patrolmen. The police station was across from the old fire house. The Community Bank started on State Street. The Teaneck National started in 1926. It burned down and opened as the People's Bank. There was no crossing over the railroad tracks. North of Englewood Avenue was all farm. There was a small shopping area in West Englewood--an A & P, a meat market and Cutler Drug Store. That was the sum total for shopping. My father had a place where Goodman's Hard store in now. My father knew John Stiansen's father. We came here from Went New York. My husband grow up in this town.  Teachers I remember were Alice Miraglia Hook, Miss Smith and Miss Robertson who lived on Sussex Road. Miss Hill was principal of the high school. The mayor was Volcker. I attended Christ Church When I worked in Englewood as a nurse till I met my husband.  We shopped for food in Teaneck and in Hackensack and New York for clothes. Some one opened a little hat shop on Cedar Lane. We had 4th of July and Memorial day parades.  Scandal? There was plenty, but I wouldn't want to say anything. The railroad was our  transportation. We had bus service. When you got off at Forest Avenue, the police would meat you and take you home. I remember Chris Gloeckler, the mayor, Volcker, Votee and Deissler.  The Blue Bird Inn was where Volk's is, then there was a golf course and then Volks came here from Hoboken. I remember Lloyd Schroeder and August Hannibal and the Garrison House.  They made a park where some people whose name began with A lived (Andreas). Where Edna Spath lives on Star Court lived two old ladies in a big house. I guess the property went to the town. Name of Leakes -- Leakes Road. The old ladies lived where the FDU parking lot is.  Bob Morrill and the Ayers boys opened an office where Hirschfield's Pharmacy is. Later Schwanewede moved in.  Back in 1926 if you missed the last train in Now York at 1:30 you had to take a trolley to the junction where the Amusement Park was in Cliffside Park,  got a trolley to Hackensack, wait at the taxi stand until they opened at 5 a.m. Your escort would see you to your door and then he would repeat the trip in reverse and make it back to Jackson Heights. You'd think that would be the and, but they came back for more.  Helen Monahan:  We came here from Bayonne in 1937 the streets in my area--Hartwell and Salem were being made. During World War II they put in an anti-aircraft base on Lindbergh Blvd. The highest point around here. I guess because it was near the hospital. We came to Teaneck because it was convenient to New York. My husband worked at 41st St and 11th Ave. I heard there was a man from Montana at the AA Base and invited him over to bring a friend because my husband had been in Montana. He brought the friend who was from Texas. We entertained him Sunday & and holidays for two years. When the war was over the AA place was dismantled.  Helen Haywood:  When we moved here they used to joke about West Englewood as Mortgage Hill or English Town because all the streets have English names. Sussex Road only went as far as Churchill Road. Then to New Bridge was all farms. We moved here 36 year ago.  There were buses to Hackensack once an hour. The #70 bus went to Bergenfield. When we first moved here it was all trees and children had tree houses,  People dumped their leaves and junk in the woods,  William Beaumont:  I came to Teaneck in 1900. We lived at the corner of  Summit & Robinson. My father later built a house at 125 Bogert Street and I lived there until 1933 when I built this house in Hillside Avenue so I'd have larger quarters.  We had 3 children.  The main road were Teaneck Road and Cedar Lane. They were macadam. Cedar Lane was a grade crossing, In the 20s the railroad sunk the tracks.  I went to old school #2. The wooden school before they built the brick one in 1906. They moved the old school to the Church Street corner and used it as an annex and later the town hall. My teacher was Miss Lucy Marsh. Laroy Jay was the principle. I remember the DeBaun sisters.  I don't know who was mayor. Murphy was the police chief and Ridley the fire chief. The library was on the corner of Bedford Avenue. I graduated in 1913 and went through Dumont High School--you had to go to Hackensack, Leonia or Dumont and I went to Dumont on the train. I went to the Presbyterian Church. George Coe was superintendent of the Sunday school.  I went to work for my father in Long Island City after serving in the Army. In 1930 I went to work for the West Shore Fuel Co. Food shopping was in West Englewood. The West Englewood Market is still there--it's changed hands several times. Clothes were bought in Hackensack or Englewood.  On Memorial Day and 4th of July there ware track meets. We competed with the old Volunteer Fire Department and the Teaneck Club. The club building still stands at Teaneck Road and Bogert Street-a four-family apaament, only it is smaller now. They had a bowling alley and teams. I played on some teams. There was one way to get to New York--the West Shore and the 42nd Street Ferry.  Politicians were just as windy then as they are now. There was no mail delivery in Teaneck in the early days. It came from Englewood. Copley was the letter carrier. He used to come on a bike from Englewood. Later Bill Jahnes carried mail.  In World War I Teaneck sent 60 odd to the Service. In World War II there were several thousands. There is a tablet on the library listing the names. In 1919 when we came back we organized the American Legion. We looked for a meeting place and finally bought the old Garrison House.The town later bought the house for a parking lot and we built at 650 Front St.  George Beaumont:  I have lived in Teaneck 65 years so far. I was born at 125 Bogert St. I was born in 1910. I walked to school #2. I remember Miss Alice Miraglia and Miss Kennedy who married Hans Christian Madison.  We made our own entertainment. At the Teaneck Club, Washington Hazelton would show movies on Sunday afternoons. Where FDU parking lot is now there were two ponds. We used to walk there in winter, shovel off the snow and skate. We played ball in Borden's field around Beaumont Avenue and Church Street. There were all cows around there. We used a bed spring for a back stop. There were no lavatories. You went home or to the woods.  Where Votee Park is now was a pond. The Flannerys, Sylvester Clausen and I had a raft we paddled there. We used to hide our trunks and got swimming near New Bridge. They used to deliver mail in a horse drawn sleigh.  I worked in Brooklyn as a sheet metal worker. In 1927 I joined the fire department and retired in 1962. 1 served in the Navy 37 months. After the Fire Department I got a job as a guard in the Garden State National bank. I retired from there now.  When they cut through streets in our section they named one Alicia and the other Beaumont for my father. Longfellow came later.  Bill Beaumont:  We learned to swim in the Hackensack River. There was a sand bank by an old cemetery. We'd get undressed and dressed behind the tomb stones. The cemetery is still there on River Road. There is a monument.  George Beaumont:  My dad was president of the school board for 9 or 10 years. He was on the board 13 years. I remember we cut down trees and cleared the whole field for the High School Athletic field. The high school was started in 1927-28.  We picked strawberries East of Teaneck Road. Jimmy Stevenson lived further up. DeRonde lived where the ramp goes to Rte 4. There's a medical building there now, but behind it is the old barn.  Bill Beaumont:  The Phelps family lived where Holy Name Hospital is now. The mansion where the Municipal Building is was destroyed by fire. How long the ruins stood there I don't know. Big trees had grown in the ruins when I was a boy. Part of their second residence became part of Holy Name Hospital.
TeaneckTownship;Fannie Borden Schultz;1885;1975;Fannie Borden Schultz, 1885, 1975  (Interview taped 7/11/1975) I must have lived in Teaneck 75 years. I came here when I was about 15 and now I'm 90. When I first came we lived on Teaneck Road where an apartment is now. It belonged to Sheriff Orser of New York City. We rented the house for a number of years then my father built a house across the street. The same man, Mr. Curry, built my father's house that built this house.  This was the Teaneck Club. They had dances on Saturday night, wedding parties and  masquerades. When World War I broke out, it was disbanded. Mr., Fibbish who lived where the Burger Master is now bought the clubhouse and made it into four apartments.  We used to got our mail from Englewood. Yes indeed, I remember Mr. Hanks at the railroad station. I used to go to New York once a week on the West Shore. I walked to the station across lots. There were no houses to West Englewood Avenue. The first ones to built there were the Jordans on West Englewood near Queen Anne Read.  My father had 40 cows. The maple tree on the next lot was beside the barn. He had two horses. It was a big place ran down to Genesee Avenue. He delivered milk mostly to the people on the hill in Englewood--the Morrows, Brinkerhoffs and all.  I went to school in Englewood and then to business school in New York--the Lusk School for court reporting. But I was never a court reporter, I worked for Remington the typewriter people and for an insurance company. Jean Randolph, Matte Scotts sister got me in.  Matte Scott bought the Orser Place for the Caddy family when we moved out. The library started in a little old hut where the Gulf Station is now. An old slave lived there at one time. Mrs. Sitzman had a store on Forest Avenue and lived over the store. Maybe she owned the land where the library was.  There were all dirt roads and people drove horses and carriages. We could walk to Englewood and take the trolley to 125th St. We took the train to work.  The Stevenson Family lived on the other side of Route 4. They had three daughters  Agnes who married Campbell and Margaret who married Hawkey and Elizabeth who married Sample. They had one son, Robert. I believe he had 17 children, some of them still here.  We pastured our cows along Longfellow Avenue. We'd take them there for pasture and drive them across the road. We lost the property when my father died.  Mr. Hagerman was the station agent before Hanks at West  Englewood. His father worked at Ellis Island. The oldest son operated the station. They had two girls. I remember going to Niagara Falls with them on a railroad pass. Hagermans lived in a Phelps gatehouse at about Franklin and Teaneck Roads. The gate houses were arched so you could drive through. You could drive from the Hackensack to the Hudson River on Phelps property.  Here is a picture Oscar Peinecke gave me on grade 7-8 at School 2 in 1910. Miss Lucy Marsh was the teacher. In it are my brother Linvest Bordon, Charlie Curry whose father built our house and Clifford Painecke as well an some of the Bohneses and Garrison. The town hall was near the Church Street side of School 2 playground.  We would have house parties. There's be a piano. When nothing else was going on we'd play and sing popular songs. Church services were at night. Supply pastors came out from New York to the Presbyterian Church. After church we'd go to some one's house and have ice cream and cake.  Many families have come and gone. Nice people. Mrs. Phelps lived where Holy Name Hospital is. We had a fair here at the Teaneck Club. Captain DeRonde and people who had money donated toward the building. Mrs. Phelps said she's give some money for flowers. The Phelpses and DeRondes were dear friends. DeRonde was married to Miss Bennett, daughter the Phelps overseer. I went to see Mrs. Phelps, a maid answered the door and Mrs. Phelps handed me $10, enough to buy flowers to decorate for the whole day of the fair. We sold a few pieces at a time.  I remember Captain Phelps. They had a colored boy who carried a saddle bag on his pony. Every day between 5 and 6 he'd go to Englewood to pick up the mail. One day our dog named Rover ran out. He used to bark at the horse. The boy shot him. My father had the vat and he lived. Dogs were allowed to run then.  There were six children in our family. I'm the oldest. Next was a brother who died of summer complaint. Then a sister died at 3 of spinal meningitis then a sister who died at 8 of diphtheria. My brother died of pneumonia and flu at 24 and my sister Florence Middlemas died 8 years age.  The Orser House had two balconies. There was a huge hall, you could drive a carriage in it. There was a big living room with wide sills and wide doors. There were beautiful pine trees. We built an addition for the help. We had three men employed. They had three bedrooms, separate stairs. My mother cooked two sets of meals.  The men ate in the kitchen and we ate in the dining room which faced Teaneck Road. Orser built the house as a summer place. Later he rented it. I never saw him. We heated with stoves. Matte Scott put in a furnace. We never had any trouble with the stoves. now I'd be afraid of fire. Now that we have all the conveniences we seem to have more fires. The fire department was all volunteer. They had a place on Fairview Avenue.  In World War I I worked in card records at Camp Merritt. In World War II I worked at Camp Shanks. My husband worked there too. The soldiers worked upstairs at Camp Merritt and we worked downstairs. We were married in the Episcopal Church in Englewood. He went all through the war. He died three years ago--1972.  My husband Frank used to go to Benny Manne to got his hair out. I was one of the last to have my hair cut. I hated to have it cut. They used to say that the Borden girls were the best dressed girls in the clubhouse. We had an aunt who was a dressmaker in New York. She was a maiden lady and took great pleasure in dressing us. She used to pay for a lot of our clothes.  We bought groceries at Mattlege and Christopher in Englewood. We had a charge account. A man came out and took our order and put it in the buggy.  My father got a car before he died in his 60s. He got it at Flannery's. He failed the first time he took the license test. Then he took it in Englewood and passed. It was a runabout--a small Ford. He put a box on the back to carry the milk. He died over there in our home. We lost him, my aunt and brother close together.  We had constables then. I remember Weiss's father. We had trouble getting good milkers and my father would got them from New York. When they'll got their monthly salary they'd got drunk and sometimes we'd have to call the constable. We had a Polish couple. We used to starch our clothes--the flounces and ruffles would stand out. This woman liked the way the starched clothes looked. so she starched her husband's long underwear! We had some funny experiences with these people who were just off the beat.  Borden's field on Longfellow Avenue was where they played bal. ,I think the Fourth of July celebrations were in West Englewood.  On the sixth anniversary of the founding of the Teaneck Club they sold chances on a round piece of  leather on which everyone had written their names, 10 cents a chance. It had the club seal and the date of the founding--June 24, 1906. The celebration wax Nov. 27, 1912-- six years after the clubhouse was opened.  Here are the signatures:  Elmer Hazelton, Josephine Dowling, George Reynolds, Ethol Habes, Charles Curry, Washington E. Hazelton, J. Lauzen, Lutthans, John Suppes, Hugh Nelson, James Philips Jr., George Korn Jr., Charles A. Wells, F. H. Magee, William Beaumont, Richard Ackerman, Henry Clausen, Roy Wilhelm, Luther Armstrong, Doris Cunningham (married Ackerman), J. A. Caddy, Mrs. Lutthans, J. Philips Agnes Nelson, H. Florence Borden, A. J. Singer, Gorden MIddlemas, H. Armstrong, Kitty Dowling, Margaret Middlemas, Marcelle Forster, Fannie Borden, Mrs. Hazelton, Rona Lauzen (married Dick Ackerman, divorced), Ed. H. Griffith, Mrs. E. J. Wells, Madge Henrich, Lizzie Huhn, C. Leslie Henrich, Ruth F. Middlemas, Charles Lauber, Walter Dunwoodie, Edna L. Force, H. A. Forster, Lita E. Franke, Carrie E. Franke, Clarence Fuerstenberg (piano), Carl Franke, Rose A. Tamangni, Charles R. Curry, William H. LaFetter, Charles M. Schlenker and Loomis. 
TeaneckTownship;Frank & Ed Lofberg;xxxx;1976;Frank & Ed Lofberg, xxxx, 1976 (Interview taped 3/1976) Our family came here in 1905.  We lived on Center Street, near the Bogota line.  Going back a few years I recall that on River Road and Cedar Lane there had been a race track--just before we came. It was not going when we came. Then there was a horse farm around Palisade Avenue on Cedar Lane--Fiss, Doerr & Carroll were there before World War I and during the war they shipped horses to Weehawken on the West Shore Railroad and from there they went to Europe.  The New York Centra1 was how people from Bogota got to New York. The Great Northern ran in Englewood. One of the old Phelps arches is over there--on Brookside Avenue.  I remember there was a big effort made at one time for people in our section of Teaneck to secede from the township and join Bogota. That was around 1912-13-14. I have a nice oil painting that Pop painted. It was calling a meeting in Martinson's barn to get people to secede. The Martinson barn was on the old Terhune property where there is a park now.  It joined the Cadmus property.  There was a high ridge so you could not see the river there. There was a cow pond. We skated there.  How did it turn out about seceding from Teaneck? It never got close.   Mr. Elliott had a garage by Kenwood Place. He used to be the town clerk. He gave me his old papers before he moved to Florida.  Pictures of the old Fire Company on Kenwood Place. They used a home cart--you pushed the cart with its long coil of hose. There was a gong you hit with a sledge hammer on Larch Avenue and Center Place. There was one on Catalpa and of course one at the fire house. I remember Nels Johnson hit the gone so hard one time he broke it.  I remember the old race-track when I went to grammar school and high school. It was all wilderness in 1928-29. North Street was not cut through. A number of us kids from Emerson School gathered old Model Ts. Mr. Elliott was very helpful when we'd take them to him-- there was Conrad Jordan, the Wilbur boys and the Elliott boys and us. We had some real races. But no one chipped in on the gas. I took in a partner -- Heenie. His father drove the Valvolene gas truck and some of his gas disappeared. It was a good partnership. We learned a lot about engines. If we had a problem we'd see Mr. Elliott or Davey Wallace. The old race track used to be for surrey racing, possibly a mile. It was a complete circle.  Fred Warner started building around Cedar Lane and River Road colonial type homes and buildings around 1923. Some people who came then still live there.  Pomander Walk was opposite the race track. That was considered the elite section where wealthy people lived. There was the Haywood home where Luther college is today. We didn't associate with those people much.  We children were not involved in politics. There was never any controversy like today. Mr. Lewis who used to live at Elm Avenue and Kipp Street was on the Council. At first we had no police at all. I remember Chief Murphy he had a bike. Jess Witham and Bublitz came later. First they had bikes then they got motorcycles. In those days we knew all our cops. The Taxpayers' League got started around 1927 Mortan, Votee and others. Prior to that there wasn't much heard about politics. Andreas lived on River Road near West Englewood Avenue.  That's where Pop worked, decorating the big house. It was cold. The people were away. He got bronchitis and died not long after. He was an interior decorator and worked in New York and in Englewood with Holmgren in 1925. I was 21 when he died. By that time I was building houses with my brother-in-law Ralph Olson. Clarence was superintendent of a tool company in 1925. Then he opened his own office in Teaneck -- Walker, Lofberg and Pavlis. He built at 347 Cedar Lane. Later he took the store next to the bank. Then my brother-in-law built that office across the street for him. At the time of his death he was planning a larger addition. His two boys finished it.  There was lots of open territory in 1931.The first year I went hunting around Whittier School there were rabbits and pheasants. I used to hunt with Max Hasse around Winthrop Road where I now live near River Road. South of that was the old Roosevelt Military Academy--South of West Englewood Avenue on the west side. It was torn down and houses built.  The old Davis house was south of that. There was an old school above Brett Park. During World War II, I guess it was during prohibitions there was a still in the old building.  It burned about 1944, I don't remember it as a school. Old residents of the area used to talk about it.  Outstanding events?  Later on in the 30s there was the fourth of July parades. They must have had parades in the 20s. I remember ending up and having ice cream at the Blue Bird Inn. Oakdene school burned in 1923. They split classes and half went to Emerson. We had to go to Oakdene for six months while they completed Emerson School. We took the trolley.  I think it was nicer in those days. There were daily ball games near my home. We had good times. None of the problems we have today. In the spring I remember the frogs singing. My mother and sister would take us walking down River Road. On Sundays Pop would hire a carriage and take us riding. We'd go to Englewood to see the buildings he worked on. He'd rent the carriage from Kacheski's(?) farm on Willow street. There are apartments there now. Then there was the Lewis farm, east of Cedar Lane.  The Disposal Plant was at the and of Cedar Lane. In 1930-31 we used to go shooting there. Bob Felt's father owned the trap. We'd shoot clay pigeons. Once I dropped into what I thought was hard ground and wound up up to my neck in sewage. George wouldn't let me get in the car on the way home. I had to ride on the running board. I had stepped down onto what I thought was hard ground and kept going down. I was pulled up by grabbing the handle of a shot gun some one held.  I didn't join much. The only thing was the Auxiliary Police and was active till the emergency eased up. I still have my badge, cap, night stick and whistle. My wife and I were active in the Teaneck Garden Club until 1963-64. We arranged to take over the old disposal plant and have a green house. We put in motorized windows and humidifiers. We were quite an active group between the club and the town we grew some nice decorations.
TeaneckTownship;Frank A. Weber;1905;1976;Frank A. Weber, 1905, 1976  (Interview taped 10/29/1976) I came to Teaneck on June 30, l923 when the West Englewood Bank opened.  I came from New York.  We were in the old building on Station Street.  We had had it remodeled. The Green Kitchen was next door. I came as assistant cashier.  In 1924 they asked for the resignation of the cashier and I became chief executive officer--others had honorary positions.  We stayed there on Station Street until 1928 when we moved into the beautiful new building at the Plaza. It's an interesting story.  It was started by Nelson M. Ayers, a developer.  When the Hudson Bridge was built it started a land boom. Every one was going to be a millionaire.  The same thing happened on Long Island when they built the Queensborough Bridge.  There was the problem of a bridge at West Englewood Avenue. With the ramps and all it would have ruined the shopping center there.  Ayers bought the property and developed it.  He asked us to buy a plot. We had bought property in West Englewood.  He made a deal with the New York Central Railroad.  They had that location and one near Central Park.  They said if Ayers would put in the ramps, they would build the bridge. It was a big project.  He put in the ramps, saved streets and put up apartments.  He signed a contract with Public Service of New Jersey for $10,000 a year so the area would be lighted at night--all the wires were under ground.  We moved in in 1928. The apartments were at Lozier Place.  The depression came and Ayers lost everything. We made mortgages and many small loans.  It was a real community.  We had moved to Bergenfield in 1912.  Our house was built by Mayor O'Niel on Washington Avenue. Mr. Fisher bought the house. He was with Brady Studios in Fort Lee.  He used to visit my father. One day I got a call saying they were going to do a Russian picture in Teaneck.  We walked to the Phelps Ruins. There was a cellar entrance where they placed a wonderful door. They took a scene of the Russian as he walked down the stairway. Those were beautiful ruins.  I used to solicit accounts after the bank closed.  I met Captain Phelps working on his property on River Road. I gave him my card and asked him for an account. He said "I had no money." But that fall I got a stack of checks.  He lived in Stoney Creek, Conn. and Orlando, Fla.  In all the years he had the account he drew only three checks.  He became old and couldn't see. I'd send him clippings which his daughter Rose read to him.  When anything in town needed funds I'd go to Captain Phelps. He said "I'll give a donation but don't mention it came from Captain Phelps.  It was anonymous. When they had Paul Volcker's big dinner I asked Captain Phelps and he sent $100.  Paul Volcker and I were very good friends.  Phelps was fond of him. Paul wrote him a letter.  Phelps gave to the Red Cross.  The Teaneck Symphony, I was treasurer of that.  Thornton Bishop was active in that. We held concerts at the high school.  Some performers they paid and some played for free.  At the start of it Phelps sent a real fine check.  I'll tell you a story about Votee Park. One day a man came into the bank with a set of plans. He asked for a mortgage on his house.  I asked where his property was and he said along the railroad tracks. He bought it when the developers were going strong, I said there are no sewers and no water there. He said I think I can make a deal to pipe water from West Englewood Avenue and I can put in a cess pool.  I went to Votee who was mayor then He said this could be serious.  A few weeks later they started the Growth & Development Committee.  I was chairman. They came up with the idea that that was a good place for a park.  They exchanged some plots.  Much of the land was in foreclosure.  It took some years, but that's how Central Park came into being.  For years some held out--there was no access.  Now I think the town owns it all.  The town wanted a fire house at Route 4 and Sussex Road. The neighbors didn't want it although there was no fire house in that area.  Thornton Bishop, a great renderer, made a rendering of a bridge near the tracks at Forest Avenue. It did not come into being. West Englewood had no fire protection.  My dad moved to Bergenfield in 1900. He bought a home in Bergenfield that had a double outhouse--a status symbol.  Mr. Hanks lived in the railroad station in Teaneck. He was the postmaster. I used to have dinner often with the Hanks.  He had a bus that went to Lake Tiorati, as a young fellow I went there.  Abe Etten was charming. His daughter had polio and a doctor from Austria treated her--her name was Pearl.  I remember the polio epidemic of 1916. I lived in Bergenfield and volunteered to be at the railroad station to see if any one with children got off. They had to go back to New York. Many came out by car. The police department then was probably one man.  I put my mind to the bank.  I recall the episode you speak of.  One day I got a call from Ted Morgan of the police department asking if he could use the bank--the county and local police were involved. It seems this bookmaker who lived in Teaneck had accumulated a lot of money.  The case was going on in Hackensack court. A witness told of a bookie who had a safe under the bar in his cellar.  They raided the place and found the money in a Campbell Soup box. It was almost full. They counted it all in the bank. Ann Schaff was one of the employees that counted. The bookie said "My mother was a great saver." I said how did your mother do it? Some of these bills were printed after your mother was gone."  How did we get through the depression? Our bank did.  On Dec. 27, 1932 my son was born.  I said it was time to look for a house. We had a three-room apartment. I found a house on Sussex Road and bought it the day before the banks closed. Our bank was in fine shape.  I bought the house knowing the bank would not close.  The bank examiner came to see me and asked why we had not closed with all the other banks.  I cashed checks and took deposits.  It was illegal. F.D.R. had closed the banks.  The bank examiner said please close the doors. I never did close them. All banks lost depositers. Our deposits shrunk. Some banks were closed. The Bergen County Bankers Association tried to save some of them.  Until the day I left our bank had only 7 foreclosures.  Some due to family trouble,  some couldn't make the payments. We waived interest. Many had made enough payments and we carried them. There was a man on Garden Street.  I waived the quarterly interest and told him to stay in his house and he could pay when he got a new job. We did that in 10 or 15 cases.  Our bank is now the National Community Bank with two branches in Teaneck.  The National Community has 14,000 banks on the U.8.  Lu McBride: That is why people never forgot Frank Weber.  Note: William Schilling was president of West Englewood Bank in 20s.  He 1ived in large house now occupied by the Carriage Club at Route 4 and Teaneck Rd. Later Bernhardt's Restaurant--after Schilling left.  Note: Mr. Weber has a painting of old West Englewood Railroad Station when it was occupied by Clifford Hanks, postmaster and station agent. The picture by Hazel Kitts Wires shows washing fluttering from the line above the station.  Note:  Dr. Andrew Nelden was an officer of the West Englewood Bank in the 20s and 30s. He had a sanitarium on Englewood Ave.  Note:  Mr. Weber has a room whose walls are lined with plaques and citations received during his long banking career and as a civic leader.
TeaneckTownship;Frank Leers;1899;1976;Frank Leers, 1899, 1976  (Interview taped 7/23/1976) My family moved to Teaneck about 70 years ago. Prior to 1930 we lived in Bogota near the Teaneck line--Larch Avenue. it was the so-called Bogota section.  My first recollection is that on numerous occasions developers held auctions in circus-like tents. No builders were sent in to complete the buildings. This development stopped at North Avenue.  There was a good deal of commercial raising of vegetables. Around our home on Larch Avenue. Farmers cultivated the land arriving at about 6 a.m., to work ground that had been leased to them. Jill the children went to Bogota schools.  There was a smaller development taking place in Glenwood Park. From 1913-17 I went to Leonia High on the trolley. We often saw deer in the Glenwood Park area.  Queen Anne Road was sooth of Cedar Lane. North of that it was Westfield Avenue. It wasn't a dirt road--macadam.  I remember 65 years ago they used to take a lot of movies for the Fort Lee studios. They did their field work in the cornfields around Johnson Avenue. You'd see Indians going through the corn with knives in their teeth ready to kill the new settlers. The ruins of the Phelps estate where the town hall is were still standing.  East of River Road around Cedar Lane and North Avenue was where a race track had been, I was told, That was before my time.  One thing I remember was the Railroad's two-track line built by Philadelphia interests of the Pennsylvania railroad -- the Vanderbilt interests had the New York Central. The high point was around Sagamore Avenue. Long freight trains would come in the early morning, huffing and puffing along. The boys in the neighborhood knew they frequently had gun battles. Raw silk was shipped from Japan. Highjackers would get on the train and dump the bales off as the train was going up Teaneck hill. The railroad cops would go after them. A barber in Bogota told me about bullets coming through the wall. That was before they had a four-track line.  Before World War I this was a port of embarkation for horses and mules. Sometimes when you walked along Cedar Lane would be solid with animals. Two or three days later you knew they had been there. A substantial part of military transport depended on horses and mules.  People look politics very seriously. An irate Teaneck citizen once came to a council meeting with a chicken under his coat. At intervals he'd pinch the chicken which would let out a squawk.  A great deal of the land was owned by Phelps. It had been assembled for him. His father was a Founder of the Delaware Lackawanna railroad, Phelps was a congressman and later ambassador to Germany. They said he could ride from the Hackensack to the Hudson on his own property.  Sunday schools used to hold picnics in the pine grove around Lincoln Place and Wyndham Road. Many of the trees are still standing. There was a pond with trees around it decorated with such romantic symbols as hearts and arrows. It was a very nice area.  I remember when Route 4 came through. The original plan of the state highway department was to have it about 15 feet higher than it is. There was so much fuss about the Chinese wall that they put it through the way they did. Teaneck was one of the first, probably the only town that protected Route 4 from commercial development.  It could be done by zoning, but you can't count on that because what one board does the next can change. Property owners were persuaded to exchange property along Route 4 for tax lien property the town had acquired. Thus Teaneck protected its part of Route 4 from becoming a Gasoline Allay.  Cedar Lane has always been business zoned. Business has always done pretty well. There was an old diner at the corner of Chestnut and Garrison. I had that property. There was a Grand Union there, then Sherwin Williams and now a bank. On the other side was Woolworth's. Apparently they couldn't make out, Carl Mellone's is still there, Panzenhagen opened up with a small butcher shop.  The area from Garrison to Beatrice street was all farms. Where Lowell School is was the Henderson Seed Company, one of the largest in the country.  Garbage disposal wasn't much of a problem. Nearly every one had chicken coops in their back yard. They took cares of the garbage. As a boy in Bogota I raised hundreds of chickens.  I have learned not to predict. The unexpected always happens.  I don't see any objections to two-family houses. In the late twenties when I was building inspector in Bogota, I suggested we allow two family houses.
TeaneckTownship;Frederic Andreas (Mayor of Teaneck);1870;1949;Frederic Andreas (Mayor of Teaneck,1924) , 1870, 1949  (Interview taped 8/15/1949) Born in 1870, came to Teaneck in 1890 when his parents were looking for a summer home.  A farm on River Road had been advertised.  His father bought it on his son's recommendation without seeing it.  They moved in.  Father died the next year.  Frederic was in wholesale coal business in New York.  At first family came to Teaneck for the summer, staying a little later each year.  They had a coal stove, no plumbing but the pump in the kitchen.  Inside part of the house was built in 1760, a wing added in 1840, then a study was built on south side and a modern kitchen added.  Frederic married Miss Mabel Moore of New York in 1911.  His mother wanted them to live in the Teaneck house.  She was then an invalid.  Moved across the street where a hay field had been.  Andreases had on son -- John Moore Andreas, Ph.D., technical expert who lived in Pasadena, Calif., Frederic Andreas retired in 1944.  He plans to hive his property to the township providing he may live on it tax free until his death.  After that the house is to be torn down, the barn and carriage house to remain standing as a meeting place for Boy and Girl scouts or other community affairs.  "When I first came here, I used to ride horseback from my home on River Rd. to the Dyckman Street ferry without going off Phelps property.  Phelps had built 30 miles of roads and owned over 3,000 acres which he acquired after buying his original farm."  "At first Phelps used the Nordhoff station in Englewood where he took the Northern railway.  Later he had a station built on his property in Teaneck where he took the West Shore.  This station was brown stone.  Two rooms.  There was a woman in charge of the station.  She had lace curtains at the window and potted geraniums on the sills. The township government was centered in Englewood.  Phelps felt Teaneck did not derive enough benefit from the taxes he paid which was the reason for the agitation for a separate township."  "Phelps' dream was to make Teaneck a residential park such as Tuxedo. He influenced some high class people to come out here.  He intended to sell some of his property to them as estates.  Because of his death, the plan did not work out.  His widow did not want to sell any of the property.  After her death the heirs did not wish the continue spending money for the upkeep.  "Phelps had a daughter, Marion, who married the court of Rothenberg, a son, John J. Phelps who died recently and Sheffield who died leaving some children.  "William Bennett, the first township chairman, came here as superintendent of the Phelps estate.  He lived on Teaneck Road north of the Town Hall.  Several hundred men worked for Phelps in those days.  "Queen Anne was a dirt road, the Clausen farm house being the only house there when I came out.  There was near the present Route 4.  At first my mother drove me to the station in a horse and wagon and met me in the evening.  Later I rode a bicycle.  Bergen History:    In 1656, after repeated Indian attacks, settlers decided to live in stockade village,  The one in Jersey City Heights was 800 feet each way.  It was called Bergen because it was on a hill.  In 1682 Bergen County was created.  What is now Hudson County was called Bergen Township.  In 1693 Hackensack Township was created.  In 1871 the state legislature divided Hackensack township into Palisade, Ridgefield and Englewood townships.  The site of the present armory was the Tri-Township Poor Farm.  Although there were no many indigents, they worked the farm.  This was later given over to the county and then to the state as the site for the armory.  Most noted Teaneck resident, aside form Phelps, was Conrad N. Jordan, secretary of the treasury under Cleveland. His son, Archibald N. Jordan lives on Larch Ave. Frank Chapman, noted ornithologist is with American Museum of Natural History.  He lived here.  Lived with his mother on North side of West Englewood Avenue.
TeaneckTownship;George and William Beaumont;1899;1970;George & William Beaumont, 1899, 1970  (Interview taped 8/12/1970) Parents cam to Teaneck from New York State when William was 1 year old, 70 years ago, bought house on Robinson Street, where George Ahrens now lives.  Moved to first house on Bogert Street built by Mr. Curry.  Harry Bennett, son of William Bennett, of Phelps Estate, named Beaumont Avenue for the family.  Father a sheet metal worker in New York.  They attended School 2 which then faced Forest Avenue, them moved to Church Street and Teaneck Road.  William graduated from School 2 in 1913 -- about 20 in the class, when to High Street in Dumont on the Train.  George when to Englewood High by bus.  People in lower Teaneck went to Leonia High in trolley.  Teaneck Club at Bogert & Teaneck Road was center of social life in early 1900s. Washington Hazelton was one of the leading spirits.  Beaumonts and other young parents pushed babies in carriages to the club, they enjoyed the evening while babies slept on balcony -- at some affairs dancing till daylight.  The club had an auditorium used for dancing, bowling, basketball, etc. and stage shows.  Club was built in 1906.  During World War I, activities and membership fell off.  Mr. Fibbish held the mortgage and foreclosed, made it into a movie theater called "The Raven".  The bowling alley was sold to the K of C in Bergenfield.  The size of the town can be gauged by the fact that only 60 from Teaneck went off to World War I, all but 7 came back.  There was only one house on Garrison Ave., home of Sam Garrison, later Legion Home, now parking lot.  You could play golf all day for 50 cents at Phelps Manor Country Club.  The Blue Bird Inn was the center of social life.  Bill Beaumont's wedding reception was there in 1923. The Gridiron Club met there.  First Bank was the West Englewood National, later Garden State, then Community National Bank.  There wasn't much business in Teaneck.  People went to Englewood and Hackensack.  Groceries were delivered.  Teaneck National Bank is now People's Trust.  I remember the fire at Longfellow school in 1922 -- it was in the winter, at night.  The Ba'ha'i cabin on Evergreen place was built 56 years ago. Big logs used to come on railroad cars.  A man named Bourgeois had a stationery store at Palisade and West Englewood Ave. (later Cutler's?), lived at Bogert and Alicia.  He built a model of the Ba'ha'i temple in competition for the design of the Wilmette temple.  A man name Wilhelm built the log cabin. He traveled all over Europe and sent back stones which are in the fire place of the log cabin.  Harry Beaumont was with Teaneck fire department from 1937 - 62. Now with Community National Bank.  Bill Beaumont remembers caws on Borden Farm.  Had quite a good business -- he'd load his coaster wagon with manure and sell it to his dad for 10 cents a load. Some days made 60 cents.  Selvage laid sidewalks in his addition before houses were built.  Ayres developed West Englewood section.  Built approaches to State Street Bridge.  Pictured subway from N. Y. coming here.  The Ackerman farm on Teaneck road where telephone building is now had cows, sheep, guinea hens.  Rekow's farm on the top of hill in West Englewood was going to be a park.
TeaneckTownship;George Ahrens;1900;1975;George Ahrens, 1900, 1975   (Interview taped 9/17/1975) My family came to Teaneck in 1905 when I was almost 5 years old. The William Beaumonts still lived in the house at 116 Robinson St. where I still live. There was Harold, Edna and Phil Beaumont. I don't think Bill was born yet. They moved over to Bogert Street, but Bogert Street wasn't opened until 1909.  There were no houses across the street from us. On our side were the Kaltenbachs--he was a plumber and in 1920 became the first paid fireman. There were the Mantins. William Beaumont lived on Stevenson Lane. Mr. Beaumont Sr. was a veteran of the Spanish American War. During World War I he used to conduct drills for those of us too young to go to war.  I went to School 2--the old one before it was moved to Teaneck Road and Church Street. I started in the old building. Teachers I remember were Miss Bessie Resue from Weehawken, Miss DeBaun who came from Essex Fells, Edith Toconsel who became Mrs. Osnato, Miss Lucy Marsh and LeRoy Jay, the principal.  There was no Forest Avenue West of Teaneck Road. There was no Selvage Avenue. We used to play in Selvage's apple orchard. Mr. Selvage made cement blocks. He built a lot of houses with them in that area. Smith & Marsh had a cement block place in Englewood.  My family came from the Bronx.  My father was an asbestos worker--he covered pipes and boilers with asbestos, felt and cork. Where Packard's store is in Hackensack there was a wallpaper factory. You took the trolley to Paterson. My father always worked away from home. In 1911 he worked on the education building in Albany after they had a fire in the capitol. He'd come home 3 or 4 times a year. I'd meet him at the train with my little express wagon. On a summer I want to Albany with him and stayed two weeks. I came home on the Albany boat all by myself.  Our house had central heating because Mr. Beaumont was a tinsmith. We had a hot air furnace, but an outdoor John. We burned coal which we bought from Mr. DiBella after he came home from World War I. He was our first barber. There were no stores in Teaneck--they were all in Englewood. You'd go there to buy postcards. My mother always wrote postcards. My father used to send souvenir cards and I have quite a collection. I had one brother and two sisters.  My mother belonged to the Woman's Club, the Willing Workers of the Presbyterian Church and the Teaneck Civic Association. The women started the library. They bought property on Teaneck Road and later turned the profit to the town to start the library. My mother was secretary of the Teaneck Schools Civic Association. They had a dental project. Kids got a ticket for 25 cents and took that to the dentist.  Teaneck had no saloons. Emile Moreau had a beer bottling plant on Congress Ave. William Brarman also had a beer bottling plant. We helped wash the bottles. They sold beer for $1 a case, delivered. Brarman's son later had the tavern on Forest Avenue. You couldn't drink beer in the bottling plants, so the men would go over to Phelps woods.  During the panic of 1907 Dad was out of work for a year.  He drove the truck for Mr. Moreau on Saturdays. Allie (Alex) Strants lived in a Phelps house at Palisade and Vandelinda (all Phelps houses were painted red.) There was nothing near but a horse pastures. Schultz living in the Richeer house at Palisade and Cedar Lane.  No one rented in those days, every one owned his home. My father paid $2500 for a 2 story house on a 50 by 100 lot. Electricity came down Robinson Street in 1912. We had water, every other street had water. Some people had wells.  After the Armistice in 1918 Dad took me to the shipyards in Brooklyn. John Sitzman had a store on Forest Avenue. He told me to go into the ice business. Peterson was our ice man. I had to get a 1-ton truck by July.  I got ice from Englewood. It was cut on the lakes in northern Jersey. I went to Copley Avenue and the Armory east of the railroad. John Brarman went west.  Clifford G. Hank the railroad station agent delivered mail. Raymond Moore delivered mail until 1918, Hanks in 1922. I took the job in the winter and had the ice route in the summer. I delivered mail house to house, walking Ogden, Rutland, Teaneck Road and Forest Avenue--twice a day 6 days a week.  Bucky McDonald had the route for the summer when he was home from college. Bucky got married and went to Maryland where he went to school. John Sedovic then took the route in the summer. In 1924 West Englewood became a second class post office. Before that it was a village post office and only granted $1,000 a year for deliver. There were three classes--RFD, village and city. We delivered mail--not parcel post. There were mail boxes in the railroad station. The post office was there until 1928 when it moved to 182 West Englewood Ave. opposite Cutlers. Mr. Hanks was a very strict postmaster. Bucky McDonald came back to town and was a carrier for many years. He became a cameraman, did photography for Brewster, picturing the progress of his many projects.  The morning RFD route went up River Road to New Bridge, over New Bridge to Teaneck Road including Foster Village--Judge Foster lived there then. Mr. and Mrs. Hanks sorted the mail. Thomas Oliver came later. George Haroy was the first tax collector, then Jim Heroy. Haroys were active in the Presbyterian Church. George McGann lived on Forest Avenue near the Cooper Dairy. He was church treasurer. My mother's envelop was No.5. After she was gone, mine was No.52.  Capt John Phelps lived on River Road. I knew the Stevensons when they lived in Englewood--on Rosemont Place. They later lived on John Christie's farm on the west side of Teaneck Road. There were all farms there in these ordar: Richards. Herr, O'Connell, Quinn, Butterick (ha was Butterick patterns). Schumanns (she was Dorothy Hooks). The Schumanns had a windmill and there was a cistern where the high school is now. Harry Bennett lived at 928 Teaneck Road where the school is now. Then came the Phelps ruins.  Note: Redwood lived at Belle Ave and route 4. He was a construction union leader Berhnhardt's Restaurant at Rte 4 and -Teaneck Rd. (Now Carriage Club) belonged to Jacob Schillimg, a trustee of the bank. I know he built the barn. Richards lived there and then Wiesner.  There ware eight gas lights between Robinson Street and Teaneck Rd. The last was at the kitchen door of the Phelps home where Holy Name Hospital is now.  Allie (Albert) Carlson was the lamplighter. I used to walk with him in the evening when we lighted the lamps--we climbed the pole and struck a match. I don't know who put them out.  I was with the Teaneck post office 43 years -- 1922-1965.  19 years assistant postmaster in Teaneck, 5 years superintendent in West Englewood.  I was in West Englewood from 1922-4l. Everything was horses in the early days. There was a big dip at Colonial Court to Church street. All the rigs "drove around it until it was a great big circle--muddy and swampy. They had to put in fill 20 feet high along Queen Anne, then Westfield.,  Vincent Sottosanti, Lucille McBride's uncle, had a friend who was a purser on the Italian lines.  I saved stamps and he sent me stamps from the Conte de Savoie and the Rex. Lu's uncle made trips on both of those boats. 
TeaneckTownship;Helen Bradner Devoe;1912;1975;Helen Bradner Devoe, 1912, 1975   (Interview taped 7/17/1975) I was 4 and half when we came to Teaneck from Now York in 1917.  We didn't intend to stay. My father was ill and we put him in Neldon's Sanitarium, suggested by the Zeobs, friends from Now York. My mother rented a house on Westervelt Place to be near him. She was a dyed in the wool New Yorker. My father was a pharmacist, then a traveling salesman. We stayed in the Westervelt Ave. house nine months. Etton's was the only market. Across the street lived the Moore family. I believe Raymond became a priest. Dorothy took me to school. I was used the Central Park in New York.  I remember once on Bogert Street a cow was tethered. I didn't know a cow from a bull. Some boys told me it was a bull and was going to got me because I had on a red hat. I tore away, fall and knocked out two front tooth.  Buffet built the house we lived in. He was able to sell. My mother went into New York. This was 1918 and prices had skyrocketed.  She had turned down Mr. Buffet. Mr. Moore found these two houses. His family bought one. There were those who said we were snobs, moving into "Mortgage Heights" as West Englewood was called.  There were just three streets, West Englewood, Ogden and Rutland.  Later they began developing Maitland. The rest was all woods. There was a farm with a big barn, Mother would walk there to get vegetables. I think it was a relative of Rekow's. Every once in a while a cow would come on our lawn. They had guinea hens. Once a motorist hit one. My father said we'd have guinea on the table, but it was just stunned.  We all coasted on this street in winter. There was a gate keeper at the railroad crossing named Pete. He knew all our names. If a train was coming, he blow a whistle  if not, we'd coast clear across the tracks to Queen Anne Road.  Jordan put up a blockade so we couldn't take a short cut to School 2.  We were not supposed to take the other path because of tramps. That was his property. He didn't want a street there. Jordan's wife and Mrs. Greenlaw started the library in a washerwoman's house across Teaneck Road. There was a fire where the fire house in now. I found one like it recently while driving to work in Connecticut--on 303 in Norwood, I think.  When we came they still had the band shell on West Englewood. It was Always wet there.  There was a story that during World War I Teaneck men organized a militia and used to practice drilling in this area.  My father went back to work in New York. Worked 12 hours a day. He always got home to vote on important issues. I went to Washington Irving School, carried my lunch. Our parents thought there should be a school within walking distance for every child so they could get home for lunch. Se now they have the schools and bus them all over town.  I went to Englewood High 6chool.We used to ride some of those old buses that had been condemned. One was a squarish one we called "The Puddle Jumper" the other was long and we called it "The Ice Wagon".  I think Dick Verlini owned them. Once one broke down and he had to got another one to take us to school,  There was the Hazelton family. Mr. Hazelton was quite an organizer. He used to put on movies at the Teaneck Club. We'd sit there when the reel would break. The old town hall was alongside the school.  They added a wing tot he school when I was in third grade.  We had classes on Fairview Avenue in the old fire house where they had hoses all rolled up on carts.  Forest Avenue stopped at Teaneck Read. One day I came to school on my bike and was told to put it in the cellar. There were gypsies cooking their breakfast in the Forest Avenue woods. They were going to cut my tires with big butcher knives.  Where17 West Englewood Avenue is now there was a beautiful old home. It belonged to Dr. Ayers. Once a year they'd string Japanese lanterns all over and have a fair. How fortunate we were as children to come out here. I was an only child, so was Ruth Brooks who came from Bogota.  We formed a club called the Busy Bees when we were 8. Dorothy Lawson, Ruth Brooks, Elsie Eberline etc.  We'd pick each other up every morning and go to school together.  We had a coal furnace. There was a gas fixture in the kitchen. The electricity was not on the day we came. Mrs. Cathie learned we had no light, so she came with a gas lamp for the kitchen. We got electricity the next day. The Cathies lived on Rutland. Lots of people had chicken coops in their back yard. The Morrills were here. So were the Ranges and the Bergers who had a big bobsled.  They lived on Rutland. Lloyd Schroeder lived on Ogden.  We could have gone to Teaneck High to graduate, but we stayed at Englewood which was accredited. Three of us went to the same business college--Packard'3--Dot Lahr, Lucille Manno and I. I wanted to go to college to be a teacher, but along came the depression. I went to Jersey City Normal and fount I didn't want that. I taught Sunday School at Christ Church.  When they built Whittier School it only went to fourth grade. I was in fifth. When they opened Whittier we all marched, wearing middies and skirts, from school 2 to the cornerstone laying.  When we lived on Westervelt Place I played with Viola Lebeck. I remember Lucy Marsh, the principal. She'd clap her hands sternly. She were glasses and looked old to us. She scowled at every one. Mr. Jay came after her. I was out of school 9 weeks when I had scarlet fever. We were quarantined.  The milk bottles accumulated on the back perch because everything had to be sterilizer. My hair fell out. My mother took me to Best's to have it singed, but it still came out. They said cut it. I think it was Mr. Manne who cut my hair all off like a boy. My mother sent along a boudoir cap. When he got in front of some people, he pulled off the cap and said he'd always wanted a boy. It was horrible. The boys teased me. When I got back to fourth grade we had a pretty teacher--Miss Allen. She sent me on an errand. I hated it because I had to face another class. But she wanted me out of the room so she could tell the other kids not to tease me.  For our eighth grade graduation we wrote a play about the Revolutionary War. That was our graduation program in the Oakdone School. Afterwards, Mr. Hooks, the superintendent of schools, presented the diplomas.  The land was not graded around our house. My mother wanted a screen door. She was going to see Mr. Ayers about it. She went to a Red Cross meeting and learned that a family in the area who was very religious had said the world was coming to an end. My mother remarked, "If that is the case, I won't bother Mr. Ayers about the screen door."  We put on plays. Bordine Rogers was great at making costumes--for fairies and all--and at decoration. Clifford Ott's sister found a dead bird. We had a funeral. There was a lovely stream which, for some reason, went up hill in the pine woods section. We'd pack a picnic lunch and go to Phelps Woods.  Vida Hooks and I said later that we learned a lot from tramps. They traveled a lot on freight trains.  Old Pete at the railroad crossing had a lantern at night. We were glad when they built more houses on this street. There were about four cars in town and we know the sound of the different horns. My mother would sometimes got on a milk wagon or an ice truck to ride to Englewood. My birthday is March 2. It always snowed. We were having a party and had to get the ice cream from Englewood. Mrs. Zeek bundled up and pulled a slat ever there 2 1/2 miles to get the ice cream for the party. What neighbors and friends!  The men around here went together and bought a big ladder, a lawn roller and a wheel barrow. They would work on each other's places. My father had a radio head set. One night the president was going to speak. Mother set the dinner on my little table so we could listen. The food was crackly and all we could hear was "Crunch, Crunch." He got another set and put wires around the upstairs room. Once he woke me up at midnight to tell me he had gotten Cuba!  Dorothy Quadorf and some of the other girls told me one day that Richard Dix was coming to town to a real estate office. I said I'd rather sleep.  Mrs. Edythe Whipple was very active in polities. She was a Democrat. We didn't know a Democrat. She wrote articles about Senator Borah and other people and left them on our porch. Her son Ralph Whipple is a doctor on Long Island. When he was married. Jim Bishop wrote a column saying Ralph would be 32 air miles away from his mother. Mrs. Whipple was a woman ahead of her times.  Shopping? We went to Mr. Etten, to Grey's hardware where the post office was--the plumbing was in the basement. The West Englewood Market is there now. There was Bourgeois Candy Store at Palisade and West Englewood where you could got a bag of penny candy that would last a week. He and Mrs. Bourgeois started that Baha'i  temple on Evergreen Place. He later designed the Baha'i Temple in Wilmette, Ill. They sold their place. Mr. Ayers wanted my father to start a drug store there.  Mr. Cutler came and opened a drug store. There was no more penny candy, just nickel bars. He introduced the Jimmy cone--with chocolate sprinkles on it for 10 cents. You'll see pictures of that old building with the door across the corner if you go to Cutler a today.  Zitelli was the shoemaker. He had been on Etten's side of the street. Built his own building across the street. The bank was where Adriano is now. I remember Mr. Levine the tailor. Mr. DiBella owned the barbershop before Mr. Manne took over. DiBella went into the coal business.  Hanks, the stationmaster ran the post office when they moved it from Frey's store to the railroad station. The Bramhoffs had a deli and sold ice. Klober came in and made it a grocery store. I remember when the ice man came around and would put 100 pounds in your ice box. You put a card in your window to tell how much you wanted. The Petersons were the first around here to have an electric refrigerator. Hazel Peterson is now teaching voice at Bradley University in Pooria, Ill.  I remember Mrs. Ayers got a Miss Blankhorn to come out from New York and give dancing lessons for boys and girls in Christ Church and later in Mrs. Ayers big home. That lasted about three years. Dorothy Fickerrman taught piano.  Sheffield Farms was where the West Englewood Electric shop is now. If you took your own jar you could got a full pint of loose cream for 21 cents.  We had to go to Englewood for a doctor. We went to Dr. Valentine Rusch. Aunt Zeeb got him for us when I had the measles. I was sick five weeks. There was a big eye, ear, nose and throat man in Englewood. He operated on my father here in this house. Deviated septum. Dr. Helff was the first doctor I remember in Teaneck. Dr. Clarke was where Dr. Peter Hunziker is now.  I love this town regardless of the changes. It has a great spirit. Every one was so kind in the old days. I work in Greenwich, Conn., now with AMAX, Inc. -- American Metal Company Limited which has merged with Climax.  They wonder why I didn't move to Greenwich. I want to stay in my house in Teaneck.  The Busy Bees used to make things for the fair at Christ Church. Fairchild N. Ferry the senior warden wanted to do something for the Busy Bees, so he let us have the church hall for a night. We decorated the community room, had prizes, we all brought props and decided to give recitations, piano solos, etc. Mr. Brooks, our MC used to take us to ball games and write poems about the Busy Bees. He brought a floor lamp as a prep, Mr. Peterson brought a victorla for dancing.  When it was over, we had to clean up for Sunday School the next day.  I remember as we left the church Mr. Peterson was out front operating the victorla and Mr. Brooks was waving the floor lamp at a baton.  They all agreed it was the finest night they had had at the church.  
TeaneckTownship;Howard Teitelbaum;1920;1976;Howard Teitelbaum, 1920, 1976  (Interview taped 6/22/1976) I have lived in Teaneck since 1936. My mother, father and brother Edwin and I came from Newark.  Before that we lived in New York City.  I was 16 when we came.  My father started a business, the Parisian Cleaners, at 415 Cedar Lane. Later we moved to 426 Cedar Lane next to the hardware store owned by Harry Wagner.  We moved there to be close to the business.  I was nearly through high school when we came. I went to Hackensack High School, although Teaneck High was built then. I graduated at 16 1/2 so it wasn't very long.  My brother went to Emerson School and finished at Teaneck High.  We later moved to 715 Linden, the apartments there.  My fondest recollection of Cedar Lane is where from the Municipal Building to Queen Anne Road and to Palisade Avenue, it was all forest, a wooded area. Next to our business was an Acme Food Market--where Linn's Stationery and Office Supply is now. Then there was Heywang's gas station. Bob Quirk, Heywang's nephew runs it now. Heywang died several years ago. The bridge was over the railroad tracks when we came,  There was a sort of Keystone Cop arrangement at Garrison Avenue and Cedar Lane, a sentry box in the middle where a cop directed traffic.  Cars used to hit it regularly.  Musicant's Flower Shop was where the bicycle store is now.  The Elms Tavern was there. It was run by a man named Clausen who was killed in an airplane accident in Newark in 1956--Henry Clausen.  At the bottom of the hill where the Pathmark is now was the Casa Mana run by Emil Feld. It was a big restaurant. People from all over Bergen County held affairs there. Feld had a stroke and lived there for several years running the business though he was in poor physical condition.  He later died.  Where the Parisian Cleaners is now--429 Cedar Lane--was an empty lot. We purchased the first section of the vacant lot.  We put up the building and I'll never forget the time we moved in. We had to vacate our premises by Sept. l.  The plaster wasn't dry and the windows weren't in when we moved on Aug.31, 1947. That was the day my son Robert was born. We moved while my wife was in the hospital.  Steiner-Massari later built the row of stores and apartments in the block.  They were the ones who built the apartments from Grange Road to Teaneck Road. Woolworth's 5 and 10 cent store at Garrison and Cedar Lane was a landmark for many years.  After I finished high school I worked as a checker at the Big Bear Market on Cedar Lane until I was 19. Then I went into the service.  I was among the first ones drafted. Started out in Anti-aircraft and ended in the infantry.  I was overseas two and a half years. I came back and got married to Gloria Hecht, an Englewood girl I met at the "Y".  My father and mother retired and moved to Florida eight years ago.  I took over.  There have been changes in the cleaning business, but we have been fortunate in this town where there are many affluent people. Wash and wear textiles are popular but dry cleaning makes fabrics look better. Thank God we have the kind of people who use dry cleaning.  In 1951 the town decided to put in a parking lot in back of our store.  My property was 140 feet deep.  The town wanted to take 50 feet and asked me to give up 50 feet. I wasn't going to argue.  That was when they moved the American legion building. I remember when they moved that house across Cedar Lane.  That Bicentennial mural on the east wall of my building attracts a lot of attention. Students from Thomas Jefferson Junior High did it. The names of the art teacher and all the kids who took part are on that wall.  No one has touched it since it was done--no graffiti.  About two months ago there was some pealing and Miss Tamborelle of the library sent a man over with the right colors and touched it up. Next year I'll let the art teacher from Benjamin Franklin Junior High and his kids do a mural, too.  There is trouble with vandalism that worries us. Kids used to hang out in the parking lot by Miller's Drug Store, now they are in back of my area.  Merchants have got to police to do something. They let the air out of tires of Miller's trucks and then decided to let out the brake fluid. That could cause a bad accident.  The kids used to hang out at Rocklin's but they ran them away from there.  Teaneck is a good town for business as far as goods and services are concerned.  People would like to shop here. When the shopping centers opened every one went there. The papers are full of ads that attract them. After a while they like the convenience of shopping here. They have reactivated the Chamber of Commerce and are making an all-out effort. I feel that we have plenty of banks.  My oldest son is 29--or will be Aug. 31. He is in business with me and has two children--7 and 4.  I have a daughter 26 and a son 23.   Some one projected that this year there would be 500 new families in Teaneck. I doubted that since there was no building going on, but I'm getting from 20 to 25 new customers a month. It is the turn over. We have a problem in Teaneck. Older people would like to stay, but there are no facilities to this day. They go to high rises in Hackensack and Fort Lee.  People are making a real effort to overcome this. They could have put apartments where the Tennis Club is now. That would have been convenient for Senior Citizens, near stores, restaurants, etc.  My son is active in the Chamber of Commerce and we hope to see some changes made. Now we are looking forward to the annual Sidewalk Sale when I can buy some Teaneck Bicentennial T shirts. Every one has a good time when they hold the sidewalk sale.
TeaneckTownship;Jack O'Brien;1914;1975;Jack O'Brien, 1914, 1975  (Interview taped 7/29/1975) My mother bought this house in about 1917 when I was 2 or 3. I was born in 1915. Started school at School Ne.2. went to Teaneck High for junior and senior classes. Graduated in 1935-- the north stairs were up and the south stairs were down. I hung around with older kids, Connie and Louise Jordan, Herbert DeVries, Tommy Snow. We belonged to the Anarchist Club. We had High Water Day when we rolled up our pants at least to the knee. We were suspended for a week for doing that. Charles Littel was the principal. He was always in the right place at the right time.  Edsel Wilhoyt was head of the music department. He wrote the Teaneck High Son Alma Mater-- "On the Hill She Stands Majestic," Tony Loudis wrote the words. Edsel had a model T, he used to drive to New York across the 125th St. Ferry. He had a Stradivarius violin he locked in the care. Ono day he walked off the ferry, get on a subway and went home. When he got there, a policeman was waiting for him. He had forgotten his car on the ferry. It was locked and they couldn't got it off. All the other people had to back their cars off! Talk about the absent minded professor.  When our high school was new we had one of the finest music groups in the state. When school opened, Wilhoyt had at least 15 instruments across the stage. He could play 10 or 15 instruments and he got together an orchestra. I wound up on string bass because I was big, and could reach. I disliked that instrument with a passion. We had a state championship orchestra and band the third year the high school was in existence. There was Al Peinecke and his brother, the two Austin boys --Stanley played the cello and his brother the Trombone. They went to Juilliard.  When I got stuck I always know you could use the high school library. Didn't appreciate it till I was out of school. Yes, we had a marching band, the blue and whites. I was mostly interested in the Orchestra. I remember Ravel's Bolero. Johnny Hammill who married Ruth Martin played the snare drum. It was fantastic.  I remember when the Teaneck Library opened. Mrs. Jordan was on the committee. She was a sparkplug of everything civic.  If it was important, Mrs. Jordan was there. We kids pitched in. I rode Helen Krause on the  cross bar of my bike. Her brother Bobby went along and Louise and Conrad Jordan and so did Ralph Greenlaw--old Mushwheels. He had disc wheels on his bike. Coming home after the dedication I had Helen K. on my bike and forgot about the gate house on Teaneck Read--near Caddys. There were two steps up and two steps down. We crashed as I was pedaling along. Helen went over the handlebars. The house was one of those show places where carriages went through the gates.  Laurel Terrace was like it is today, but it was not paved. They did that two years ago. Burt Gottlieb and his mother lived next door.  Then the Pousts.  Ann Kennedy lived in the big double house. Then there was Tedy Schwartz and the Imhoffs lived next to them. Then the McDonalds -- Evelyn, Elvira, Bucky and Harold.  Henry Settler end his mother.  The Jordans lived on West Englewood Ave. I went to school with Connie from Kindergarten on. He had long curls and when we started he said, "Jack, stand beside me. Connie is an operating engineer in California. He served in France during World War II and speaks French like a native. George Credo came along when we were in third grade.  The Settlers belonged to the Lutheran church. The pastor at St. Paul's was one hell of a nice guy -- named Schnabel. He'd invite all us Catholics to come to their picnics. We're all close neighbors and we'd go to Greenwood Lake on the trolley. The trolley would stay on a siding and bring us all back. When the Catholics were having a tombela - Pastor Schnabel would say to his people, "Come on, let's make a good showing. He practiced ecumenism 30-40 years ago. There was a lot of animosity in our town. Some of our dear Irish neighbors thought if you were not a Catholic, you would go to hell. They were shocked when our priest said that was not so.  My mother was a liberated woman 50 yearn ago. She came to New York from Nova Scotia to be a nurse. Trained in a Jewish hospital. They knew she couldn't eat meat on Friday. Both my father and mother came from St. Johns, Nova Scotia, an independent colony. Her father died in 1932 and Dr. McCormack said my mother needed a change so we went back on a visit. My grandfather would take me "for a bit of walk."  We'd walk 20 miles around the pond. My mother was with the Henry Street Nursing Service and knew Henrietta Weld. She started a Mothers' Club for immigrant women. She commuted in to the city on the West Shore.  I got a scholarship to a progressive school they started. It was not for scholarship but because they wanted some poor kids. My mother said they could have hers. There were only 8 to 12 kids in a class. It was at 165 W. 12th Street across from St. Vincent's. Rich kids went there.  My mother said there used to be a shelf in the West Englewood railroad station where commuters could leave their lanterns. The area there was all woods and a crook. The bank stood alone on that corner for years. First the bank was on Palisade Avenue where Adriane is now. When they built the big bank there was so much water and quicksand there they had to build it like a boat.  Abe Etton owned this house before we came. He later lived on West Englewood Ave. next to Greenlaws. Benny Segal had a paint and glass store on West Englewood Ave. east of Etton's store. Comfort Coal was across the street. Frey moved in afterwards. Paul Zitelli's father had a shoe repair shop. Archibald Jordan was a corporation lawyer for Jack Frost Sugar. He had an office on Palisade Avenue. He was active when his wife sparked him. He fought the closing of West Englewood Avenue at the tracks. He owned where Cutler's Drug Store is. The Jordans owned a lot of property.  Laurel Terrace used to be Elm Terrace. Queen Anne Rd. was Westfield Avenue here. Where the gas station is now the people had goats and a pony. I think it was the Butterfield house. The town is changing. It's human nature to object to change. I liked the formality of the old days.  George and Henry Crede and I used to rent a rowboat on the Hackensack River for 25 cents an hour from George Benson. He wasn't too strict on the clock. For 50 cents an hour we could got a canoe. Edgar Benson was a friend of William Roomer.
TeaneckTownship;Jesson Witham;1891;1970;Jesson Witham, 1891, 1970  (Interview taped 10/13/1970) I came to Teaneck from Brooklyn 1908. Appointed constable with Bill Jahnes in 1934. Jahnes was related to the Phillips family. Worked from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m., never had a day off. There was very little if any crime. Watched hoboes. They slept in the woods all over. Had their regular hangouts. They didn't bother much. I talked to some of them. They had been all over--India, China and all.  That was their way of life. Hoboes didn't want to be near any one who violated the law. Sometimes a fellow the cope were looking for would hang around them, but they'd get him out.  At police headquarters in old town hall we had two cells made of iron slats.  For years we let the hoboes sleep there.  They'd lay on newspapers on concrete floor and cover with a newspaper. We couldn't let them freeze in the woods.  During the depression I remember when they were building houses, the hoboes would sleep on shelves. I'd go in with my flashlight and they'd call to me, I couldn't see them. They'd say "Hey, you're looking right at me."  Yes, they voted us down on an election because they thought $5,000 was too much for a police dept. But we had a referendum and they put us back on. We got $60 a month for 12-hr. a day 7 days a week. We worked mainly during the time the men were away at work. When they came home at night the men could look after things. Sometimes the hoboes gave the ladies trouble. She'd offer them pie and they'd insist on something else. I remember when some fellows came through with a load of potatoes, a fine team. Jimmy came running like the devil and told me the potato peddler stole his gold watch. I went after them on my motor cycle, got them off the truck.  I went through bag after bag looking for the watch. There it was in an empty bag at the bottom. Jimmy and old Capt Phelps didn't want to prosecute them. Three years later they picked up that same bunch of potato peddlers in Jersey City.  There were quite a few telephones here then. We had one phone at police headquarters, not a fancy switchboard like they have now.  Glenwood Park was quiet. Once a couple of kids robbed Reiner's stores, stole apples, crackers, etc. Mayor Bodine said a talking to was enough, Reiner said it was all right with him, but they had broke things in the store.  My two brothers went to the school on Ft. Lee Rd.  Davison used to run a stage coach along Park Ave. to Ridgefield Park then back and up Fycke Lane to Teaneck Rd.  I remember Bessie Parker lived on North side of Parker Lane.  A fellow lived on the east side of Teaneck Rd. wrote the song for her. It was a popular rag time tune. The fellow who wrote it used to walk in Parker Lane which was nothing but pine tress, like a lover's land, nice place.  I found lots of Indian relics in Glenwood Park. Arrowheads whenever they dug for a foundation. Bob Phillips met me one day and took me over to Lippman's and said look at this. It was a blue clay slab--looked like a grave. People used to bury their dead on their own property. Lewises were buried all around there. On Cadmus place on River Road there were graves.  I could have been a state trooper. Cadmus talked to me, but I said I'm a home town boy and turned it down. They dropped me from Capt. to Lt. over a drunken driver. I sassed the doctor.  When they added 2 new men to the force Bill Jahnes quit. I stuck it out and got along fine. The cop on the job is always in trouble. Gets roasted.  We didn't walk until the force had 4-5 men. One man would go over the area around Robinson St. Then West Englewood and the Bogota section. It was cold on winter nights. Sometimes I'd meet Capt. Phelps coming home and would have a cup of hot coffee.  Once in a while we'd pick up a stranger or someone who missed the trolley. When we didn't have enough motor cycles, we'd ride bicycles.  Later they got more motorcycles and side cars.  The day they dedicated Holy Name Hospital there must have been 100 or 200 protests.  People parked in the flower beds.  They told cops to get them out.  It was nip and tuck. No one was boss. Must have been 200 or 300 cars there.  There was plenty of trapping in the meadows--mink, muskrat, some pheasants. Not a weed. The meadow hay was fine. Used to cut it in winter as soon as ice was strong enough for a team to go in. There was a crystal clear spring, it was fines but dangerous for the horses. The spring had no bottom. I remember them lassoing horse to get them out. They out hay all summer. Big stacks were sold. I got a load from old when I built my house, not a crack in the foundation. I built our house. Took me a year and a half.  After War I I went to moonlighting. Building houses. When I had enough money I got 4 lots. Now I have eight. Things are going to change with the new development.  I walk a lot now--over to the Palisades and around. But I've got a corn. never had one when I was on the force. I'll be 80 my next birthday.  
TeaneckTownship;John P. Sullivan;1906;1976;John P. Sullivan, 1906, 1976   (Interview taped in 1976) I came to Teaneck in 1907 with my parents.  I was one year old at the time.  There were six of us. I had one brother and four sisters. We lived at 127 Park Ave. off Fort Lee Road. In those days it was all farms there, part of the Westervelt farm.  We had a two-story house with an attic. My father had it built. There weren't many houses around there. There was our house, a house across the street and two McCaffrey houses on Maple Street. There was a house up on Oak Street--not more than 10 houses altogether on Park Ave. We knew every one. We had no grocery store, but there was a general store at Fort Lee and Queen Anne Road. They came around and took your order and would deliver it in the afternoon.  When there was a whole lot of snow they had runners on all the wagons. The baker and the coal man had sleighs. Charlie Kjawski would plow a little path through the town.  Almost every one walked. Those who worked in New York went to the Ridgefield Park station. Ridgefield Park was the shopping town. They had a general store. Carried everything from a spool of thread to a horse Collar.  My father was a Wheelman on the West Shore Ferry. He went to school with Al Smith. Al Smith was at my Grandfather's funeral. My mother was a Canadian,  Teaneck Road was very beautiful. Vary narrow pavement--maybe wide enough for two Model T Fords--they could just get by.  In our section there was a nice pine woods.  I went to Oakdene School.  Just the center part of the present school was built then. They had about eight classrooms, I remember Miss Duryea and Miss Kranz.  Mr. Jay was the principal. When Miss Duryea retired we had a party.  It was quite an affair--lasted from 8 in the evening till 4 in the morning. It started with some pictures.  Gone Deckert and I decided to give a party.  He was a sergeant with the police department and he got a lot of people together.  We had coal stoves at first--one upstairs and one down and then we got a pipeless furnace. We had a kitchen range.  It was my job to haul the coal and take out the ashes.  In the beginning we lighted with kerosene, then they piped gas through and we had gas lamps.  When I was 17 or 18 we used to go to girls' houses, roll up the rugs and dance. Nearly every house had those goose neck gas lights that used mantles. Being tall, I'd hit my head on them and break the mantle.  I'd bring extras along with me. When we were ready to go home we'd put back the rugs and put things together again.  Everybody had an ice box on the back porch.  My brother has the Dennis Studio in Bogota. My sisters Margaret, Jane and Anne are gone.  Margarat was murdered in New Milford14 years ago. I now have one sister and a brother living.  I was a printer with the Newark Evening News for 35 years.  I am retired. I was married at St. Francis Church in Ridgefield Park. I've been in this house 30 years. At first we rented a place on Cooper Ave. Then we bought this house. I keep busy teaching school, taking Pictures, making frames, going to art school. I exhibit my pictured in banks--the Garden State, People's Trust, etc. I teach art in Hasbrouck Heights and Saddle brook Adult School and at St. Anastazia's.  I had no problem about retiring, I was teaching for the last 20 years.  You get a lot of satisfaction seeing people get so much out of it. You just can't quit. You have to share. I have taught nuns, priests, lawyers, doctors, one judge--Judge Fake of Paramus Court--and yes, an undertaker.  There were John and Mary Summers,  Mary Thrun, Sister Eileen and Father Ferdinand. I taught for seven or eight years at the community Church. Rev. Harold Vanoort sponsored it.  He was a swell fellow. His wife was very active. Yes, we turned out quite a number of painters.  There was no Teaneck High School when I was young. I didn't go to high school. I went to work after sixth grade. I was apprenticed in a print shop and became a journeyman printer. I worked for the Newark News until it was sold to the Star Ledger.  That was a sad day.  I was active in politics -- 1928 and afterwards. It was fun to some degree. I happened to be a Democrat. There were few of us and it was an uphill fight. Had a lot of fun. We know everybody. Donald Waesche was the township lawyer.  He became a judge. We elected Edison governor.  I was captain of the Auxiliary Police--all volunteers.  Started during the war, Chief Harte of the police department saw that we got plenty of training,  We were out when that airplane crashed on Queen Anne Rd, around Frances St. We assisted the town and the government in case of emergency.  One time we had a terrible windstorm. That was after we had disbanded. Capt. Klemm called and we rounded up a few boys. There were more wires bouncing around than there were men, he said.  They needed help so we spent the rest of the night watching those bouncing wires.  Interest in the town was great in those days. There were fewer people.  Every one knew one another. Now I go to Town Hall and they call me Mister--those that know me. Years ago when Clara Christensen and Paul Volcker were there they called me John. I know chief Fitzpatrick.  I organized the Teaneck Democratic Club 28 years ago. I think they killed it. I was campaign manager for Jimmy Brown when he ran for Congress, We almost won. 15,000 more votes and we'd have been in. We spent about $500.  Ridgefield Park was our parish. When there was a wedding the whole procession walked to church. Today that would look foolish. Not every one had cars. They'd have a party at the bride's house. They held Christenings and weddings in homes. They started a church in Bogota and we thought that would be a little nearer. When they were building they'd hold mass in the Fire House--Catholic services were in the morning and another service in the afternoon.  I made my first communion in the fire house.  Teaneck started to build up after 1921.We didn't have parades before that here. There were parades in Ridgefield Park.  Mayor Votee was the man who thought we ought to be securing property for parks, because one day we couldn't get those properties. I was the one he named for the Park Commission.  He talked to Ammann. When I was a boy, Old Man Ammann wouldn't let you stand on his place.  He married a girl he got from a mail order place out west.  He didn't want to leave the property to her so he gave it to the town.  I helped planning the parks.  We got property from Phelps people and called it Central Park.  Lots of it had been sold as lots, but the ground was four feet lower than the sewer.  It took a little time condemning it and all.  We called it Central Park.  I served on the 4th of July committee.  We had more people at parades than they have now.  It was fun in those days. You saw all your neighbors. It was an all day affair. Waesche used to get the Coast Guard band to play.  We had a nice day and a nice evening. Then everybody was home.  I've got a lot of memories.  In those days we had non-partisan government.  I was a Democrat but I supported many Republicans.  There was interest in government.  I think we had it for a number of years.  There was Angus Hanniball and Henny Deissler, he became mayor after he was a councilman.  I was active in town. One thing led to another.  It is good to be active. You learn a lot of things, what's going on in town. You take a part in it.  Now I'm active--as you get older, you're interested in different things.  If I wasn't interested in art, I'd still be in politics.  I'm  past president of the Hackensack Art Club.  I'm still engaged in that line.  Where was the band?  The bank we had around here was on Mount Vernon Street in Ridgefield Park. People weren't rich at that time.  You worked hard for a dollar.  They paid off their mortgages and their houses. There were rich people in Teaneck on those big estates. Around the fringes were small houses--south of Fort Lee Road. There was Manhattan Heights.  Selvage built a lot of cement houses there, Near the railroad station it was pretty well built up.  We had a military academy. Roosevelt Military Academy not far from the West Englewood station.  It's still in operation in either Pennsylvania or New York.  The boys used to look like West Point.  Every one took the train.  They worked in New York. It was easier to go to New York then than now.  The ferries went up or down town. The trip was less tiresome. You had your friends.  You walked to the station.  When I was a boy they made movies around '.here. You'd see them making movies any where. The director in his khaki pants and bull horn. There'd be colored people they put grass skirts on around Crystal Lake.  Pearl White got pushed off the cliff (the palisades).  I remember they made World War I movie "Guy Empee". We used to go through those trenches in Fort Lee on a Sunday.  There were "The Perils of Pauline." The studios were big glass houses--looked a lot like greenhouses. They had a big green house in Ridgefield Park. It was very interesting.  You had few roads--the rest were dirt or gravel.  Teaneck Road was paved in the middle--very narrow until they added 10 feet.  If they lead a wide road it was paved in the center.  I remember stores on Cedar Lane--a drug store, dry goods store. That was 1922-23.  There was a store on West Englewood Avenue.  In Ridgefield Park there was a shoo store, a paint store and a general store. They had a horse trough on Main Street for the horses to drink out of.  I remember our neighbors 30 years ago.  My Laiston, his grandmother was a sister of the Kaiser.  Until Hitler came along he got royalties from her holdings. There was Joe Weiss, an old timer who owned a garage.  He lived up there. I remember when there was a path from the Old Plantation (Inwood Manor) to the front door of the school on Oakdone (Longfellow).  It was all apple orchards up here. No houses on Oakdone.  I remember the Larkin girls used to come to school in a pony cart--a straw carts. They lived in that beautiful old house at Teaneck Road and Van Buren where the doctor lives now. I don't know where they are now,  I'll probably forget a lot of things, I have enjoyed life in Teaneck. We had a lot of fun. We had a lot of nice people they knew you as you were.  Thornton Bishop was a great Republican. He wanted to back me for the council.  He know I was a Democrat.  When I was captain of the Auxiliary Police we had to keep the railroad tracks clear for when the President came and when troop trains came down from Camp Shanks up at Orangeburg. They'd come one after another traveling pretty fast. We made sure the tracks were clear. Kids would throw things on the track--park benches. We didn't got much notice. You'd get there as quick as you could. Then after the war when there were muggers we patrolled the streets,  Prior to that I remember World War I and Camp Merritt. On Fort Lee and Teaneck Roads army trucks came down from the West Shore and the Erie in Leonia on their way to Cresskill, where they marched up the hill, I was there the day they dedicated the monument.  General Pershing was there, I was there when they dedicated the World War I memorial at the library.  The Municipal Building was on the other side of School 2, the Town House now. Later they moved it to a side street and the VFW had it. We had a volunteer fire department.  When I was a boy there was a farm house on Hillside Avenue--old Doc. Percival's place. There was a shad where we used to keep the fire hose. We big boys would hook it on to a milk wagon. By the time we got there the house would be pretty well burned out.  We threw everything out of the window so they could save something. We had plenty of water-the pipes were in. Prior to that I guess they used wells.  I remember picking strawberries for half a cent a quart. Willie Fox and the Fox girls, the McCaffrey girls--8 or 9 of us used to pick strawberries for Westervelt.  We'd throw them big berries at each other. Bergen County was the strawberry capital.  Peter Westervelt's farm ran from Teaneck Road at Oak Street to Ridgefield Park.  They used to have apple orchards off Maple Street.  Edna Gaston used to pick berries. Her brothers Milton and Alec were great baseball players.  On Saturday's we'd take a bath in Overpeck Creek.  There was good swimming there.  They trapped muskrats and hunted.  I'm not much at hunting.  I can't kill a chicken.  There were lots of rabbits. I never seen any deer.  There was a whole strip of woods in Glenwood Park.  They tell me there once was big trees there. I think they cut them down for fire wood in the Depression.  On Friday nights we used to see team after team of horses--farmers going to the New York Market. They'd come from New Milford, Bergenfield with their vegetables and fruit from 5 p.m. on.  Just carrying lanterns. There weren't many autos in Teaneck, lots of horses. 
TeaneckTownship;Joseph and Son Paul Zitelli;1889;1975;Joseph & Son Paul Zitelli, 1889, 1975  (Interview taped 7/30/1975) I came to Teaneck in July 1914 from Bergenfield where I had a shoe shop with lots of customers.  I bought seven lots on Lincoln's birthday.  My wife know nothing about it.  Jordan owned all these lots.  I built a little place on West Englewood Ave, 14 by 15. Maybe I was the first merchant on West Englewood Ave. Kube had a little stationery store where the barber shop is now.  He lived on Washington Place. Abe Etten the butcher came after me--1916. Di Bella had a barber shop until it was time to go to war.  We lived first on Shelbourne Places when we came from Bergenfield.  I had gone there in 1908. I wanted to go back to the other side.  My father passed away.  I go crazy. I write to my mother asking does she want to come. Then I write I am going to got married.  I send picture of my wife.  After a month she decided to come and bring the three children.  I make the store bigger ant finish upstairs for house. When Paul was a little baby, 15 days old, he got whooping cough. Then he got mumps. Dr. Pitlkin took care. He charged $2 every time he come from Bergenfield.  I made Dr. Pitkin's mother's shoes. The people on 52nd Street in New York couldn't make shoos right. Dr. Pitkin sent word "I want Joe".   He says you come over here.  She had a closet full of shoos. I say I make the shoes in a week. When I bring them he says "How much?"  I say $100.  The doctor say give Joe $100. You charge what you want,  I charge what I want. We are professional men. I say if you don't want it I take shoes back.  I learn shoemaker trade like going to college. I start when I was 10 while going to regular school. My boss was very particular, knew his trade.  When I was 18 I finished learning.  When I was 21 I went to Catania.  Tony, my old boss, came to see me. My new boss said to him "You are good, but this fellow is better. The first shoos I make for my sister who was born with a club feet.  She went to specialist, had shoe with a big brace. After I make her shoe she did not need a special shoe. I make correction.  I made Mr. Lobeck's shoes for 20 years.  One day he bring in shoes for sales. I say this foot too short--other long. He says I paid a lot of money for my shoes. I said I'll make them for you. He was tickled to death. I made shoes for Mr. Diehl, the councilman and for the Tuttle brothers in Englewood--horseback riders.  Later I sell that shop and started a dry goods and shoe shop where Cutlers is now.  We had a big fire in 1923, no insurance. I sold my shop to build next door.  The doctor says I should stop because I get headaches.  Business was bad in the dry goods shop. I had sold shoe shop for $500.  I bought it back for $2,000. I stayed there till 1942 then I came to the Plaza where Holder was. I didn't want to move but Frank Weber from the bank and Betsch the lawyer said you better move here, a better spot.  Paul was then in the service. I stayed there until 1955.  Doctor said I was working too hard. One night I sleep in the chair, couldn't got upstairs. I say "if any one comes along today I'll give my shop away. I was working, a fellow from Newark came and say "you wanna sell the shop?" I say I think it over, come back in a couple of  hours. I hate to give it up. He came back. I said all right. he says "how much?" I say $8,000. He give me $4,000 cash. That's where the shoe shop is now.  I stayed idle a year and a half.  I go crazy.  There was a store below the drug store on Teaneck Road near Monterrey and library. I say "How much you want?  He say $3,000. I had it six months. Mr.Betach say Joe, you better get your money back. I couldn't got a clear title.  Leland Ferry was my customer. I used to walk from Bergenfield to get his shoes. John Murphy, vice president of Canada Dry, was another customer.  He lived on Rutland and later Winthrop Road. After his wife died he moved back to Rutland. Chief of Police Murphy was a customer. He had a son who limped.  Before I came there was a shoe maker on Forest Avenue, 1912-13. Scaffidi came after him.  Frank Weber was the first cashier at the bank--West -Englewood National.  Paul's account number there is still #165.  Where the bank is now was all a hill.  There were about 1800 people in Teaneck when I came. Clifford Hanks was the station master. Lawson Graffin was the tax collector. He was into everything. Used to collect the taxes on Sunday.  He lived on Bogert Street. Dickerson Road was a farm. Beaumont Avenue was a football play field.  Lou DiBella was born in apartment over my shop. Now he lives on Pennington Rd.  I bought this house in 1942 while Paul was in service. Brown of Brown and Hanselman built it. Lauzens had lived here in the depression, they lost it. Three or four days after I brought it for $8,500, a real estate man asked me if I want to sell. He will give me $3,000 more. DiBella got the house after Lauzen had it. The house was built in 1923.  For recreation--when we were not working seven days a week--my wife and I would go to New York to the opera four or five times a year. Families used to got together at Daria's farm or Limone's farm on Palisade Avenue. Sometimes we would take Henny and Joe Weiss's taxi.  Queen Anne Road was a cow path called Westfield Ave. Charley Curry was the county cop.  Paul Zitelli started at the old wooden school No.2. Attended classes in the old police station until Bryant School was built in 1926 High was built in 1929. He was in first class to graduate after 4 years there--1933. Mrs. Kirby was in charge at School 6. Miss Tepper and Miss West were at School 2. To get to school 6 (Bryant) he would cut through Ackerman's orchard on Teaneck road, come home for lunch and go back. Made the trip 4 times a day to Bryant and High School. No bus.  Joseph: Taxes on this house in 1942 were $195. Today they are $1600. Kids go to school on the bus, we pay.  Paul: Today every town, city, country is in trouble. Police, firemen, teachers all want better pay,  Joseph: In 1905 I work for 50 cent a week.  
TeaneckTownship;Joseph Riehle;1896;1975;Joseph Riehle, 1896, 1975 (Interview taped 7/2/1975) We came to Teaneck in 1926, moving from an apartment in the city.  They were going to have a railroad pass down our street.  If that had happened they would have started at my house.  Mr. Ayers came through and stood they expense of the overpass.  There was a blacktop road here that used to wash out, but the county eventually built the road and we got a good grade.  I worked at McGraw Hill. Commuting was wonderful.  You met all your friends on the train.  The only bad feature was the fog at the ferry. I was with McGraw Hill for 23 years then started my own studio for commercial art, my brother and I.  I took my transportation accounts with me.  The early years in Teaneck were pleasant.  There were five houses on the south side of West Englewood Avenue between here and Sussex Rd.  After the depression I could have bought on Sussex Road, for less than this cost.  Ayers had a fine home on Rutland or Warwick.  We heard of West Englewood through Frances Fairchild, Judge Ferry's niece.  Our neighbors were Dehroff, she was a secretary in town  Frank Wanderer, Fred Nugent and Walter Brawn.  His son Carl is now vice president of his business -- making school bleachers, room dividers, etc. Lowe lived next to Piper, Frank Weber across the street, who was in the piano business in New York. Charles Ries built his string of houses. He had a real estate office.  Poole was another neighbor.  Every one was against them building the fire dept., building at the foot of West Englewood Ave., but they did an excellent job.  It is not annoying.  I had a fire here in my kitchen.  There were no so many thieves as there seem to be today.  No one locked his doors.  Things were normal.  Our daughter had parties and we all had friends.  There was a time when you could travel on the railroad during certain hours at half rate.  Lots of women went to the city.  Now they have all these plazas.  We bought groceries from Klober, Abe Etten was the butcher.  My tax bill today is $1500.  I do my own cooking now that my wife Edith is gone.  Time hangs heavy.  I have a studio upstairs I paint.  I used to play golf at Phelps Manor.  I think they had 10 holes.  My daughter Dorothy went to Whittier School and Teaneck High.  Edith taught therapy at Medical Center and Bellvue.  Were were interested in the Episcopal Church when Rev. Russell was there.  We used to bowl at the Phelps Manor Bowling Alley before Feibel was there on Cedar Lane.  Brett was a bowler, so was Kieffer, an insurance man.  I was in the American Legion for 35 or 40 years but never went to a meeting.  Henry Deissler and Frank Hazzard were commanders.  I was in World War I. 
TeaneckTownship;Judge Leland Ferry;1900;1975;Judge Leland Ferry, 1900, 1975   (Interview taped 11/7/1975) My Family came to Teaneck Nov. 1, 1911 when I was 11 years old.  My parent, Fairchild N. ferry and Clara B. Ferry, moved to a house on the corner of Odgen Avenue and Sussex Road -- It was the 12th house built on the West side of the railroad tracks.  The movers carries the piano a block from West Englewood Avenue because Odgen Road was not built.  It was two months before we had electricity or gas  six months before we had a phone.   I went to a two-room school on River Road near New Bridge Road.  There were four grades in Each room.  At first I walked  later the school board provided a horse and wagon.  The horse was an old nag named Nellie.  I remember one teacher--Miss Secor.  The school had a belfry and a pot bellied stove.  There were about 25 in each room.  Lloyd Schroeder was on of my classmates.  Then there was Rudolph Rekow, Henry Worth whose family had the Worth farm and Marjorie Cole.  The Schroeders were our nearest neighbors.  There was a German family across Sussex Road.  More Houses were built later.  I remember Henry Deissler who served as town clerk.  Later I went to the old house on Teaneck Road that became the Town Hall.  We had no police, just constables.  We had a volunteer fire department.  The eighth grade boys had a little fire house where a jumper was stored.   When there was a fire the boys puller the jumper with its coil of rolled-up hose.  I remember the old fire gong made out of a locomotive tire.  I was always interested in radio.  I had the first set at the age of 8--a glass tube filled with iron fillings.  At about 12 or 13 I built my own radio set.  Jack Whipple of Universal Movies came to my house and took pictures of me with my set.  Those movies were shown all over the world.  Dr. Le DeForrest, inventor of the audio tube, came to see it.  I was getting news broadcasts.  I found that by putting the earphones on a glass bowl I could amplify the sound.  I the the chimes from Big Ben on Westminster Hall in England and on New Year's eve I'd open the window and all the neighbors could hear it.  I made quite a few dollars installing them for my neighbors.  I also used to kill chickens for 10 cents each for people who didn't have the heart to do it.  During World War I, I enlisted in the Signal Corps.  I studied at New York University and after the war I went as a radio operator on an oil tanker.  I traveled around the world then I cam back and went to High School at the age of 21--I lacked two years, I made up the two years in one at Englewood High School.  During that time many changes came to Teaneck.  They built Route 4, Jesson Witham was a policeman, he now lives with his son-in-law and is a client of mine.  The grandmother, Julia Ferry, lived with us.  She was a devoted Episcopalian.  When she died in 1915 the family wanted an Episcopal minister.    They got Reverend James from Englewood.  He started holding services in our living room, I played the violin and mother played the piano.  We went from house to house for Sunday services and I used to push a wheelbarrow containing the hymn books and a prayer stool.  When they built Christ Church at Rutland Avenue and Rugby Road, I was the sexton, earning $5 a month.  There was one grocery store in West Englewood when we came here--McKay's on Palisade Avenue near the station.  Sam Cutler had a drugstore.  Abe Etton had a grocery store on the other side of the tracks.  Benny Manne, the barber, was a very lovable man.  Once I had Pneumonia and he cam to the house to give me a haircut.  I felt like I was dying, but he joked with me and made me feel better.  Jim Dibella was the first barber.  I was married Feb. 12, 1929 to Lois Anne Curtis.  They lived in this house.  We moved to 386 Churchill Road and lived there two years.  Our first child was born there.  Then I brought this house and we had two more children.  I bought the house from her mother.  In 1921 I entered New York University law school, graduating in 1924.  I was clerk in the Teaneck Recorders court for four or five years, then was Teaneck magistrate for three or four years.  Then I was the first assistant prosecutor for two years and was with the Judicial Criminal Court in Hackensack for two years.  I started practice in the Englewood law office of Judge Seiffert.  Then I opened an office on Cedar Lane and was there for 25 years  until I moved my office here at the house.  Tony Manno clerked for me.  One day Benny, his dad, called and told me that Tony was losing interest in law school  his friends mode more money doing other things.  I talked to him, sent him back and passed the bar exam on the first try.  I served on the Teaneck Planning Board, the Patriotic observance Committee, was township attorney and was elected to the Constitution Convention in 1947.  I was voted the most valuable citizen in Teaneck in 1947 by the Joint Citizens Association.  I have been warden of Christ Church. I guess they call me judge from the time I was magistrate--it is a title like Kentucky Colonel.  My mother was co-chairman of the Democratic party.  She sang in the choir of Christ Church, was a charter member and president of the Woman's Club and served on the Planning Board.  My father was on the Board of Education.  He ran for the Assembly a number of times as I did.  When we first came here this was really rural with deer running around.  Even now we see lots of wild life in this place along the river.  It is the only place with underbrush.  We see wild geese and pheasants.  This house is about 140 years old.  It was built by people named Schumaker.  I was appointed magistrate in 1930 when Karl Van Wagner became mayor.  He brought Paul Volcker here as manager.  During the Depression I was in the prosecutor's office.  We were paid in scrip.  I went to Volcker and said let my salary as magistrate hang in suspense, but the town paid it.  In the old days, the Town Hall was on Church Street and Teaneck Road.  The Council met there.  The police were at the back.  There were town cells.  Jack Brinkerhoff was the custodian.  When they caught bootleggers, the evidence often disappeared. he said he didn't have any faith in those locks.  He put on his own locks.  they said Jack's neuritis disappeared after a haul of hooch.  They tell of a policeman who was walking along Teaneck Road when a truck passed.  He held out his hand and the driver gave him $50!  I have lived in Teaneck 64 years and this is where I want to stay. 
TeaneckTownship;Larry Kuusela;1910;1976;Larry Kuusela, 1910, 1976  (Interview taped 3/1976) I have lived in Teaneck since 1914. I have had this agency at 1000 Teaneck Road since 1945--we lived at 430 Hillcrest Avenue. In our area, Main Street, Bogota was the main street. River Road and Cedar Lane as I recall were dirt streets. I recall an old house on Chestnut Street where a farmer lived. He had dairy cows. After 7 o'clock in the evening after milking the cows we would go there and get fresh milk in our pails. Sheffield Farms was there later.  My father was in the building business. He built 2 or 300 homes on Cumberland Avenue, Sussex and Lambert Roads, Salem, Hartwell, Stelton, Warner Place and Cranford Place. He lived in the Bogota section and we swam in the Hackensack River in the early 20s. North of Cedar Lane to the Englewood line was all woods--before Route 4 was built. That was part of the Phelps Estate. There was a sprinkling of homes in the West Englewood Area to the Bergenfield line.  Col. William Phelps owned where Fairleigh Dickinson University is.  He had a homestead on River Road. From River Road to the Hudson River he planted trees--some are now 50-60 feet high. Where the town hall is was a castle--the old Phelps homestead. They had a fire. Now it is the site of the present Town Hall.  There were some well known restaurants in the early 20s. The Blue Bird Inn where Volk's Funeral home is now. Where Fairleigh Dickinson dormitories are was Sigrist's Restaurant, Dick Ackerman's father had a homestead where the phone company is now. He raised sheep. There was a bridal path from Cedar Lane to the present hi6h school athletic field. It went where Red Road in near the school property around town hall.  When I was a boy there was Emerson School #3, Longfellow #2 and Irving #1 and Bryant #4. The main transportation was the Hudson River Trolley to Paterson. The area south of the town was developed when the trolley came. We shopped in Hackensack. For transportation we walked or used a horse and buggy. When the George Washington bridge was built they extended Cedar Lane.  The police department in the early 20s used mostly bikes. The fire department was all volunteer. They had horse shoe rings in different locations. In case of fire you rang the bell and the fire department would arrive. Different rings on the fire alarm bell.  I remember when I resided at 430 Hillcrest, 515 River Road was the Henderson estate. The house was abandoned and it was called the Spook House. My father bought it and tore it down for two apartments. At 772 Stelton St during World War II was an army barracks. That was the highest elevation in town-- at Stelton and Lindbergh Blvd. Boys were there from all over the country. When there was an air raid warning called by, sirens wardens knocked on doors and told you to put your light out if it was on.  I've seen the population grow from 3,000 to 46,000. I attended Emerson School from grades 1 to 8, then Teaneck High.  The Principal at Emerson was Mrs. Mary Bernhard. My teachers were  Miss Riggles and Miss Bigby.  When my daughter went to Washington Irving School they taught her.  When we went there to visit Miss Riggles said, "Don't tell the children I taught at Emerson." The Principal at Teaneck High was Leon High, the  Charlie Steel. When I graduated, my teachers included Mary Galvin for English, Mrs. Duffy for Latin, Vernon Dolph was the coach.  They built Teaneck High in 1927.  I think it opened in 1928.  Most of the students attended Leonia or Hackensack High before that.  Most of our shopping for food and clothes was done in Hackensack. There was the Phelps Manor Country Club east of Teaneck Road between Route 4 and Cedar Lane. I think the mayor at the time they changed to the Council-Manager form was Lacey Walker. I think the library was where it is now but it was a wooden building.  The only newspaper was the Bergen Evening Record -- now The Record.  When the George Washington Bridge was built there was a parade from the bridge to Hackensack.  July 4 and Memorial Days there were parades during 20s and 30s.  There were two banks -- the People's Trust and the West Englewood National, now the National Community Bank on State Street at the Plaza.  Civic Clubs? Well, the Kiwanis, Rotary and Lions clubs were formed in the latter 20s.The Rotary met first where the present Carriage Club is, then Sigrid's, then the Casa Mana and now the Innwood Manor.  Holy Name Hospital was built in the late 20s -- 1926 or 27. I was born at 518 Hooper (cooper?) St. In the early 20s, coal was the main energy.  Heat was furnished by coal. Some homes in Glenwood Park had out houses. I remember that. Was Teaneck mostly farms? I'd say about 25 percent. Many times we hiked to the George Washington Bridge. As a Boy Scout we hiked to Point Lookout where the Englewood Golf Club is and camped there overnight. The scoutmaster was Rev. Sauter. Then there was Arthur Storms, Stromberg and Eddie Hasse. Churches? I Just recall the Community Church built in the 20s. Rev. Turnbach was the only pastor I recall. 
TeaneckTownship;Lillian Stevenson Pinkham, Milton Pinkham, Agnes Stevenson Reilley and Charles Montgomery;1908;1975;Lillian Stevenson Pinkham, Milton Pinkham, Agnes Stevenson Reilley & Charles Montgomery , 1908, 1975   (Interview taped 5/7/1975) Lillian and Agnes Stevenson were daughters of James Stevenson who had 16 children. Their grandfather, Robert Stevenson, was a Scotsman who had a farm extending from Teaneck Road to the Phelps property to the east (later the golf course). Route 4 was then a dirt road called Stevenson Lane. Robert Stevenson was elected to the Township Committee, taking office Jan. 2, 1911 when James E. Pearce was chairman. Also elected were Christian Benson, George V. Demarest and Davit Beck.  Charles Montgomery was brought to Teaneck in 1908 when he was 20 days old. The family came by train to Englewood, were met by a horse and buggy "taxi" and taken to their new home on Cooper Ave. His father was a horse man employed by Fiss, Doerr & Carrell on Queen Anne Rd. and Cedar Lane. They trained horses for fancy riding and for carriages. During World War I they shipped horses for use in France (1915-16). They were put in corrals around the Teaneck Railroad station and along Palisade Avenue.  James Stevenson at one time had a farm of 23 acres in the area of Teaneck Rd. and Grayson Place where they lived. He was later with the N. Y. Telephone Co. and also in real estate. Their house had large, high ceiling rooms.  Mr. Montgomery and the Stevenson girls all went to the present School 2. The first grade teacher was Miss Hazel K. Judd. Mrs. Marah was principal and Mr. Jay the superintendent. Miss Edith Tepper came later.  As a baby Montgomery worked on farm, picking beans, tomatoes, corns. Later, when Charles Clausen had a fat factory, he worked with his father on a fat route, visiting butcher shops and picking up fat and hides. Butchers bought meat with hide on. Montgomery's father got him a knife and the boy learned to skin the animals. Clausen took the hides.  Montgomerys went to St. Anastania Church. Used to got up early on Sunday mornings, make a fire in the hot air furnace, pump out the cellar and than go over to DeGraw Ave. in horse and buggy and pick up the priest--Father Peter.  The girls' aunt, Agnes Stevenson Campbell, made a trip to the holy land and brought back water from Jerusalem which was used to Christen some of the children.  Transportation? You walked, rode a horse, took a trolley or rode a bike if you were lucky.  R. T. Davis had the first bus line to New York. A Kilmurray was one of the first drivers. There were wooden sidewalks you walked on going to the train.  If you slipped off the walk, you went down in the mud. You caught the trolley either on Dean Street or DeGraw Ave. and you could go to Leonia, Paterson or Tenafly as well as to the ferry.  A Mr. Barnes was the ticket agent at the Teaneck Railroad Station. There were three houses in the area on Palisade Ave. (Then Heasley) where Jimmy Limone's place is. Barnes lived in one, Montgomerys in another and Grimm, the railroad a crossing guard, in the third.  For entertainment there was swimming in Hackensack River or Teaneck Creek for the boys. Also ball games at Borden's Field in the Longfellow--Beaumont Ave. area. Mi1ton Pinkham, who was with the Teaneck Post Office from 1937-73, played semi-pro baseball and was a member of the Red Devils. The Kilmurrays were wheels on the Red Devil team.  There were band concerts. They had a band stand on what is new Windsor Road where the West Englewood fire house is. Hercules LeVoque used to play in the band. There were church, school and family picnics.  Agnes Stevenson Reilly remembers going to her grandfathers farm when they were haying. While they men were putting the hay in the left, she and her cousin Joan decided to take a ride on the hay wagon. They stopped by the house and picked up the cook named Susan. She sat on the back, legs dangling. They drove the hay wagon down Cedar Lane and along came an automobile. The horse shied, the cook screamed "Jesus, Mary and Joseph! We're all going to got killed." Grandpa Stevenson, a stern Scotsman gave the girls a good scolding.  Joe and Henry Weiss had the first taxi service. They'd meet the trains and people would pile in. They lived on Congress Ave. His son had a gas station on Teaneck Rd.  As for police protection, things were so quiet in Teaneck you could blow a whistle and the sound would carry so far, you'd got help. You might be dead when they get there but you'd blown the whistle. Joe Weiss Sr. was a constable.  Adam Ewald was a judge.  Among the cops were Bublitz, Witham Murphy and Luthrans.    The first fire house was in a barn on Fairview Avenue -- they moved it from Englewood. Kinloch V. Ridley was the first fire chief.  Montgomery joined the volunteer Fire Dept. in 1938 and the paid Dept in 1941 ($1500 a year), retired as lieutenant in charge of Fire Prevention. In his early days every fire was a TL--total loss.  They had two-wheel cars for hose wagons.  Some pulled it in front and others went behind to straighten the hose.  The fire alarm was hanging an old locomotive steel tire with a hammer.    Bucky (William) Brahmin had the first RFD route.  He used to drive a two-seated Democrat when he delivered mail out of Englewood.  Ernie and Bill Haupt delivered papers.  They rode a horse.    Shopping?  Mrs. Lowry had a candy store on Tuxedo Square.  Sitzmans had a grocery on Forest Ave.  Boni's Dairy was between Queen Anne and Grange Road. The first gin mill in Teaneck was at Congress and Prospect Avenue.  Libonati ran it before prohibition.  William F. Brahms used to make beer in Teaneck.  Later he dealt in coal, wood and ice around Cooper Ave.    The Library was a little building on the east side of Teaneck Road where a gas station is now.  Mrs. Hawkey, Mrs. Sample and Mrs. Campbell, the Stevenson's aunts, were all active in the Library.   
TeaneckTownship;Louis DiBella;xxxx;1975;Louis DiBella, xxxx, 1975 (Interview taped 8/8/1975) My father was James Dibella who came here around 1918 -- probably before that because he opened a barber shop and later when into the service.  Perhaps he was the first barber in Teaneck.  He sold the barber business to Mr. Manne.  After World War I he started a second business -- food, grain, kindling and wood.  A year or later he got into the coal business.  It was called the West Englewood Coal and Supply Company on Palisade Avenue near the present business at 1475 Palisade Avenue.  His was the first business one or two block south -- between the West Englewood station and the water tower.  Palisade Avenue then was called Station Street.  I was born in Englewood Hospital.  At first we lived in an apartment above Cutler's Pharmacy.  When I was about 4 we moved to Amsterdam Ave.  In 1929 we moved to 1266 Pennington Road where my father still lives.  I remember playing with the Klober Brothers, Lenny and Bill.  I remember Pearl Etton and her sister Dorothy.  I remember when many new stores were built on the south side of West Englewood Avenue.  There were serious water Problems -- Probably caused by a high water table.  The builders had a problem.  In the mid thirties my father was involved in building some of the newer stores.  The area north east of West Englewood Avenue was all fields which belonged to Mr. Ackerman.  They were entirely country with paths between pear and peach trees where 100 State Street is now.  In the center of the woods was a delightful spring.  That was where the G. E. Building is now in that industrial section.  I went to School 2 for a couple of years, then to Bryant, then to Whittier School.   I went to Junior High at the High School and graduated from St. Cecilia's in Englewood.  My dad took me to school and I got a bus home.  I remember Miss Hill, Mr. Morse and Mr. Salerne who taught French at Teaneck High.  My dad was a hard workery industrious. He was up at dawn.  In 1924-1925, he had a coal pocket constructed on the property at 1475 Palisade Ave.  We handled different size coal -- rice, pea, buck wheat, stove or egg.  The purpose of the coal pocket was to unload the cars from the railroad and segregate above ground so that the wagon underground could be loaded by gravity. At first our wagons were horse drawn.  I remember one Sunday morning the structure collapsed -- the ground gave way probably because it was wet.  The coal trucks beneath were destroyed.  It was a great financial loss to my father.  To his credit, he was not totally discouraged, but took steps to have a new building put up.  It took a long time to pay it off, but he had a real business drive.  We had a stable for the horses.  It is still there -- behind some evergreen in the northeast corner of the property near Queen Anne Rd. near Bryant School.  It is now used for storage.  We used horses in 1920-25.  There was a blacksmith on New Bridge Rd. near River Road.  I remember watching him shoe the horses.  During the Depression in the mid thirties man had a camp near the railroad.  They were hoboes who moved from place to place.  Their camp was in a clearing in the woods opposite where Benjamin Franklin Jr. High School is.  One day a man knocked on our backdoor.  I was about 12.  My mother wasn't home.  He asked for something to eat and I supplied him with everything.  Mother was surprised when she came home and found a tramp there, but it worked out all right.  We did see gypsies traveling through in those days.   From time to time some one would be injured or killed a the railroad crossing in West Englewood.  People would go across the gates.  Telley family lost a daughter killed by a train.  In the 20s and 30s life of the people of Teaneck revolved around the railroad.  Most people went to the city and the town depended completely on the railroad.  It's a nostalgia thing to me.  Between 7 and 9 a.m. every one in town gathered on the platform -- a mass exodus.  They came home en masse in the evening.   Lot of activity centered around railroad.  I remember seeing trains marked Ontario and Western racing through.  That was my link with far away places.  Big locomotives pulled long lines of cars.  They'd stop to take on water at West Englewood and that was my opportunity to look over the engines and talk to the engineer.  I remember your father, Mr. Manne.  When I was 5 or 6 my father took me to his shop, a friendly, congenial person. My mother and Mrs. Manne were close friends.  When I went Whittier School, some of us kids went to the Von Steuben House, that was before the Historical Society took it over.  We went through a cellar window and found some old flags in the attic.
TeaneckTownship;Lt. George Botyos, Teaneck Detective Bureau;1916;1975;Lt. George Botyos, Teaneck Detective Bureau, 1916, 1975  (Interview taped 8/1/1975) I came to Teaneck from Staplaten, Staten Island in 1922 when I was 8 or 9. I entered third grade at Longfellow School. There was a fire in the school shortly after I came and we went to school at the Morning Side Fire Station. One teacher I remember was Miss Eleanor Kennedy, the music teacher who married Hans Christian Madison.  I went to Leonia High school at first and then to Teaneck High. I was a mid-year student so I did not graduate with the first graduating class at Teaneck High in 1931, but graduated in Feb.,1932. My parents came here because they wanted country living. We lived at 531 Spring Street. My parents still live there.  I was interested in all sports. My friends were Tony Manne, Tommy Costa and the other follows interested in sports.  In the yearbook they predicted that I would be an undertaker.  They also said I was a cut-up and the best dancer in the class.  It was hard to get a job during the depression, I joined the police force June 15, 1936. There were 125 applicants for three jobs. I went in with Ellie Norten, now retired, and Bob Fitzpatrick, now chief.  I started as a patrolman on the uniformed force. That lasted 10 years. Then I made sergeant and then lieutenant. Before we had the Youth Bureau I did all the youth work and general investigation. When the Youth Bureau was organized there were three detectives. Now there are five plus the lieutenant. We should have 10 detectives. There is a regulation that there should be so many police to so much population. We are short four people now. When the economy gets worse, crime gets worse. There was not as much crime 20 years age as there is now because there weren't so many people.  Is the police department upgraded because so many men go back to school? Yes. All our detectives have their degrees. After four years of study, they go to seminars and take courses. Rutgers, Rockland, Ramapo and Paterson colleges all teach courses in law enforcement. Psychology were in all categories of police work--accidents, family trouble and so forth. It used to be if you were big and strong, that was all you needed to be a cop. Not today. You need education. The study of law helps in court situations.  Criminals today are well educated, we have to keep ahead of them. I've attended many seminars. All kinds of lectures are available. You can go to all kinds of seminars, but experience is important. I'd like you to meet one of our new men--John S. Terhune.  He got his bachelor's degree from Rutgers ant his master's in criminal justice from CCNY. We've got at least six men on the force who have bachelor's degrees and about 25 with associate degrees. Rutgers has an excellent department of criminology.  Harte was chief when I came. There were foot patrolmen in three areas-- the West Englewood Plaza section, Cetar Lane and the Fort Lee Road area to the south. You can accomplish much more with our motor radio system.  Years ago we did not have the equipment. We had cars without radios. We used call boxes and sirens. Today you are as close to help as you are to a telephone,  Yes, I feel we have an excellent department--fine personnel. We use women as dispatchers, record keepers and switchboard. It is a big help because of all the paper work. Sometimes it takes 7 or 8 hours to make out reports on a case that might have taken an hour.  Karl Van Wagner was the first mayor I remember. When I came here there were tramps along the railroad.  Their shacks or camps along the railroad were common, especially during warm weather. They migrated in winter. They didn't give us much trouble, many times there wore drinking problems.  One case I remember was that of Lee Link. It was the case of the state police. Nelson Stamler was the special prosecutor. They got a search warrant for Link's home. He had been operating a gambling ring throughout the state. They found $125,000 in the wall paneling of his recreation room. I had the unpleasant job of counting the money. It was all musty when it was confiscated.  The Redwood murder happened during my first year on the force. He headed the sand hog union . I was assigned to guard duty at his home on W. Laurelton Parkway. It was under 24 hour watch. I was on for 8 hours at a time. The prosecutor's office had responsibility for investigation.  Lt. Ted Morgan was assigned to the prosecutor's office for over a year. I was in uniform at the time, not a detective, I know they spent a lot of time in Now York. The case got a lot of publicity, Mrs. Redwood lived in Teaneck--in an apartment over Cancre's tavern, until recently.  Among the men I worked with besides Morgan were Huber, Crooquist, Muhlhahn. Chief Harte, Jack Mulligan, Jerry Pepole, Ferrara whose son is now in the force, Franke and many others.  There was plenty to do in Teaneck when we were kids. We skated and coasted around Fycko Lane. The Letter farm ran north of Fycke Lane and George Street to Hawthorne school. It ran next to Lewis's Farm The Letters were our nearest neighbors. Mike Letter was my friend. I remember we used to steal tomatoes from Lewis' farm which extended to where Volk's is now. The Blue Bird Inn was there and it was quite a place to go.  My brother became Deputy Fire Chief. He died a few years age. My daughter Georgene had a Ph. D. in chemistry. She is married to Dudley Hirschbach, a professor at Harvard. They are just returning from Europe where he has been on a lecture tour. My daughter Roberta has five girls and lived in Pompton. My son Clifford lives in Florida. He started out in education, but is now an FBI agent. They have three boys.  Where we lived was all dirt roads in the early days. When we'd go shopping in Hackensack at the time of the spring we'd put skid-chains on  the car and take them off when we got to Teaneck Road. Willow Lane was a dirt road. We'd take that or Fycke Lane and turn off at Spring St. The area was known as Springside -- furthur east was Glenwood Park. There was a trolley stop at Spring Street. My father took the ferry to N.Y. He was in the dairy business. The trolley service was good except in the early morning. We used to hitch rides on the trolley and go to Paterson. We annoyed the motorman. In summer they had these open cars, I remember once I was swimming in the creek and my father was coming home on the trolley. He saw me. I saw him coming down the road and get my clothes on fast. I guess the water was  polluted but I wasn't worried.  I know Jack McBride and his brother Lester, We used to play ball where the A & P was on DeGraw Ave. and Queen Anne Rd.--Tony Manne, Tommy Costa and a bunch of us. Life styles are different now--we made our own good times.  Youth activity is different, now they go off the deep end -- drug problems and all.
TeaneckTownship;Martial Kilmurray;1911;1976;Martial Kilmurray, 1911, 1976  (Interview taped 8/17/1976) I was born July 10, 1911 in a house on Tuxedo Square a few blocks from here. I was the 12th child, seventh son. My parents were both born in Ireland, my mother in Galway and my father in West Meath. My father was a carpenter. He built this house at 52 Prospect Terrace in 1915. He died in 1916. I went to School 2, now Washington Irving. Lucy Marsh was the principal. Katherine Keener was my eighth grade teacher. I went to St. Cecilia High School. We shopped at local stores. There used to be a First National Store on Teaneck Road. It's gone now. Friedman was the local butcher. Ballestrini's had a store on Forest Avenue. Julia is still around.  I went to work for the Department of Public Works in 1930 for $50 a month. We worked 48 hours in a six-day week,, no over time. We had about half as many streets as there are today. Most of them were paper streets. Now they are putting in streets off Englewood Avenue and they are finding curbs and sidewalks that were put in years ago. The streets were marked off.  I got a good education. I went to St. Cecilia High and to Stevens Tach. After Paul Volcker left as town manager, he was a professor at Stevens. I took a course under him.  The town was debt ridden when Volcker came in. He didn't out salaries but we got paid in scrip.  I was 33 when I became superintendent of the Department of Public Works.  I had 17 men under me. We'd hire high school and college boys in the summer at 50 cents an hour. There are about 80 or 90 employees in the DPW today and they have a lot more equipment than we had. We looked after streets, parks, sewers and trees. When I retired they partitioned my job into three categories. Warren Ridley is head of the department now.   How about snow removal? It used to be cleaned up quicker than it is now and without the Equipment they have. I had verbal contracts with six or eight carters and their word was better than their bond. It snowed no more than 2 inches before we'd go out. I would call Teterboro--that was before they had the Port Authority System--and we got a better report. It helps too to look out the window. We'd do the main thoroughfares first.  The 1947 snow storm was my baptism. Twenty six inches. Mr. Volcker, my boss, was at a meeting out of town. I couldn't get in touch with him. I called the superintendent of equipment for George Brewster -- I took it on myself because our equipment couldn't handle it. He gave me all the equipment he could and Teaneck was the only town cleaned up after that snow, I didn't get home for three days. I'd see that the family had bread, milk, etc.  Teaneck is blessed with trees but the leaves fall every year. You know they re coming. You don't got a heavy snow fall once in years. We'd cart the leaves to Pomander Walk, Churchill Road and Windsor Rd. There's good mulch there.  We supervised the garbage collection. The pick-ups twice a year which have been discontinued is a matter for PERC -- Public Employees Relations Council. The pick-ups were in their contract before. Residents pay $3.75 or so a month for garbage collection -- it will be $6 or $8 when they get their new contract.  New streets are the project of the Engineering Department. DPW is in charge of resurfacing. There are about 110 miles of streets in Teaneck. The last hurricane before Belle in '76 was in 1961, the year I retired. The 1951 hurricane was a bad one. It happened about the time Jim Brett was married for the second time.  Jim Welsh was manager then. He came in 1948, two years before Volcker left. He had been mayor of Steubenville, Ohio. Paul Volcker introduced me to Jim. It didn't take him long to handle things. He know the ropes because he had had experience. If it wasn't for Welsh, the DPW, Police and Fire departments would still be working for peanuts. He raised salaries when he became manager. In the next budget every one's salary was raised. He was a working man's man. He was well liked. I hear he is dead. He left when Hanniball became mayor.  Karl Van Wagoner was mayor when I started. I worked under him, Votee, Bratt, Deissler, Hanniball and Feldman.  Mrs. Kilmurray:  I lived in Teaneck in 1930 and in 1932 when I got married. I moved back. We have 7 children. Our son Frank is with DPW. Dick is a police officer, our son-in-law Nick Bock is a police officer and our nephew is a police lieutenant in the juvenile department. We have 11 grandchildren. Christmas is a great time when they are all here. Our son Thomas is a commander in the Naby stationed at Norfolk.  Mr. Kilmurrary:  I have a sister who is mother superior at Holy Name Hospital Convent--Sister DiPazzi. She and sister Canice went through probationary period together in 1928. There are just about 5 or 6 nuns now at Holy Name. On our 25th anniversary she came. It was the first time she had been in a public place in 25 years and she was with another nun.   I have no desire to go to Ireland. My mother was 13 and my father 15 when they landed in New York. I have no ties in Ireland. I have a cousin over there some where. I don't know her married name. My ties are here.  My father was a house carpenter for Segal & Cooper in New York. He used to walk from the house on Tuxedo Square, down Forest Avenue to Dean street to get the trolley in Englewood. It took him 2 hours a day. He worked 6 days a week 10 hours a day. He'd come trudging up Forest Avenue. He came out here in 1898.  I want to put in a pitch for polio. I have had it since I was 13 months old. I'm 65 now. I don't know how I got it. They have the shots now. Now they've got the Swine Flu shots. I don't think I'll take them. I remember the little St. Anastasia Church. I remember John Sullivan. He was poolmaster. He took a lot of pictures. Our pictures and phonograph records were all lost when our house burned in 1426--we had Caruso, McCormick records.  We had a cow. They tell the story that they brought the calf in from the field the day I was born--the wind blow the door open. There were open fields all around--where Route 4 is. Every one had chickens and cows. We had no pigs--just children. It was my job every Saturday to wring the neck of a chicken.  Lots of people had horses.  I didn't know any of the Phelps family. I remember DeRonde had horses. He was on Teaneck Road south of Route 4. Then there were the Kellys and the Selvages -- Mrs. Kelly gave St. Anastasia church. The streets in that area were named for their family and friends--like the O'Hares.  We didn't know we were poor. People were good and kind. If some one was sick a neighbor came in with soup, a cake or a pie. Being neighborly seems to be a lost art. If you try to be neighborly now, they think you're being nosey. People move in and move out and you never know them.  
TeaneckTownship;Max A. Hasse, Jr.;1915;1976;Max A. Hasse, Jr., 1915, 1976   (Interview taped 3/1976) I was born at 627 Front St. on Sept. 13, 1915. I had a very happy childhood. We didn't have any money or any affluence. Just good family communication. My family came here in 1909 with my older brother -Eddie and my sister Charlotte.  They moved into a house my father had started to build from rubble. He thought he ought to raise his children in a better environment. A friend had told him of a place in Teaneck near the railroad. He came out and looked at the lot and there was nothing there but a couple of 2 by 4s where some one else had started to build. He carried most of the wood to build his house from New York on the train. He couldn't go in the coaches with his lumber, so he stood between the cars. The wood was from packing cases shipped from all over the world.  I remember lying in bed as a boy and looking at the ceiling and reading the addresses of places where all the wood came from -- Europe, England, Germany. The house he completed had no central heating. We used coal salvaged from the railroad. A plus was the railroad ties we cut up every Sunday morning. The kitchen had a coal stove, it was the only place heated. We carried water from a cold water tap to the cast iron sink in the kitchen. We had an out house. It was interesting to walk out there on a cold night. At night we used to cut up newspapers and run strings through them for the out house. There was no water in the house. At the top of the street there was a single cold water faucet where the water was cut off. It came from the wells of the Bogota Water Company. We got water by the pail full.  I remember we had a mortgage. That lot must have cost $1100 or $1200. I know well, because in later life I finished paying it off. We had a great family life. My father was an engineer. He came from Germany. He was in the hardware business and he was a locksmith.  I remember when Cedar Lane was a single road, just about a cow path. There were farmhouses from Elm Avenue over to River Road, I went to Emerson School. It hasn't changed much, from outside appearances. I  remember some of my teachers. Mrs. Brainerd was the principal. Mrs. Quackenbush was real rough as all teachers went. Mrs. Brainard used to rap me on the head with a ruler. One teacher I remember was Mrs. Rouse. I was in the sixth grade and just beginning to notice certain things. She was just about the prettiest woman I had seen. Later she taught my children in Bryant school. I went to Teaneck High School and graduated in 1933. I recall Gerry Galanti, now head of Fairleigh Dickinson's Branch in England. Dr. Charles Littel was the principal. He founded Bergen Junior College on River Street in Hackensack. Then he moved it to Teaneck and it later became the Teaneck Campus of Fairleigh Dickinson.  I was born at home. There were not that many hospitals then. When I was about to happen, mother told my father he'd have to get the doctor. He ran to Bogota--we had no car and no telephone. Dr. Edwards handled half the people in our section--and the live stock, too. He was a real family doctor. His specialty was people.  Kids I recall--there was Morrison and Frank Iorio. We used to play ball with kids from Larch and Elm Avenues and River Road. There weren't that many people around. The West Shore was our main transportation. It didn't stop in Teaneck but West Englewood. It would slow up to let my father off. The old trolley ran to 125th Street. There was no bridge over the tracks at Cedar Lane. There were no stores. The first building on the North side of Cedar lane was where a health food store is now. On the south side was a drug store--Holsteiner's Pharmacy where I worked.  I mopped floors at first and when I got a bike I made deliveries. I made my bike out of old parts. Believe it or not I turned that bike over to my own kids later. It stood up. When I was 18 or 19 I used to ride it to Greenwood Lake and back on Tuesdays, my day off.  I joined the Boy Scouts in 1927 at the Smith Community Church. I was 12 in 1927 but I had been reading the Boy Scout manual for several months waiting until I was 12. Arthur Storms a real estate man was the scoutmaster and there was Stromberg . I used to go to his house to pass tests and he was always reading the army manual, He was a colonel in the National Guard.  1927 was the first year they had Nobebosco. I couldn't afford to go to camp, but there was a thing going in Ridgefield Park and the one who sold the most tickets got a free week at camp. It cost $7. But I didn't have a uniform. The troop committed had the idea that the one who passed the most tests would get a uniform. I got the uniform and the week at camp for free, thanks to the committee. Troop 94 met at the Community Church where my mother was a charter member.  To add to my Scout equipment, the Sunday School teacher Miss Near gave a prize for Perfect attendance. That was about the hardest thing I had to do. Usually they gave a Bible, but she found out what you wanted and I'd get a new piece of equipment each time. I felt badly leaving her class after a couple of years. When the church started I went to Sunday School in the Kenwood Fire house on the second floor. I recall the ground breaking for the church. It was the Smith Community Church, part of a church in Bogota.  My mother had a green thumb. She planted things we could use. Instead of barberry she'd plant currants, gooseberries or cherry trees. Our desserts came from these. Blackberries. Where the tennis club is now were fields of strawberries. We made elderberry wine. We used everything. As for meat, on Saturday nights my father brought home two or three bags from a German pork butcher in New York. He'd go to the Five and Ten and bring home candy. The kids in the neighborhood would be waiting and he'd give every one pieces of caddy. That was our allotment for the week. My mother knitted, but she didn't sew much. She made quilts filled with down. We raised geese, chickens and I raised a lot of turkeys. Fences were virtually unheard of. We were happy with what we had.   I'm still associated with scouting after 45 years.  I'm an Eagle Scout like my sons. I'm also a Silver Beaver, one of the finest awards of all. It is given for service to boyhood. I'm proud of that. I was assistant scout master at 18 or 19. Russell Richter who has passed away was the Scoutmaster. The troop was sponsored by the Teaneck Men's Club. Later I was scoutmaster in another town and of Troop 93 in Teaneck, one of the biggest troops in the country--just under 100.  We met in the Presbyterian Church. When we got too big for their hall, we went to Washington Irving School and still had two companies. We had a fine lot of young people. We built a swimming pool and while I know nothing about music, we had one of the finest drum and bugle corps around.  I had just moved into the house on Amsterdam Avenue when a man named Lee and Harold Tallman knocked on my door. This fellow Lee said they only wanted a little help with the scout troop, I said I'd go over Friday night. When I got there I saw a pile of  kids with no uniforms, no organization. I said this isn't for me. We had closing ceremonies. Next week the scoutmaster didn't show up. That was it. I took over--for the next 20 years. We had a couple of junior leaders who today are raising scouts of their own. I built it up to one of the beat operating troops in the county. The National Boy Scouts came to see us. We turned out some wonderful kids--we taught life saving, swimming, first aid. We had 25 on the committee -- men were anxious to got on the committee.  We had a great camping unit. We moved like the army. There was great spirit and cooperation among the kids. They were proud of Troop 93. This town has a Guidance Council and a Youth Bureau. Hundreds of parents came to us for help with problems at home. I think we did some good. It's nice to see what has happened, some of them are first grade engineers, professors and in other fields. They like the sons I raised to be. Eagle Scouts have thanked me for what I have done for them. It wasn't me, it was the whole outfit.  The kids helped build a swimming pool. I enjoyed every minute of it. Louise enjoyed it as much as I did. The swimming pool was a story in itself. I said if you kids want a pool we will all work together, I got a prices on digging a 30 by 18 pool, 7 ft deep. The contractor said $85. He dug the hole. When I came home I sound these mounds of dirt. He told me he didn't say he'd take the dirt away. But he had a problem. There was a big boulder in the middle of the pool. It would cost him to get it out. I said if I get ride of the boulder, you get the dirt out for a total of $75. That evening there were kids all over the place and the neighbors were wondering what we were doing. The boulder was at the deep end of the pool. We dug a big hole in the shallow end. Then I brought chains, hitched them around the boulder and to the truck--gave a big jerk and the boulder fell into the hole. The contractor never knew where the boulder went.  We made our own concrete mixer with a 15-gallon drum, a couple of roller skates and a gear reducer. The floor was concrete and the sides cinder blocks. That pool is 18-20 years old now. We used a filter we got from an old dry cleaning plant. The kids learned plumbing, pipe fitting, concrete mixing, etc. Later I wanted to put a cover over a patio section. The price was $700 or $800. We took old pipe and made a roof of corrugated aluminum. They used to work on power lifting in our barn. This started when they were wrestling and playing football at Teaneck High. Now some of those young men are leaders in the Jersey State Power Lifters Assoc. This started when Dick Rodda said some kids were interested. They set up bar bells in my barn where the Fine Arts Committee used to practice their plays.  Every Memorial Day and 4th of July we took part in the town program. We had a float with a theme like brotherhood Through Scouting. We get a flag and a uniform from different countries--40 nations in all. Then we found youngsters to fit the size of the uniforms. We had the statue of Liberty and a flag on the float. After we sent back the uniforms I wound up with one from a country that had gone Communist, I had it until 3 months ago.  We had a water safety float with a pool where we demonstrated artificial respiration, rescue and first aid. We had a camp float. For the life saving float we wrote to the Lifesaver people and got Lifesavers which we divided up and wrapped in little packages to through to kids watching the parade. We had animals on the camp float and demonstrated lashing.  Every time we finished our Teaneck Parade we would hurry down to Ridgefield Park and enter their parade where we always got first prize as we did in Teaneck.  When did I get into politics? I was asked to serve on the committee on Parks and Recreation. I served four years, then they asked me to serve on the Board of Adjustment. I preferred Parks and Recreation, but it seems every one wanted to be on the Board of Adjustment. When I finished with the Parks and Recreation Board I went to the Board of Adjustment. I was there 4 years.
TeaneckTownship;Miss Jane Sullivan;1923;1970;Miss Jane Sullivan, 1923, 1970  (Interview taped 10/19/1970) My family came here in 1902 from Hoboken. They had two children when they came and ended up with six. My father John Sullivans was a photographer. Took many of the pictures being seen now. Our home at 15 Fairview Ave. is the background for many.  I went to School 29, a wooden building. We had two teachers, Mr. Jay and Miss Morris--four grades downstairs and four grades upstairs. When they built the school that is now the Town House they moved the old school over toward Church Street and that became the Municipal Bldg.  We went to the Catholic church in Englewood and I walked to Englewood to high school. I remember the original St. Anastasia Church. It was small. Donated by Mrs. Kelly. The sacred vessels were kept in our house.  There was no water in the church so my father would take a pitcher of holy water over to the church--hoping in the winter that it wouldn't freeze.  My father was active in the fire department. I remember the hose wagon and ringing the gong which was the fire alarm. When they got their first La France fire engine and there was a fire my father would say to my mother "Heat some water, Ann, so we can start up the engine. The old fire house was across from the one where Lobbe and Flannery used to be. George Ahrens remembers I went to school with him and Oscar Peinecke. My sister, Mrs. Dale, teaches kindergarten.  My sister Marie is a housemother at Fairleigh Dickinson University. Mrs. Dale's daughter teaches at Lowell School.  We move to Cherry Lane in 1926. It was a red dirt road with big trees in the center. My father tried to save the trees when they made the street. It really a tow path for Phelps to the railroad station.  We used to take our visitors to see the Phelps ruins. The golf course was pretty and I remember the Blue Bird Inn. We had quite a few socials at our church. We knew the Selvage family. Mrs. Kelly, Mrs. Selvage's mother was blind. I remember Selvage Ave. when it was a daisy field. Father Peter used to come over from Englewood and we'd have our catechism in the daisy field. During World War I we tried to do things for soldiers,  meeting in the schools. Our No. 2 school graduation was held in School 1. I graduated from Englewood High in 1915.  When I went to Montclair I went from the West Englewood Station to Bogota, took the trolley from Bogota to Paterson and then the bus from Paterson to Montclair. I only did this on weekends. I'd got up early Monday morning with my father. He'd carry my valise and then came that awful ride. I was sick every Monday and Friday.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Alma (Roscoe) Williford;1910;1970;Mrs. Alma (Roscoe) Williford, 1910, 1970  (Interview taped 10/19/1970) I came to Teaneck on Sept. 24, 1930 -- Just a little over 40 years ago. I came from Anderson, S. C. and have always lived in the same house. My husband's mother owned it.  She had lived there three years when we came.  Her children--she had 13 and raised 10-- included Eliza Stover, Geneva Wilson.  There are only three houses in our neighborhood that were not there when we came. The Rev. Ed Pearson's son built a nice house on Lorraine at Rosemont. Mr. and Mrs. Powell had a large house on Forest Ave and built a new one for themselves. The Rev. J. M. Wilson and Wilbur Morman had nice gardens, grew vegetables and flowers.  My sons, Roscoe Jr. and James, went to Washington Irving school and then to Junior high school in the high school building,, They finished Teaneck high, Roscoe went to Fairleigh Dickinson in Rutherford, James Henry attended Bergen Junior College after working a year. When it merged with F.D.U. near the end of his first semester.  He was drafted near the end of his senior year and served in Germany.  Today Roscoe has a dump track business and hauls sand and gravel.  James is with the Progressive Life Insurance Co. He belonged to Boy Scout Troop 93.  I took a practical nursing course in 1948. 1 worked first at Barnert Hospital in Paterson--five years. Then five years at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood and then 10 years at Holy Name Hospital in the nursery. In the other hospitals I was in medical and surgical. I am now retired.  Holy Name hospital has changed a great deal since I came here.  Now they have a special way of taking care of kidney cases and have isolates for premature babies. There have been so many improvements,  I have always liked Teaneck.  It used to be like a small town where you could know most everybody. The town has grown a great deal since 1930.  I remember when they built Route 4 and the George Washington Bridge.  I got to know most of the people. When the boys were in school I went to PTA, parents' night at the High School and functions at Fairleigh Dickinson. My husband Roscoe used to go on Father and son hikes with Troop 93 when Mr. Stahl was scoutmaster.  We shopped mainly in Englewood. Sometimes on West Englewood Ave. or Hackensack . There were no stores on the highway. Where the Grand Onion is in Fair Lawn used to be a big golf course. Up Teaneck Road where the Armory is was all open.  My sister-in-law Geneva has a nice catering business on South Dean Street in Englewood. She started out on Van Brunt., but now have a nice building.  I go to the First Baptist Church in Englewood, transferred my membership from South Carolina. It used to be on Williams Street.  About 4 years ago we built a new church on Englewood Ave. The Rev. J. Isaiah Goodman is our pastor. He is active in civic affairs. I have three grandsons and a Granddaughter.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Anna E. "Ellie" Leiffert Cole;1985;1975;Mrs. Anna E. "Ellie" Leiffert Cole, 1985, 1975   (Milford Manor Nursing Home. Interview taped 8/2/1975) Summary  (Click Here for the Complete Transcript)  I am 80. I was 7 when we moved to Teaneck. I lived at 1180 Summit Ave. until I was married at 19. Then we lived upstairs. When my daughter, Clarice Cole Custer was born 2 1/2 years later we built a house on Arlington Ave. My daughter is married and gave me a wonderful son as well as four beautiful granddaughters.  There were 13 houses in the area where we lived -- three farms, Coopers, Phillips and Stevenson. The other 10 houses were scattered about. We had to walk through the woods to our neighbors. The Camaris were the closest. The McMahons came to Teaneck and lived on Forest Avenue. They had a girl my age. We are still friends. Kitty is now a widow living in Oradell.  I went to School in Teaneck. Our teacher was Miss Rizou. Mr. Jay was our principal. In severe weather my father would shuffle through the snow to Teaneck Road and I would follow in his footsteps. Bill Guthrie, a big boy, sometimes carried Katherine Kilmurray and me over the drifts. Mr. Selvage had a big apple orchard behind the school. Somtimes the boys would bring us a big apple from the orchard. Clarice went to School 2, too. Mrs. Lucy Marsh tought both of us. She lived on Forest Ave. next to Seidel's store.  Clarice Custer: We lived at 133 Evergreen Place. I remember a couple named Oliver -- Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Oliver, whom we called Uncle Tom and Aunt Del. They built a house on Forest Avenue near Arlington. She taught me to bake bread and used to play with me. They had no children.  Mrs. Cole: Mr. George Coe of Englewood, a rich man was interested in Teaneck. Some of our neighbors like the Olivers, Heroys and Waterburys got together for church services. The lady of the house would read the Bible and we'd sing a few hymns. Among those attending were the Frankes. They had two daughters and a son -- Lita, Selma and Carl. Lita and I were the only young people who went to services. Mr. Coe came to us and said I think it's time we had a place to meet. We built the Washington Avenue Sunday School on Church Street -- first floor and basement. After several years Mr. Coe suggested members of the church buy the Sunday School and re-christen it the Presbyterian Church of Teaneck. Lita and I played piano there for years. We went to church three times on Sunday, Wendesday night prayer meeting and choir practice Friday nights.  We used to have picnics and strawberry festivals. Big trees arched over Teaneck Road like you were going through a tunnel. There were some gorgeous houses in Teaneck -- They had gazebos or summer houses and pony carts. I can remember a strawberry festival when they had beautiful lanters strung on a house built on a hillside. Every one would be there -- ladies wearing long summer dresses. fancy hats with lace. The berries were sweeter then, they came right from the farms.  Billy Hawkey had a pony cart. I was afraid of horses. Once the boys chased me with the pony cart. There was a house at Bogert Street and Teaneck Road used as a club house -- it is a four-family apartment now. Every Saturday they had a dance. I was the first one there and the last one home.  We'd take a walk on Sunday to Phillips farm, Coopers' or Stevensons and I would come home loaded with fruit and vegetables. We walked two miles to Englewood to shop on Saturdays. If we forgot something, we went back.  My grandmother was a dressmaker and used to give us magazines like the Delineator and we'd cut out paper dolls. Edna Foster's family bought a home near us. We formed a dramatic club.  I met Clarence Cole when I was 15. He came to see me and I pushed to dolls under the settee. I asked him why he came and he said he'd come to find out if I would like to go to New York to see a show. I said "Oh My God". Mama said yes so he took me to a beautiful restaurant and a show. I hoped he would come again. He came again Saturday. We kept company for four years. One day he said he was going on vacation and that first we would get married. I said will we? He said what do you think I've been coming here for? I started a hope chest. I had some little baby shirts trimmed with lace. One day he looked in the hope chest and saw them. He said you'd better save them. Maybe we can use them.  My mother was a practical nurse. My grandmother Leiffert, a dressmaker had worked for Mrs. Sample and Mrs. Hawkey. Once my mother couldn't go to take care of Mrs. Sample when she had a baby. So I went. It was near Christmas and Mr. Stevenson saw that I was well remembered.  We had a young minister from New York Theological Seminary. Once Mr. Stevenson came to church. He didn't kneel when the time came. That worried me. I thought he wouldn't go to heaven. He said I kneel for no man -- and besides, I had on a new pair of pants.  I helped my mother with Mrs. Johnes on Circle Drive for two weeks. That's where I began my nursing career. I was a practical nurse for eignt years. I helped deliver my four granddaughters. Clarice wouldn't have a baby in the hospital. Two doctors came from the hospital to see a home delivery. It was a beautiful set up.  Sitzman's had a little country store on Forest and Cooper Avenues. Mother and son. Seidel's had a general store near Teaneck Road. Balestrinis came after Seidels.  We came here from Brooklyn. My mother had had an operation and the doctor said she should come to the country. They read an ad about Manhattan Heights. Mr. Selvage owned practically all of Teaneck. He had a model bungalow on Tuxedo Square where he had an office. When we moved into our house we thought it was a palace.  I didn't speak English until I came to Teaneck. I spoke Platt Deutsche and German.  We had a toilet downstaires, no tub. We bathed in the soapstone tub in the kitchen. There was a coal range. There was a lavatory off the kitchen. Later we put in a tub upstairs and finished the third floor where I lived after I was married -- two rooms and a kitchen. The Rev. George M. Woodbury married us in that house. We were married 46 years. I had a sweetheart second to none.  My father was a diamond appraiser and setter for Tiffany's in New York. At first he worked for Tiffany in Forest Hills as a silversmith. Then he tookup goldsmithing. They moved him to the Fifth Avenue store where he specialized in diamond setting and appraising.  Gladys and Agnes Nelson had a country store later on Froest Avenue. Teaneck was like a summer resort when we came. Every one came to visit. My mother's brother drove the trolley. For a nickel I could go all the way to Coney Island with Uncil Bill. All our neighbors had company all summer.  My mother delivered two of the Stevenson children -- one for Mrs. Hawkey and one for Mrs. Sample. My grandmother sewed for those people. She had been to Paris. She made her own patterns and made beautiful hats.  Edna Foster and I were interested in theatricals and formed a dramatic club. Yes I remember Dorothy Fickerman who played the piano. Clarice and Janny Milane started school together -- second grade teacher was Miss Todd. She boarded with my mother and later married Bill Middlemas. Fred Davis, "Papa" Davis was the cop on the corner.  Clarice: Miss Kennedy the music teacher, always made a grand entrance. When she got married I thought she would have to have some very special man. She used to have us sing like rippling water. We'd dress up in costumes of dyed cheese cloth.  The Nibbes lived on Prospect Terrace. Mrs. Franke had a soft German accent.  I have a 50-year Eastern Star Pin - Teaneck Chapter 218. I was a charter member. Recently 9 Eastern Stars came here to present the pin. I am a past commander of Golden Star Circle 35. Lady Foresters and I am the oldest charter member of the Presbyterian Church. I'm No. 1 on the list. Lita Franke Bower is No. 2.  One thing I want to say as you go through life, remember to pray "Not mine, by Thy will be done." And I find comfort in the 23rd Psalm -- The Lord is my shepherd.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Clarence Lofberg and Mrs. Ralph Olsen;1907;1976;Mrs. Clarence Lofberg & Mrs. Ralph Olsen, 1907, 1976 (Interview taped 10/20/1976) Mrs. Olsen: I have lived in Teaneck since 1905. We lived on Center Place where I live now. Our family included my mother, father, two brothers and myself. We had no school in our neighborhood then. I went to school in Bogota. The school was where the Borough Hall is now. There was no police force, just Mr. Winter who came from Hackensack. The nearest school in Teaneck was Longfellow then. I walked to school--it was just six blocks. Emerson school was built about 1913. I finished school in Bogota at the Main Street School--now the Lillian Steen School. She was one of my teachers. I went to Leonia High School. We had our choice between Leonia and Hackensack. Leonia High opened in 1913.  Mrs. Lofberg: I came to Teaneck as a bride June 27, 1927. We lived on Griggs Avenue, then known as Phelps Manor, a new development. Inez (Mrs. Olsen's) husband and brother Frank built most of the houses in that area. The firm was Olsen and Lofberg. Griggs Avenue was not cut through. I was a teacher in Bogota High--Spanish and English. I was there three years and then my Richard came along. Our mail came through Bogota. There was no post office in Teaneck.    Mrs.Olsen: Terhune Park was a big buckwheat field. The old frame house that stood there so many years was torn down when they made the park. When I was a girl the house was rented in three sections. Various people lived there. My aunt lived in one section of the Terhune house. Cedar Lane was a wagon road. There were farms all around. I remember the Garrison farm and Fiss, Doerr and Carroll riding stables. They gradually developed the area. There was a big red barn on the Terhune place and a little cabin in the back. Bill Easterbrook lived down there.  I went to Bogart Church until the Community Church started. We were founders of the Smith Community Church as it was called then. Mr. Shields had been at Bogart Church. He took. Mr. Lane's place when he was in the service. We met in the Kenwood Firehouse until we got our church.  There were farms around Linden Avenue where the apartments are now. The Garrison farm was north of Cedar Lane. All west of there was farms.   Mrs. Lofberg:  After Richard arrived I went back as a substitute teacher. I had a precious mother-in-law who lived next door to Inez. She took care of the baby while I taught school. Clarence would take him to Grandma's. I might as well of had a full time job. I taught six weeks in Teaneck, then in Ridgefield Park through the winter and in Leonia till the end of school. I met my husband at a Halloween party--a dress up party at the Community Church. The Blue Bird Inn was a big deal then. we went with Ferde Grofe. Clarence sold him his house in Leonia, then his house in Teaneck. He lived on Norma Road.  I saw him in California three or four years ago. Stayed with him and his third wife in Santa Monica. He was terribly ill and is gone now. He and his wife were transcribing all his big records made with Paul Whiteman's orchestra. He orchestrated mostly. I think he played the piano and another instrument, probably the violin, but his orchestrations were the big thing.  The big deal, of course, was Rhapsody in Blue by Gerschwin.  When he married the second time a gal named Ruth Maglane of Jersey City, Clarence was an usher. They had two children--one 6 months older then Richard. His name was Ferdinand. He went to Longfellow School. Then they had Anne, a little girl. They went to California. He used to have many parties. We met a lot of musicians. We met Paul Whiteman at a concert. I have pictures of their wedding.  Mrs. Olson: My children went to Emerson School. I have three girls. The property belonged to my father. He was a portrait painter. There was no market for that here. He traveled to Englewood and Tenafly on the Hudson River trolley, changed at Leonia junction. He was with a contracting firm--Holmgren in Englewood. Both of my parents came from Sweden--Skane province. My mother lived near Copenhagen. My daughter has resurrected pictures from the attic. One is a water color of the Hackensack River. They are not in frames.  Mrs. Lofberg: I grew up in Hackensack. The river then was lovely--fish and clams. On Sunday afternoons people used to go crabbing on the bridge. There was a place called Eden Beach in River Edge where you could swim. People canoed up there. The Wheelman's Sports Club was in the Oritani Field Club area.   Mrs. Olsen: we used to go around the Ruins where the Teaneck Municipal Building is now.  Mrs. Lofberg: Holy Name Hospital was new when I came here. Not all the streets were cut through. Albin Street was a dead end. Pat Cornell lived near us, then there was Ralph and Frank (Olsen) and the Barneses lived next door.  Mrs. Olsen: We had no stores near us. We shopped on Main Street, Bogota. There was a general store on River Road and the car tracks. They took orders and delivered. There were no phones. There were no lights before my father and some others formed a Civic Association. The streets were all gulleys. There was Kates grocery store, a small A & P at Larch and Main, Butler and Reeves -- that was our shopping Center. We used to go to Hackensack on Saturday--on the trolley--it cost a nickel. If we didn't have the nickel we walked. Clarence had a little red wagon. We didn't need many vegetables because we had a garden. My family had a cow, sometimes a pig. Oh yes, we had chickens and we had some geese. There was plenty of room. A car? Oh no! Dr. Edwards got a little Saxon. He drove me home from school one day. I sat on the floor. Dr. Edwards was at 100 Larch Ave, half a block from Main street. My parents didn't know anyone out here when they came from Brooklyn. I don't know how they happened to settle here. Max Hasse and my brother were in school together. The Hasses lived not too far away.   Mrs. Lofberg: My husband used to work near the Bronx--a tool and dye place. Then he got into real estate and later moved in to insurance. Then he had the Motor Vehicle Agency for over 20 years. Every one in Teaneck came to see him once a year. I worked with him. We knew a lot of people. Our two boys went to Teaneck schools. Dick had scholarships to spare. He got the Bosch and Lomb award and went to Cornell to become a chemical engineer.  Mrs. Olsen: Recreation? We went sleigh riding. We skated on the cow pond in the buckwheat field at Terhune's when it froze hard. My mother wouldn't let us go until it was hard because the pond was deep. Mr. Knopping made a pond on his place. He'd let water in from the river. They had a hut there. It was nice.  Mrs. Lofberg: Places to go? There was Sigrid's Restaurant at Cedar Lane and River Road. The Rotary met there. I heard they had gambling in the red barn, but I never saw it. We used to go on picnics to The Pines in the Suffern Road area. We went there from Lincoln Place. Churches from Hackensack used to have their picnics in those pine woods. The needles were so thick on the ground you could dance on them. I know there was a lot of activity when they changed to the Council-Manager plan. They said that was when Hudson County came over. My husband started in political activity but said it took too much time.  Mrs. Olson: Do I remember the Depression! Homes were mortgaged in this whole area. People lost their homes right and left. Now look what the taxes are. Teaneck was on television two weeks ago showing how the town picks up leaves.  Mrs. Lofberg: I have had happy memories of Teaneck. You pay high taxes, but they're high everywhere.  Talking about where we used to go. There was a place on the Cliffs. That was where Frank Sinatra came into the Limelight. The Rustic Cabin. But most of the doings were in homes, churches, schools. The PTA put on plays and fund raisers. I joined the woman's Club when Alice Lober was president. I was on the board of A.A.U.W. with her and was up to my neck, but she wanted me to come in while she was president. I had been active in P.T.A., as a classmother and teaching. I remember when the junior high was added to the high school, teaching with a 11 that clatter. 
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Edythe Whipple;1892;1975;Mrs. Edythe Whipple, 1892, 1975 (Interview taped 8/13/1975) I moved here Nov. 1, 1912 from Jersey City where my husband's family lived. I was pure New York City. We lived in flats and want to church. My father and his sister brought me up.  When I came here it was like going into another world.  It was raining the day we moved. The men had to carry our furniture from West Englewood Ave. to Ogden Ave--there was no road on Ogden. They were laying the pipes for water, gas and electricity. I had never seen the house my husband had bought.  We were married in Jersey City.  He got an apartment.  I worked in New York as a designer and model in a place on 23rd St.  I had to suffer to got to work.  My husband's office was at 11th Ave. and 43. He was a news reel camera man and had to go all over the world.  We no sooner got here than he was sent to Panama to photograph the Panama Canal. I was 20 with a 4-month's old baby.  We negotiated for the house through a New York office.  Since I was making more than my Husband the house was put in my name.  It's been that way ever since.   It's better that way. Although we moved in the worst rain storm I remember, we didn't lose anything--we had little to lose. I had to adjust to having no gas, no water, no electricity.  The first thing we got was a pipe in the front yard to get water. Our only neighbors were next door and across the street. We had to cook with coal on a combination stove.   We had a furnace but no coal man.  He was down by the railroad station. Coal was $5 a ton delivered in baskets.  I'd wait until it was almost gone before I ordered, then I'd keep my eye on it to make sure we got a ton. There was a weights ant measures department in the county.  Once I called them. The coal man had to take all the coal out and measure it. It was short and he was placed under arrest. I decided then to use coal.  The next big hurrah was electricity. That meant carbon lamps, they'd last forever. Before we got electricity, we used kerosene lamps. Light and gas fixtures were in, but we had so service. Our neighbors were Mr. and Mrs. Race across the street and Mr. and Mrs. Thorne to the west.  The Ferrys lived nearby. Leland was 11 years younger than I, but when snow came I wanted to go belly whopping down Ogden Avenue. It was great fun. The second winter the wives wouldn't let the men come out.  Electric irons had just come out. I had an electric toaster which I still use.  The people on the other side of the tracks seem to have been jealous of the newcomers. Mr. Ayers developed Ogden, Rutland, Maitland, Warwick Avenues and Winthrop Road.  He was gracious to all. If you couldn't pay your mortgage, you were forgiven. This good man died bankrupt. The ramps ever the tracks were built by Judge Venable of Newark and West Englewood Avenue, the business district, went down.  Mr. Ayers was going to use State Street for a big business district, but he died a poverty stricken man.  Our house cost $4800. I had $200 to put down and got two mortgages at 8%.  People today are paying what I paid 30 years ago. I brought up my son carefully.  I had a great woman doctor in New York.  She died of senility like my husband did. My son is a certified urological surgeon. He turned out better than any Teaneck boy I know of. He studies until he was 36--never earned a cent before that. He retired last year because the insurance people wanted him to pay $30,000 for malpractice coverage. He lives in Manhassett, L. I. He has six children, attended Princeton, worked  at Bellevue Hospital and Jersey City Medical Center.  My son and I are more or less in conflict.  He's of a driving nature. I don't drive myself.  I  carried cash in to New York to pay the mortgage.  I loved going on the train with its comfortable seats and the ferry ride to Cortlandt Street.  There were two cable cars on 42nd St. We had the IRT subway going west and the Lennox Subway going east.  I'd take a late train coming home so Ii could see the liglits.  My father was a musician, worked late.  He lived with me, but that was later.  The two tracks of the West Shore only came to Bogota--then there was one track to Teaneck where there was no station, just wooden stairs, or to the West Englewood station. Then it went to Bergenfield, no further. When we got on the train in Weehawken we rode in style.  Then came the tunnel and every one began coughing because of the soft coal--it was misery but luxury.  There was wonderful passenger service as time progressed.  There was a lovely old fashioned station at Weehawken.  Later we got four tracks and the coal shoveling disappeared.  Houses were being built.  Mr. Ayers finished one street at a time.  A man who had a farm between Bergenfield and Teaneck started a bus line #78. He later sold to Public Service.  We had one of the best bus systems in Teaneck.  When I came there was a man named Bodine in city hall.  He didn't know how to talk.  Mr.Shaw know how to talk.  He was No. l from my site of the track until Mr. Ayers decided he wanted a mayor from our side.  Mr. Griffiths, the manager of the Pennsylvania Drug Stores, had a friend in New York employed as a public servant. He led Mr. Griffiths into the mayor's job. He started a program for sidewalks. I got a walk that's still in good condition.  About 1926 a big boisterous man named Mr. Kelly was elected Councilman.  He began a program of expansion, improving the roadbeds. This program went west of the railroad to River Road and to the Phelps Estate. The politicians used to meet at the Blue Bird Inn, a place more elite than a lunch wagon. It became a Republican hangout.  Kelly, a Democrat, built all the roads.  He was put out of office, but he made Teaneck a desirable real estate location. The Phelps estate would declare certain sections open to builders.  Women got the vote in 1920. I became interested.  The first vote was for president in 1920. The voting place was the little wooden office of Mr. Ayers in West Englewood Park, across from the post office. The sewer for all West Englewood was in back of the office--later they moved it up toward Bergenfield. I went to vote. Men were beginning to take an interest in me. I had made friends with state and county politicians. I would write little articles.  Mr. Borg had a small office on Main Street, Hackensack.  He had Mr. Ely, a wonderful man check on everything.  He took a liking to me.  Mr. Borg used to print all the news of each town.  I suggested he have a Voice of the People. He called in Donald Borg. I think that is what made people interested in politics.  They began fearing me.  They feared Mr. Borg awfully, he was indicted. There were two factions in the Republican part. The press of the state came to his rescue.  Until 1928 I was only interested in New York City.  I bought vacant land in Teaneck, a plot at a time. My husband was a camera man who worked too hard all his life.  He had no interest for the building business.  I got so interested in politics I sat in the state Senate to find out what they did down there.  Senator Mackay was making money on 15% mortgages. The Senate had nicer seats than the Assembly. One day I went to the governor's office.  He had a man in the outer office who found out what you wanted.  I suppose I was good enough looking for the receptionist to take an interest.  The Governor was Mr. Moore. He saw me.  Zoning was the big subject in Teaneck.  I had bought six little plots--60 by 120.  We had residents who were against zoning.  Teaneck appointed a zoning board headed by Archie Hart, the county prosecutor who lived at Cedar Lane and River Road where Fairleigh Dickinson is.  I went to Mr. Hart and said I don't want zoning.  I want to build two-family houses,  Mr. Hart was impressed.  He told the building man "She's resourceful. Give her permits before zoning goes in." I never built the houses because my husband would not join me.  When anyone ran for governor or senator they'd ask me to help. If I liked them I would write articles.  I still have these permits. My husband retired in 1956.  I sold the land and it's been supporting me all these years.  I bought him a house in Florida and a nice boat for $3600. We had a car.  He wanted a Cadillac.  He went there in '56.  I never went there to live.  I'm saving the house for my son.  Along came Mr. Andreas.  He wanted to give his property to the town after he died provided he could live there without paying taxes.  I said his son could reclaim the land.  It became a state wide case.  I had a good lawyer. It went to the Supreme Court. The court rules Andreas would have to pay taxes. I had enough looks to got what I wanted.  The best way to get along is to be a diplomat.  You can be definite and also diplomatic.  I don't believe in women's Lib.  They want to out-do the men.  I believe in being equal.  When I was young woman were treated poorly.  The first library was started by Mrs. Jordan and two other women they called the sobbing sisters. Mr. Bodine was a good listener. Today we have a fine library, but I don't think they are treating it right.  When I came here the post office was in a little store on West Englewood Avenue.  Mr. Frey, a plumber, was the postmaster. We had two deliveries a days, we'd put a box on the curb.  Mr. Ayers put in gravel for his first roads.  When Mr. Griffiths came he put in curbs and made that water ran into the sewer.  The roads were 40 feet West Englewood Ave. 50 feet. Senator Mackay ant Brewster, the big road builder, were friends.  He wanted the West Englewood Avenue job.  It was then a county road. Mr. Ayers said "Go See Mrs. Whipple, she will get the contract."  I went to the State Highway Commissioner about changes in the road level.  The State Highway Commissioner must have taken a liking to me--but we never got any further than talk because I didn't like him. I talked an Mr. Golly.  Mr. Brewster got the job. No one on West Englewood Avenue had to pay for roads.  Mr. Hanks came after Mr. Frey.  He asked me to get him the post office. He didn't got it.  He was the Station master. I didn't know the congressman.  The Taxpayers League started in 1928. Mr. Morton was the brains.  Mr. Van Wagoner was the spokesman. I was the only woman member.  It started because taxes were too high. They went after the Board of Education, a great spender.  They went after Lester Neulen, the superintendent of schools.  Mr. Morton said examine the high school construction to see how much money was wasted. The Taxpayers League inspected the plumbing system and found that all the fixtures were brass as specified. Later Mr. Van Wagenor said I move that Mrs. Whipple be removed from this group. A member escorted me home. I became a factor because the TPL was throwing fear into the politicians. They wanted a manager so they would hold elections only every four years. Waesche wanted to be township attorney, but he hadn't passed the examination.  They had a big meeting.  Mr. Convory called me. Citizens would have 10 minutes to talk. I took my 10 minutes.  I said Mr. Waesche lived in Ridgefield Park before coming to Teaneck and he was then preaching against the manager system, now he wants it. What is up his sleeve?  When the Taxpayers League was elected, Mr. Waesche was turned down because he hadn't passed the exam. From then on it was nothing to me, I never belonged to anything after the Taxpayers League didn't want me.  I'd always go to the Board of Education meetings to talk against taxes. Mr. Brett, my neighbor, was president of the board.  I alone defeated one school budget.  Cedar Lane was a dirt road.  The ground was very high. At Queen Anne road, there was a horse farm on one side where you'd see horses sticking their heads over the railing. I don't know why they made Benjamin Edwards tear down his cleaning plant if that side of Cedar Lane was restricted and now they have big buildings there.  When women were called for jury duty, the men of the town must have decided I should be on the first jury. I was called.  At recess a man asked me to try and change the jury's mind so I'll win this case. I said Yes, all right. To this day they don't instruct the jury as to what to do, so you go in ignorance. I understand they said "Don't call her, she's too good looking."  (Mrs. Whipple was accompanied by her friend Louise Beggi-- whom she had known for 50 years--since Louise was 16. Her family lived on Lafayette St., Englewood.) 
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Frances Manno, Eva M. Gemp, Lucille M. McBride;1892;1976;Mrs. Frances Manno, Eva M. Gemp, Lucille M. McBride, 1892, 1976  Mrs. Manno (Age 84): I came to Teaneck from Clifton--it was near Clifton. Papa bought the barber shop. We lived in back of the shop. Lucille was 8, Tony was 6 and Eva was a year and a half. I saved all my money. We were rich.  We had a toilet on the first floor. No bathtub. My children had to have a bath. In summer when it was so hot I'd fill the tub with cold water. I wanted a different tub. I went to the department store and got a galvanized tub shaped like a bath tub. I put it on an old chair. I wanted water with the kettle.  We had a range, but I think we had one burner that was gas. There was no hot water at the sink. I'd rinse my dishes with hot water. I remember the first time I had a washing machine. The man used to come and pick up the laundry. One day the doctor (Dr.Louie Rusch) came and said you work too hard. I used to wash the children's delicate clothes. The children looked beautiful. Did I know about sewing? That was born in me. My mother was 100 percent stylish.  When I was young I go to work to bring money to my mother to pay the rent. Your father didn't bring much to me. I sewed for people. I had a summer home. I sold some things. I bought material in New York, around 34th Street. I designed and made clothes for people. Mrs. Zeeb was a good customer. I was stylish. She wanted a Russian blouse, that cost $50. She sketched it for me and Oh Boy did I make it!  You originated the brother and sister outfits? Yes. They were sailor suits. I made them first then saw them in a magazine.  I'd go to New York taking the train, the boat and the trolley. I loved New York, I had to get some one to take care of my children. I got a colored lady--she was blonde (albino) I wanted some one German or Irish. There was a Pollack woman upstairs. She made pastries which were such dainty things. I couldn't get a lady like I wanted to take care of my children.  I remember the DiBellas in West Englewood. There was a small A &P store on Teaneck Road and West Englewood Avenue. There was a small Grand Union. I liked the A &P better. Mr. Cutler's store was on Railroad Avenue--Now Palisade Ave. Joe and Henny Weiss had the taxi stand next to us. When they put it in the back I put in a few chickens. I used to go to Hackensack to get fresh vegetables -- carrots and turnips and green beans.  Lucille McBride:  We had a Billy Goat. I wanted a goat for fresh milk for my children, but we got a Billy Goat. One day I was fitting a lady's dress and the kids brought the Billy goat into the parlor. Some one brought me a rabbit, but he was dirty. I made hassenpfeffer out of him. One time I brought home two kittens from New York--and I had three children.  Later we moved to a beautiful five-room apartment over the delicatessen (where West Englewood Market is now).  He went to John Marshall Law school with Tommy Costa. They graduated together. Tony passed the bar exam a couple of years before Tommy. He was a clerk for Judge Ferry and was active in the rotary Club--not in politics, but he was behind the scene. He put Tommy forward, got him going. Tommy was a good guy but not so aggressive.  Mrs. Manno: He used to invite us. He said Tommy Costa's mother wants to see you. I didn't want to go. One day she come to see me. It was very pleasant -- everything was so nice. I still had the piano and she played the piano, she was a musician.  Lucille: Bob Morrill wrote a beautiful tribute for the Rotary magazine. I went to work for Lawson Graffin, the insurance man. That was my firs job. That was after I went to Packard Commercial College. It was a nicI job. but I didn't like a hick town. I wanted the big city and lots of men.  Mrs. Manno: At that time she was pretty looking, we called her Clara.  Lucille: My Aunt was a sample maker for Maurice Rentner. She said they needed a bookkeeper. I worked there a while, but I get tired of the garment industry. My friend Marge Diggleman got me a job in an advertising agency. After that I worked for a couple of advertising agencies till I got married to John McBride of 285 Morningside Terrace, we've been married 36 years and have three sons--John Patrick J., Timothy Michael and  Gregory Anthony.  Eva: I went to Washington Irving and to Junior High School after the high school was finished. I worked down one hill through the mud where Route 4 was to be and up another hill to school. When I was a junior I fell in love with Ray Ward, who was to be my first husband. I got a job with Richter the plumber at Cedar Lane & Palisade Ave. for $5 a week--later I got a raise to $6.  My father told me there was a job open at the bank for $12 a week. Frank Weber hired me. He asked me why I wanted to work in the bank and I said because I liked to meet people. Ray was killed in World War II-- He was a paratrooper at Normandy. Is his name on the monument? 1 didn't know. I was at the bank eight years. While working there I went to banking school but I didn't do much but flirt with the teacher. I left the bank because everyone who came in would offer their condolences and I couldn't take it. I went to Florida. My first job when I got back was with the Teaneck Sunday Sun. Mr. McNamara hired me. Jobs always came to me. I was at the Sun until I married Jim Gemp of Maywood. We have two children--Robert & Sandra..  When we were kids there was no one to drive us around. we went swimming at Crestview Lake or to the shore--Belmar & Point Pleasant.  Mrs. M:  I used to say I'm thankful my son does not go on the high dive. One day he comes home with a trophy. I said Where did you get that? He says Mama I can't help it. High Diving. Well.  Lu: Our parents had a car--we had two cars. On Sundays we'd go for a ride in the Ford with Izing glass curtains that rolled right down. When it was not raining we'd fold the top back. Then we had a Model T sedan with real glass windows. Pop would toot the horn at all the chicks. He'd say: "Sing, kids, Sing." My father liked having a car. We didn't have much, but we had a car. Then we got a brand new Auburn. He sold that and got an Oldsmobile almost new. He sold that and got that '55 Buick with 3900 miles on it.  When we were real little we walked through the snow to Washington Irvine School. Mother used to wrap newspapers around our legs and pack our lunch. We used to go sleigh riding on Beaumont Avenue with George Beaumont, Ellie Norton and other kids.  Mrs. M.:  I was worried about skating. I wanted to go to town hall and ask them to block off the street because of traffic.  Lu: We used to go to Miller's Pond in Englewood. It's a good thing my mother didn't know how deep Miller's Pond was. She used to say why don't they find a place and flood it a little for skating. That's what they finally did at Votee Park.  My father used to sell cigars and cigarettes in the barber shop. He had a little case with all the popular brands.  What about weddings? We didn't go to many around here. Most of the ones we went to were in New York. Italian weddings were famous. I was married in St. Anastasia's and Eva in Christ Church. Ray was not a Catholic and they would have had to get married in the rectory. She wanted a church wedding.  We went to catechism in the little old St. Anastasia Church on Sunday afternoons the nuns had classes. In those days all businesses were open on Saturday and my father was open a half day on Sunday. We would go for a ride and he didn't want to wait until after the 3 p.m. class was over. He'd have a fit. He wanted to go some place.  Picnics? We used to go to Lake Hopatcong,. There were no town picnics. As a kid we had field days on the 4th of July. I'd win the 100-yard dash. One year I got an umbrella and another year a linen handkerchief -- first prize. I marched with the Girl Scouts, so did Eva. Her Scout leader was Bess Gilliland. Tony belonged to the Boy Scouts with Joe Culver.  Tony was popular in high school. He was well liked. He graduated with the first class at Teaneck High, then went to John Marshall Law School with Tommy Costa and got his law certificate on the first try. He died of a heart attack 11 years ago. It was quite a shock to the community. He had offices at 362 Cedar Lane. He helped many people, not just through his law practice. I will read the tribute Bob Morrill wrote in the Rotary Club publication High Gear--It starts out--"Tony has left us."  Here is another article by Merrill Tucker which appeared in the Times Review June 23, 1963 telling about his great interest in the Teaneck Athletic Boosters, a column by Mildred Taylor saying the town will not be the same with Tony Manno gone--dead at the age of 49. There is another column by Bob Henderson in the Times Review of June 23, 1963. That's all.  I want to add that my father, Benjamin Manno, had the second barbershop in Teaneck on Railroad--now Palisade Avenue. He loved people and always had a smile and a ready hand.  My sister Eva was captain of cheer leaders at Teaneck High. She was active in scouting and used to help a girl on Longfellow Avenue who was in a wheel chair. She'd go there nearly every day to encourage her to walk.  My sister Eva had her wedding reception at the Old Plantation. I had mine at the Rustic Cabin where Frank Sinatra sang. I can't remember where my brother's reception was.  The West Englewood Market was once owned by Branhoff. I remember the bandshell in Windsor Park on the West side of the railroad. Mayor Kelly paved all the streets and caused a hubub but it turned out to be a good thing. I remember the railroad station in Victorian stule.  Mr. and Mrs. Hanks lived there. He was station master. Where the West Englewood post office is now was where my father had his first shop. We lived in a house behind before we moved to Beaumont Avenue.   Second Interview taped by Lucille McBride & Janet Schmitt, 1976:  Lucille McB: Mama, tell about Mr. Etten's market. I used to go over there. They had wonderful service. He and his wife would talk. They didn't think I knew what Schoene meant. He said Mrs. Manno I'll walk home with you. I only lived on Beaumont and the meat weighed 3 or 4 pounds. He was walking with me. Schoene means nice?   I remember Mr. Zitelli the shoemaker with his wife.  Lots of children in his store. They had a big family.  Mr. Frei had the hardware store. Mr. and Mrs. Frei were nice. Mr. Zitelli moved into a store that had been a general store. You could buy anything from a shoe lace to anything. The old woman before Mrs. Hagen -- Mrs. Goodman, she had everything. You go with a sample, she'd find it. My mother and my brother lived on West Englewood Avenue. A big old gray house with a porch all around and a big yard. They bought the house from Mr. and Mrs. Butterfield. That was when Lu was about 13.  Lu: I graduated from Washington Irving School in 1926 and from Englewood High in 1930--so that must have been in the 20s. We moved from Clifton in 1918 or 1919. I remember Uncle Joe came home from the war. When he bent to kiss me he burned me with a cigarette.  It was after that we moved here. My brother went to Washington Irving and to Englewood High for two years then came back and was in the first graduating class at Teaneck High.   Eva:  I remember Miss McGrath, a red head, and Miss O'Riley and Miss Beckwith, Mr. Sodowski and the music teacher, Miss Kennedy.  Mr. M.: I remember when Tony was in school they made a play. He was the most important man. He was sitting on a desk and when he got up he ripped his first long pants. Well, he said what he had to say.   Lu: Tony was always active in sports.  Mr. M.: When the teachers couldn't control him they'd call me. One time two teachers came together. They told him Tony if you don't behave you put the whole class in an uproar and we can't teach. I say Tony keep your mouth shut. Once the principal sent a note. I said, Tony, from the principal--for YOU. O.K. Tony, teachers report you are an excellent student. He was full of life. I said to the teacher if you give kids a little they take the whole thing. I went to school 2. They said there was no better. Boy. When I go home I said, Tony I went to the principal. They all like you, but they'll expel you if you behave like that. Tomorrow go sit down and be quiet. Next I had a note he was a gentleman. If you give a finger, they'll take a hand.  Lu: Tony was very tiny when he was in Englewood High--the smallest in his crowd They selected him to give the speech at the Monument one year.  Mrs. M.: He delivered Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. He didn't tell me he had to go over there. I went over and was in the crowd. The music played. My hand was shaking. I stood on one side. People were saying what a lucky mother. I didn't turn around. I was so proud of what he was. Then he came home, I didn't tell him I was there. It was such a great feeling for a kid to do that. He got $10 in gold and he said, This is yours, Mama. I said who gave it to you? He said the mayor. What 1 did--I gave it to Ruth when they got married.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Frank Scolpino and Det. Sgt. Anthony Scolpino;1900;1976;Mrs. Frank Scolpino & Det. Sgt. Anthony Scolpino, 1900, 1976 (Interview taped 8/11/1976 by Mildred Taylor & Edna Spath) Mrs. Scolpino: I have lived in this house since the day I was married--Oct.16,1921-- nearly 55 years. I came from Brooklyn as a bride.  My father -in-law had first come to Teaneck in 1909. He worked for the Brooklyn Sanitation Department and came here part time. He built the house in 1913.  Sgt. Scolpino:  At first he built a one-room shack on the back of the lot and lived there before building the house. People used to do that in those days.  We three boys were born here.  Mrs. Scolpino: We had no gas at first.  We had a little range where we burned wood for cooking. After a couple of years my father-in-law had a gas line laid from Teaneck Road. Our neighbors were the Materas who lived on the corner at Teaneck Road.  Vackas lived in the back. They haven't been gone too long,   Sgt. Scolpino:  Miss Decker owned apple orchards in the back of our house where Galway Place is.  Maria Decker was related to the Ackermans. I remember when she was up in years she had a little church built because it was hard for her to go to Hackensack.  She donated the little Baptist Church on Teaneck Road near Tryon Ave. She was related to Richard Ackerman.  The whole grounds belonged to them.  Mrs. Scolpino:  The boys had a nice time there.  In the early 30s, they rented to people who brought cows in. My father-in-law had a goat and chickens. He kept the shack he had built and used it as a summer house. He had white Leghorn chickens.  Sgt. Scolpine: When I was about 10, I sent away for 25 chicks, They sent me 250!  The neighbors and my father put up two more chicken coops.  Mrs. S:  We had grape arbors--there is one still there. My father-in-law made barrels of wine. At the end of the street was a speakeasy. Ralph Troy, he was a retired actor and she was an actress.   Sgt. S.: I remember the traffic. They made it into a night club.   Mrs. S.: I have three sons: Tony, Robert, who is a planning director in Gloucester County, and Frank Jr., a captain in the Navy. He is a graduate of Annapolis. They are coming for a visit.  Sgt. S.: In the early 20s people who built put up temporary shelters before they built their houses.  That was true of many homes in this area. Mary Baird's house next door was built the year my mother was married. That was a two-family house. Mrs. James Herrold who lived there now lives in Dumont.  Mrs. S.: I'm 76. All my boys entered the Navy. They all went to Teaneck High.  Sgt. S.: In 1942, 20 of us fellows from this neighborhood enlisted the same day.  Mrs. S.: They built Bryant School when he was ready for kindergarten.  They built it in time for Tony. We had lots of eggs and chickens. I didn't sell them. I used them or gave them to relatives.  Mrs. Gould Harris bought some. I was a Red Cross volunteer during the war. I was in charge of production.  I did lots of sewing. When the army set up the Anti-Aircraft camp in Teaneck after the war I repaired uniforms and sawed on patches.  I remember Mrs. Talbort. I think she was in Motor Service -- and Dorothy Lupton, now Mrs. Beach. She's in Florida.  Sgt. S.:  I joined the Teaneck Police force in 1949.  I've been in 27 years.  As for that episode at the race track--I had done a lot of wrestling and football playing in school.   I was a good tackle. I was at Yonkers Race rack on my day off when I saw this follow walking around.  I recognized him. He used to live in Teaneck but he was not living here then. I knew he was wanted. His picture had been posted. He had escaped from Elmira where he was sent for rape and robbery. I had no gun. I went to the Pinkerton guard and asked him to help. He stayed behind. I tackled the guy. People spotted me. People were being knocked down left and right. A New York City cop behind me had a gun at my back. When I got close the fellow drew a gun. I tackled him. He shot me. I didn't realize I was shot till some one told me there was blood running down my back. He fired a second shot. Then he put a bullet through his head. People screamed that I did it.  I was being pulled and shoved,  The Security men came. They protected me.  I had pain in my shoulder. The man behind me said "You're bleeding." De Cannio my friend was with me. He called the ambulance. I saw this follow bandaged.  He died later that night.  Mrs. S.:  I got threats. They told me they were going to send Tony home in a box. They had a hearse drive by the house.  Sgt. S.: This was in 1955. They didn't know I was a cop.  Capt. Fitzpatrick (now chief) and Patrolman Carl Franke came to visit me at the hospital. They said I shouldn't be in the same room with the follow.  That was before I went into surgery.  Getting back to the old times. When we were young we played baseball where the Armory is.  Then we played at Tryon Ave. and Van Cortlandt, using Bedsprings and such for back stops. We didn't have any planned play programs.  Mrs. S.: The train was the main transportation. We also took the trolley to the ferry.  We got off the trolley in  Englewood and walked home. We shopped in Englewood.  Sgt. S.:  When I was 3 or 4, I walked to Englewood once a week with my grandfather. We'd pull the groceries home in a coaster wagon. We used coal and wood for the furnace. I would sit on the sawbuck while grandpa sawed. He had stacks and stacks of wood. When we changed to oil heat they carted away two truckloads of wood. He was a great gardener. He raised lots of tomatoes, peppers and squash and Grapes!  Mrs. S.: We have one arbor now. I have a hard time picking grapes. Now we make juice. Last fall some boys came and I let them pick a pan for me and they picked all they wanted. Next day they had had their fill of grapes.  Sgt. S.:  I now live in Tenafly. I did live in Teaneck, but the children are grown and we moved to a smaller house.  We used to shop at Etten's Market where Cutler's Drug Store is and Benny Manno the barber was.  Mrs. S.: I joined the Red Cross in World War II, Tony used to deliver hospital beds. Mrs. Mayerhoff of Englewood would see that the work was cut. Many women didn't know much about sawing--how to put together the little coats we made for England -- Bundles for Britain. I knew tailoring.  George and Mrs. Cady lived near here. Mr. Cady designed Bryant School.  Sgt. S.:  During the depression I remember old men who were in construction and had no steady work.  They would be picked up in a truck when day work was available. They were good workers. They were in demand. Older boys were affected by the Depression. They'd work a day on the coal yard when they could get it.  Mrs. S.: I ran rummage sales for Women of the Elks--a project to raise money.  This was the Bergenfield Elks. Pop was there 49 Years.  Sgt. S.: There was no Shepherd Ave.  But there were sidewalks that went no where. Curbs where houses were never built during the 20s.  They never put in the street at the west end of Tryon for a long time. Sidewalks and curbs were there for 25 years.  Galway Place as well. They didn't cut it through because residents objected-people would cut through before Tryon Avenue.  In the area of Teaneck Armory were houses without cellars. Those houses were built about 22 years ago, When they dug down 3 feet for footings they found skulls--one with a hole in it. We thought we had a murder but where the Armory is used to be the Poor Farm.  When inmates died they'd wrap them in a black sheet and dig a grave. Those were the bodies that were unearthed. They built the Armory in 1938.  This was when they built the houses on Ward Plaza near the Armory property.  I work with juveniles and I don't think youth is getting better.  I think they're worse. Maybe it's too much permissiveness.  There's nothing wrong with hero worship. These kids don't look up to any one--the priests, teacher--nobody. I respected teachers. Respect for the others and the law is necessary for an orderly society.  This town is very slow in getting Senior citizen housing.  Mrs. S.: A friend lives upstairs. She is 80.  Sgt. S.:  About the shopping, We used to have a vegetable man, a milk man and a bread man who came around.  Louie Polizzi had a vegetable wagon. He lived on Hamilton Road,, but he has moved. There was a man who came around and picked up shoes, took them home and repaired them. 25 cents for half soles and heels.    Mrs. S.:  We went to New York by trains, but my husband's brother got A Ford, and he'd take up to Brooklyn. My father had an old Hudson and he'd take the children to Coney Island.  Sgt. S.:  The VFW would like to have a social for long time.  Teaneck residents to mark our 50th anniversary and the Bicentennial.  I am a past commander and a trustee.  Bob Blanchard is commander.  I was fortunate in growing up here. Boys didn't get into real trouble.  The old bunch still gets together-- we have reunions of the boys, their parents and families. The next will be in 1977.  Mrs. S.: Next door lived Mrs. Bill Whitman.  She came in 1918.   Her husband was electrician for the Board of Education. She's 86, sold her house and now lives in Now Milford.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. George Leback (Eva);1882;1975;Mrs. George Leback (Eva), 1882, 1975   (Interview taped 7/3/1975) I'll be 93 in October. I'm going to tell it from the beginning. I was born Nov. 10, 1882 on Wythe Avenue in Brooklyn. My name was Buchridge. My grandfather James Alexander Buckridge received a silver trumpet from the city of New York. He was a volunteer Fireman. I lived a good bit of my life in the Bushwick section of  Brooklyn.  I married George Lebeck in 1900. We went to the Lutheran church because he was a Methodist and I was an Episcopalian. We showed no partiality. My parent didn't knew we were getting married. My mother thought I was going to a wedding reception and made me a new dress. I went to my bridesmaid's house.  Her mother lectured us on getting married without letting our parents know. We had time to spare after dinner until 5 p.m. so we went to the Central Park zoo, came back in time with the bridesmaid and best man and. went to a hotel near the ferry in Brooklyn and had a dinner. They didn't have any wedding cake, fruit cake it was in these days, so we had raisin cake. Then the four of us went to the Peyton Theater in New York, then back to Brooklyn and saw a show in a Jewish place. Then he took me home and he went to his home.  My mother invited a friend to Thanksgiving dinner. I told the friend I was married and she told my mother. My parent called George and I together and gave us a big lecture. I was 18 and he was 20. We went housekeeping on New Year's Eve.   George decided later we should move to the country.  We came to Teaneck in 1913. Every one was so glad to see me. They had flags flying and bands playing at the station--it was July 4th. George get interested Teaneck and so did I.  We had two policemen--constables they were--Jess Witham and Bill Jahnes. we moved into this house.  we had a coal stove with holes in the ceiling to heat upstairs--no pipes. We had a bathtub and a toilet with a chain--no sink in the bathroom. We used a bowl and pitcher. I still wash clothes the old fashioned way. I used to make 80 glasses of apple jelly and put up 200 jars off our own ground.  George started the Red Devils over on Borden's Field. A family named Berden had some cows and used to walk them up Teaneck Road. Children used to sleigh down the hill and under the horses legs.  George used to referee games and he started the sack races and all on the Fourth of July.  He belonged to the Teaneck Club.  They had a dance every two weeks -- one you get dressed up for and on informal.  Mr. Hazelton put up a movie in School 2 -- 15 cents for a reserved seat.  he was a charter member of the Masonic Lodge in Teaneck.  I belonged to the Eastern Star -- Tuscan Chapter in Englewood.  I got my 50 year pin five years ago.  I later joined Teaneck Chapter and there was also the Monarch Chapter in Teaneck. I was a charter member of the Woman's Club, the first hospitality chairman.  When Mrs. Lippman was going to sell her house we met in her barn. It was very cold.  We used to go the day before the meeting to clean it up, hang curtains and build a fire.  The member donated refreshments.   There were no stores. There was a butcher named Fried on Forest Avenue. For groceries, a man came from Englewood and took my order.  His name  was also Fried.  He'd bring the groceries next day.  Thursday a man came with fish.  Lewis who had a farm on East Cedar land sold milk.  I traded with him until he was there no more.  Viola was a baby when we came. We went to Dr. Sullivan in Englewood. Then to Dr. Louis Rusch.  Evelyn graduated from School 2 and Englewood High, so did Viola.  George was on the school board, so was Leland Ferry's father and Mr. Ranges.  I was block warden for Civil Defense during World War II. Before World War I Viola took first prize in a baby parade in West Englewood Park.  My oldest daughter was in high school when Viola had scarlet fever.  It was the last month before graduation, so she went to live with friend on Long Island for a month.  I made her graduation dress and finished it just in time.  Viola was 6 weeks in bed.  Lucy Manne used to come by after school and leave Viola's home work in the hedge.  Miss Marsh was the principal and School 2 when Viola and Lucy went there.  In their class was Bob Morrill, Nelson Ayers, Ed Ranges, Tommy Ingram.  When I first came Mrs. Drumhauser lived next door. She went to New York and came back after she married again.  On the other side was a Germany lady who wouldn't put out the American flag.  They found a bell the day before World War I ended.  Mrs. Lippman used to rent a house in Teaneck before they move here.  I get to know Mr. Lippman very well.  I had to carry viola and he'd often pick me up and give us a ride in his horse and buggy.  Our first choral group was formed in the Lippman home.  Mrs. Howard was the director.  The Woman's Club Choral sang over War.  We were active in organizing Christ Church.  We used to meet in people's home and Leland Ferry carted the books and told people where the services would be.  Fairchild Ferry was the first warden.  When the church was opened he appointed me to take care of the altar.  I was 10 years alone on the altar.  Then Mr. Hall, our clergyman, formed the Altar Guild -- our first minister came from Englewood on a bike.  His name was Genns.  Mr. Stridburg was our first regular minister.  He entered the War with the Red Cross, came back and served a while and then Mr. Hall came.  We walked to church, there were no cars.  The little church at Rutland Ave. and Rugby Rd, built in 1915.  There were so many people wanted a church nearby.  There was just the Presbyterian and St. Anastasia's.  I was a charter member of the Lady Foresters who met in St. Anastasia's.  We had an Englewood Hospital Auxiliary that met in people's homes.  Mrs. Ayers had a Red Cross meeting in her home in from Teaneck Road -- a beautiful home.  Nelson Ayers had a son who was born in his grandfather's mansion (Dr. Ayers).  The Teaneck Woman's Club Choral used to go the Millington, N. J. (East Orange) on Dec. 22 and sing carols for the Veterans there.  The Christ Church choir sang for the prisoners in Hackensack.  Teaneck Road was a dirt road with lots of trees.  Orchard Street was just a lane -- I wish it still was.  We had a traveling library at first.  They left books at Kubie's stationary store at the foot of West Englewood Ave.  The a group of women bought a slave house on Teaneck Road, we fixed it up for a little library.  Then we sold it and gave the money to the town with the understanding they would build a library.  The library women included Mrs. Greenlaw, Mrs. Jordan, Mrs. Caddy, Mrs. Franke, Mrs. Peinecke and myself.  There is a plaque in the music department in memory of the founder.  George sold war bonds during World War I.  That war broke up the Teaneck Club -- every one joined up.  Mr. Fibbish owned the house where the club met.  Mrs. Febbish was an actress before she married him.  We had a show at the high school (the woman's Club) .  Helen Jepson sang in costume.  When the club was 25 years old we had an affair at the White Beeches and she sang then. She was a member of the club.  I think I made all the coffee Christ Church and the Woman's club every served.  We had eggnog parties and they had me serving whisky sours.  I said I didn't know if I was promoted or demoted.  I used to go with Mrs. Hacker all over, visited the United Nations.  I have soon so much.  I had a sister who was an elocutionist.  The Woman's club used to sing carols around the Christmas tree on the municipal grounds which the Men's Club planted.  We used to go to police court on Friday nights -- George used to go.  We had volunteer firemen.  There was a big fire on Lincoln's birthday at Lauzon's at Teaneck Rd. and Bogert.  They used to work in a 5-car garage.  After their business in New York fell apart they came here.  Hilliard lived on Garden Street.  Joe married the niece of Jim Farley, Rudy built a house where Denny lives now.  Peineckes lived on Bogert St. He was a carpenter.  Clifford married a teacher.  When I was married Macy's was at 14th Street.  I made all of my oldest daughter's clothes till she got married.  I was crowned queen of the Teaneck Senior Citizen in 1969.  The day Eisenhower was inaugurated I entertained the choral group here.  They came at 10 and stayed till 5 to watch it on TV.  
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. George Lebeck;1903;1970;Mrs. George Lebeck, 1903, 1970 (Interview taped 10/15/1970) The bands were playing and flags were flying when I came to Teaneck in 1913 -- It was 4th of July. That was 57 years ago. We moved into a house on Orchard Street and have been there ever since.  We were active in organizing Christ Episcopal Church that same year. First we met in homes. Leland Ferry used to go around on Sunday morning telling people where the meeting was to be. Mrs. Fairchild Ferry had a Sunday School class in her home. Then a minister from Englewood came on his bike, Leland Ferry wheeled the song books and prayer books in a wheel barrow to where we were going to meet. I sang in the choir and still do.  We built our first church at Rutland and Rugby roads. Mr. Stritzberg from Englewood conducted an afternoon service. After we were going a while we had 300 children in the Sunday School. I took care of the altar.  I was a charter member of the Woman's Club started in Mrs. Lippman's home. I was hospitality chairman after we got started and met in the Lippman's barn. I'd go the day before and make a fire and get things read. The choral met in Mrs. Lippman's home. She was a wonderful accompanist. I always sang in the chorale.  I was also active in organizing the library. We met at Mrs. Caddy's home, sometimes at Mrs. Jordan's. We bought the little slave house where the Gulf station is now. Held bake sales etc. to raise the money. It took a lot to keep it going. Then we sold the property for a nice profit and gave the money to the town to build a library.  One year the town had a baby parade on the 4th of July. My daughter won first prizes, a cup from Tiffany's. Lawson Graffin, the chairman, worked there.  They used to have band concerts in the part by the West Englewood station. They'd practice in a barn on Orchard St--where it was all trees.  Every one used to go to see the Phelps Ruins, The Blue Bird Inn was a popular place. Movie actors from Fort Lee used to come. Helen Jepson belonged to our Woman's Club and used to entertain the Opera Guild in her home. She sing for our 25th anniversary. Wrote me on our 50th anniversary.  When my husband was on the school board they bought the land for the high school and Whittier School.  There weren't many houses in our area. We had an RFD mailbox. A fire gong was at West Englewood Ave. and Teaneck Rd. Used to drive cows across Borden's fields on Longfellow Ave. & Bogert. They had an athletic field. My husband started the Red Devils, they used to have games in Borden's fields and he traveled with the team when they went away.  The Teaneck Club was a great place. They had a bowling allay. Hilliard Lausanne used to set pins for me. Used to have dances every two weeks, One formals one informal. That's where movies started in Teaneck. Mr. Hazelton used to show us good pictures. Everybody always sat in the same place. We brought our children. I never had a baby sitter.  There were no stores. A man from Englewood used to bring bakery goods -- coffee, cake, etc.  We had a vegetable man.  Mr. read from Englewood would com and take grocery orders.  My husband used to bring things like meat from N. Y., he was a truckman with a stationery firm.  I used to do up to 200 jars of fruit and vegetables.  The Phillips farm was along Franklin Road.  He was the tax collector. 
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Harry Davis;1912;1975;Mrs. Harry Davis, 1912, 1975  (Interview taped 9/29/1975) I have lived in Teaneck since Aug.14, 1926 as a bride. I had been living in Tenafly with my brother following the death of my parents when I was 14. My first home was at 291 Thomas Street--Shoffield Farms had a warehouse and platform at Chestnut and Thomas Street. I think the house in still there. We lived upstairs. The last person I know who owned it was a patrolman.  From there we moved to Congress Street, then to Forest Avenue, then Van Buskirk Road. We moved from Van Buskirk to Shepard Ave. and in 1943 we moved to the Homestead here. My husband's parents and family had been living here while we were moving about.  This house was built in 1900 by Mother and Dad Davis. They had six children--five boys and a girl. Mother Davis died in 1917. Fred Davis, Harry's father, went on the Police Department and stayed there till he died in 1935. This street, Overlook, was then known as Parkway. There were few houses around. The house next door was built in 1927--Smithers' house was there, but they didn't live there then--a teacher lived there in 1927-28. Most of the cement block houses were here then, but not the bungalows.  My husband was a volunteer fireman from March 1922 until he went on the paid department June 1, 1929. K. V. Ridley was chief at the time. We did not have the council-manager form of government then. Those who went on at that time were William Lindsay, Roy White and Nels Johnson.  Harry was with the department for 39 years. He was Deputy Chief when he retired. When he was a volunteer I used to make coffee and go to the fires. I took the children. I had five.  I raised four girls, my boy died shortly after he was born. My daughter Harriette married Arthur Ridley, son of the chief. My daughter Beatrice married George Bowker, now a patrolman. My daughter Alice married Louis Kelter, now Deputy Fire Chief and my daughter Gwendolyn married to Warner Bassett of the road department.  Yes, I still got the short wave calls of the fire department. I have a Potrone. I used to get both police and fire calls but now the police dept has its own band. The sound doesn't bother me at all. We first bought Harry a Helicrafter. It was always out of tune, so in 1960 the girls and I bought this for him. He asked why did he need it since he had a direct phone to headquarters.  I was on the Bess Myerson program with Harry because he told why I deserved the Big Pay Off in the late 1950s. I got some jewelry, a sports outfit and a negligee.  One big fire I remember was the Big Boar store on Cedar Lane on the same side with the picture show. That was the first super market with carts and all. The fire was around 1945 or 46. I remember when the Blue Bird Inn burned. Harry was overcome with smoke so they took him to Holy Name hospital across the street. That must have been in the late 20s. In the winter of 1928 when Harry was a volunteer and was employed by the road department they had one of those big snowstorms. He drove a snow plow for 72 hours, came home to get some sleep and next thing you know he went out and fought a fire that night. Policemen are nice, but some Firemen are more sacrificial.  I have scrapbooks of everything pertaining to the fire department. Here is a clipping about a fire at Neldon's Sanitarium on Aug. 28, 1924. That was on Englewood Ave. at Gaylord Terrace. The Clover Club burned in February,1926. That was on Teaneck Road about where Route 4 is now, on the east side around Forest Avenue.  Teaneck Volunteer fire Department helped put out a fire at Englewood Hospital in May, 1925. When we had a Volunteer department we'd go all over -- Bergenfield, Bogota, Hackensack. Chief Murray Sr. came here to be an instructor in fire mathematics. After he was here 10 weeks they hired him as fire commissioner. During the early 40s he ran training schools and people came from all over. There are only six paid fire departments in Bergen County to this day.  I always participated in local affairs--Girl Scouts, etc . When my three girls went to Bryant School I was classmother in charge of classmothers reminding them to bring their cakes etc. I worked with St.Paul's Church and on Teaneck 75th anniversary committee. I have tutored handicapped children in hand crafts at Whittier, Longfellow and Teaneck High.  I was in charge of the tea during Teaneck's 75th anniversary celebration Sending out the invitations and all. It was just great to see so many people there. I got the autograph album with all of their signatures. I hope to participate in the Bicentennial. Harry and I would have gone if he had lived. When we were married Aug.14, 1926, we didn't go to Niagara Falls  we went to Philadelphia where they were celebrating the Sesqui Centennial. We would have celebrated out 50th anniversary in '76.  He retired at 65 because he had to. He watched the progress of the fire house they were building on Windsor Road. I picked up 75 nails they were using and kept them as souvenirs.  When Harry was at the Morningside Terrace Station a youngster climbed a telephone pole during a bad storm. He and Frank Denny and Charles VanSlyko got the boy off the wires.  Our social life? In the 20s Company 4 Fire House used to have dances. They were down on Glenwood Avenue and later were where Ronald's warehouse was. It was the first company disbanded when the paid fire department went in. That was on Glenwood near Hemlock, I dyed my wedding dress to wear to a Christmas party.  We planned a big celebration in 1935 to celebrate 40 years, but my father-in-law died.  Here are articles about lots of fires. There was one Dec. 23., 1935 started by a Christmas tree. A man came down from upstairs got to the vestibule and opened a door.  It was a coat closet door, not the outside. He died in that closet.  Firemen used to got lots of calls to rescue boys going on rafts in the Hackensack liver.   After I was married I worked three weeks as a cashier in the Dumont Theater--not the Dumont Municipal building. That was the first theater that had talkies. I rode the Dumont-Hackensack Bus---five cents each way. Dick Verlini's 78 bus was 15 cents from Englewood to Hackensack.  
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Ida Damrau Montensen;1896;1970;Mrs. Ida Damrau Montensen, 1896, 1970  (Interview taped 9/18/1970) I was born 74 years ago in house where the Grand Union now stands on Queen Anne Rd. near DeGraw. My father came from Alsace Lorraine and at first worked with flowers on Phelps estate. Greenhouses were where Ronald's furniture store is now.  Queen Anne, then called Westfield Ave., was a dirt road. No gas or electric, but we had an artesian well and people came from all over for the water.  I went to school on Fort Lee Road. Miss Howland was our teacher. There were no more than 15 pupils. My classmates includes the McCaffreys and Edna DeGraw. I remember the fire gong where the luncheonette is now. My father used to bang it with a hammer whenever there was a fire.  My father later had his own green house, specialized in sweet peas and chrysanthemums for the New York market. The whole family worked bunching them. First we tied them with raffia, later with rubber bands which were easier. We had four big greenhouses.  Lorena Carroll was my girl friend. Her father was with Fiss, Doerr and Carroll who had a big stock farm between Queen Anne Rd. and Palisade Ave. near Cedar Lane. The stables were enormous. Mr. Jackson had a boarding house for all the Carroll's help. Willie Jackson is still living in Hackensack. The boarding house was on Palisade Ave. in the woods.  Lorena had a governess and they had a footman and a pony cart. Of course they had high stepping horses. Mr. Carroll wanted her to go to Dwight School . We went there for a while. Lorena's aunt was Ida Ringling of Baraboo, Wis. She married Paul Lambert.   We had no near neighbors. The Carroll's, then the next was a family at Palisade and Cedar Lane where Richter's is and then the Garrisons on Garrison Ave. at Beverly Rd. We were so happy when a store was opened where the gas station is on Fort Lee Road. They sold candy. P. J. Nugent had the only grocery store in Hackensack. Tom McCaffrey was the grocer boy, came one day to take the orders and another day to deliver. Peddlers used to come around with shoes, clothing and other things. Every one was glad to see them.  Capt. Stewart had a big house opposite Hillside Ave., a little beyond Oakdene. They had three girls--they were friends of Mrs. Blauvelt Westervelt. The house burned down. The Stewarts moved to Connecticut after selling to Hughes. They had a caretaker-- it was all apple orchards then.  The trolley was near us. The Garrison boys used to wait the trolley near our house. I remember when we got our first near neighbor. What a thrill. They built where the Grand Union Parking lot is now.  My father came from Alsace Lorraine in 1893, my brother had been born there. He came to Teaneck because my aunt lived here in what had been the schoolmaster's house. We used to go there. The second floor had little windows, two bedrooms, a brook in the back. They had five children. Later they bought a farm in South Hackensack from Hudson St. to Teterboro. Sold it for nothing.  Even though my father had a greenhouse, he farmed across the street grew tomatoes. He worked for Phelps for a couple of years. Retired at 50, the depression cane along, every one needed money, couldn't repay loans.  I walked to the Lutheran Church on Essex St. in Hackensack.  We'd go to church there in the morning and on Sunday evenings we'd go again to prayer meeting at the Sunday school. Had good times, put on plays. Willie DeGraw taught us how to tango.  Donald Mathewson ran the Phelps greenhouses. He was a Scotsman. They used to grow luscious grapes. Frank DeRonde used to drive by in his horse and buggy.  My grandmother bought five pieces of  furniture when the Phelps family held its auction, a love seat, platform rocker and arm chairs. My father had one of the side chairs in the greenhouse for a long time. Later he threw it on a trash pile, tried to break it up but couldn't. I salvaged it, refinished it and made needlepoint. My daughter has it today. Mrs. Dahl bought the fancy bed. She lived on Teaneck Rd. on the old Cornelius Terhune House.  After my marriage, I moved to a house owned by George Demarest. 
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Katherine Keener (age 90);1885;1975;Mrs. Katherine Keener (age 90), 1885, 1975 Principle of Hawthorne School 1924-1955 (Interview taped 8/4/1975) I came to Teaneck in 1919 or 20. Mr. Jay was head of the school system. I applied and he said there was no vacancy. I went to the board and they hired me. They were trying to got him to loosen his authority. He was an honorable man. I think it was politics. He became a book man who sold books for all schools. He had a beautiful daughter Naomi. She said I taught her to love history.  I went to School 2 first and was there four years. Mr. Lee sent me up to School 1 because they needed help with some children who were--let us say--full of pep. Nellie Ward was their teacher. I was at No.1 a year. They laid the cornerstone of Hawthorne School on my birthday, Jan.24, 1924. There was an eclipse of the sun that day.  Frank Sample came up to School 1 around February and asked if I'd like to be principal. I had turned down School 3--Emerson-- and Bogota, I had my father-in-law then. Mrs. Sample was on the board. I had Sonny Sample in school. Made him write a note to his mother telling her he was tardy. Now he is building boats in Massachusetts ant bought his mother a fine house.  Mr. Lee came after Mr. Jay. Then came Dr. Lester Neulen who took a course at Columbia that enabled him to make up a course for sack class in the system. He was working on language. He wanted me to get all the poems for each grade. He called Miss Norton for a selection. She called me and I gave her the poems all my classes read.  I was principal of Hawthorne School from 1924-1955. I want to thank the man who got No.5 school for Glenwood Park. That was Mr. Shulenberger. He went every where and said how much that school was needed. No. 4 had just been finished. We all fought to get No.5.  I had one room in the school on the northwest corner. It was cold and damp. Teachers and children got colds. It needed renovating. The board wasn't doing anything. The PTA appointed a man to go to the board meeting. I had him ask me questions and I gave the answers.  It cost $8,000 to waterproof the walls, install radiators, etc.  Yes, I remember Tony Manne. What did he die of? A heart attack? He had Miss Walsh as a teacher.  In G1enwood Park we had an athletic meet. We won the large cup for sixth graders and the baseball trophy. We won ever seventh and eighth grader. It was those tough little children who did this. Mr. Weekly was the coach. The children loved him.  I've learned a lot of Patience since I came here. I get cards ant letters from so many former pupils. Here is one from Mario Thompson Tambord, "To the best principal and teacher I could hope to have in 1934-35."  In 1960 I took a trip around the world. Rode in 32 planes -- San Francisco, Hawaii, then I went on a side trip to Fiji and Australia. Rejoined the group and went to India, Ceylon, Turkey, the Black Sea resorts, saw the Taj Mahal by moonlight, Egypt, through the Holy Land, Greece, Ita1y, Portugal, Spain and home. I was then 75. I saw the Himalayas, Nepal, Cambodia where they had shrines to some unknown lord. I have been to Alaska, Mexico, and Guatemala. The finest trip was on a cattle boat to South America. There were 12 of us -- all principals -- no men. We brought back 200 black, angus cattle to Texas.   When I started teaching we didn't have as many books or drawing materials as they have now. Mr. Jay looked for good disciplinarians. The children turned out fine. We didn't have vandalism. Yes, I was a strong disciplinarian. If you must know. Tony was quite a handful. Before they had my dinner Tommy Costa came to my school and said he was going deer hunting that day. I said you go and bring me some venison.1 didn't get it.  The Board of Education didn't give me the right salary -- what they paid in the larger school. The new board came on and asked if there was anything to complain about. I said I thought I should have the same salary as principals of larger schools. I'm not worried, I said. I have my career all out out,  if I don't get the raise. I'll be a bouncer in a saloon.  I liked arithmetic and history and used to hold old fashioned spelling bees.1 know the new math, but I think the old is better. Now they learn subtraction by addition.  I came to the nursing home 11 years ago. My finances will keep me here until I'm 95, then I'll go to Bergen Pines and lot Rufus Little look after me.  I attained Normal School in Courtland, N. Y., Class of 1906. I taught first in Lodi where most of the people worked in the silk mills. I lived in Dumont. Took a train and two trolleys to got to Bogota when I taught there. I lived in Bergenfield when taught in Teaneck.  Being a principal was all right. I loved teaching.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Lily Thiede Conklin;1896;1970;Mrs. Lily Thiede Conklin, 1896, 1970 (Interview taped August 1970) Born in Teaneck 1896. Her parents lived in a house on Teaneck Road near present Fenimore. Her mother worked on the farm, her father worked for William DeGraw. They were married in New York City. She was born in a house on Fort Lee Road, went to school on Fort Lee Road with Edna DeGraw. In 1904 when she was 8 went to St. Mary's School in Hackensack, walked the two miles. When Susquehenna tracks flooded she couldn't go to school. Used to walk to Moore's store in Leonia to get a yeast cake.  Remembers as a child waiting for the man in the sulky to light the gas light at Beech Street and come every morning to put it out. We were the only house around -- between West Shore and Northern Railroad. There were 8 children. Her father milked the cows. She was married in Fort Lee at the Church of the Madonna. Stayed with her mother at first then moved to 90 Munn Ave.  At first the trolley just went to River road and then took a stage to the Hackensack green. Cost a nickel.  My father came from Germany. He was a good farmer, grew fine corn, tomatoes, etc. She used to help get produce ready for market -- wiped off tomatoes. Her brother used to take a sulky to Dan Kelly's hill to hlep pull farmers and their loads up hill.  Phelps didn't come this way much. Peter Ackerman was Supt. of Schools. Grocery man came Tuesdays for orders and delivered on Thursdays. We bought clothes on Sunday on Hudson St., Hackensack, when we went to church.  My father used to work for William Bennett also, later DeGraw came after him and he went to work for him again.  I remember Fiss, Doerr and Carroll stock farm. Teaneck was all farmers and working poeple in those days. I remember Mr. Garrison coming by in a buggy to deliver mail. Boats used to come up the Hackensack loaded with coal and lumber.  Our pleasures were simple. After Sunday School on Sundays we would have dinner and then go to look at some one's new pigs, a new calf, team of horses. We had a music box that played tin discs. Special delicacies were ox heart cherries. We'd sing and the grown-ups would dance in the yard. The Ho-Ho-Kus fair was a big thing. They had auto races. I told my father that a car went 60 mph and he said people were going to kill themselves. We used to go to Foster's store in Bergenfield where Foster Village is now.  I remember the Cherry Hill tornado of 1914. The tornado hit near River Edge, but trees were blown across roads in Teaneck. My father and other citizens worked for three days with cross cut saws to clear the roads. The only electricity in Teaneck was on Teaneck Road. 
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Lois Henderson Stianson (Mrs. John);1920;1970;Mrs. Lois Henderson Stianson (Mrs. John), 1920, 1970  (Interview taped 10/15/1970) When we came here in 1923 there was one house going up across from our house on Merrison St. and another down the hill. The Schultzes were at the foot of the hill. There were no other houses. The street was cut through and the sewers were in. Late that year they paved it. It was country living. At night we could see the lights of Hackensack and the hills beyond. In the winter strong winds blew across from Garrison Avenue. There was nothing to break the wind. The pipes would freeze.  We were a family of six girls and two boys-- Florence, Amy, Bob, Dot, Kan, myself. Two were married. Marion married Gustave Terhune.  Before World War I John and Gus had a sporting goods store in Hackensack . We went to Emerson school. The trackk were at street level then. Water used to rush down Cedar Lane. I remember after the Longfellow School fire those kids went to Emerson. We used to cut across farm land on Garrison Ave. I went to Hackensack High in my junior year. After high school I went to work in New York. After my marriage I joined the Woman's Club and became music chairman.  Mr. Stianson's parents came from Norway. He was a ship's captain and a master at 21. He gave up the sea when he married. They moved to Ridgefield Park and came to Teaneck when John was 3. He did building and was a partner with Mr. Ayers--he did the building. Held second mortgages on many houses and then came the depression. I don't remember much about the depression, but every one helped out. They all do in a big family.   I remember when they built the George Washington Bridge. One day we hiked up Fort Lee Road to see them building it. I remember when Clarence Chamberlain landed a plane on the bridge. His plane had the first diesel motor. He called it Miss Teaneck. Van Waggoner was mayor.  Cedar Lane is so different now. The Garrison house used to be high on a hill that ran clear to Maple Avenue. There were gypsies around.  
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Marjorie Polifene Zeliff;1919;1970;Mrs. Marjorie Polifene Zeliff, 1919, 1970 (Interview taped 10/15/1970) I came to Teaneck in 1927 and has always lived in the same house at Garrison Ave. and Wyndham Rd. Garrison was a dirt road. My father used to park his car at Sagamore and walk the rest of the way home.  Very few stores on Cedar Lane. I went to Emerson School and came home for lunch, walking through lots where Cowen's, Gratzel's and apartments are now. Used to play ball there.  Remembered the carnivals that used to be held at Garrison and Cedar Lane, a high spot in those days. Went to Teaneck High, graduated the first year they had a junior high--1937. I married a Hackensack man, member of an old Dutch family, has three daughters, 2 married, one in Albright College, 4 grandchildren. Walked to high school and came home for lunch.  I remembered when Route 4 was being built. A great place to learn to ride a 2-wheel bike. Good pavement, no traffic. Used to go sleigh riding on Martense and Tilden. My father commuted on the West Shore, service was fantastic. I lived across street from Duncan Hill who wanted to keep the railroad. When I went to work in N.Y., I used the Courtlandt St. ferry, a pleasant trip.  I remembered the miniature golf course where Volks is now--after they tore down Blue Bird Inn. Golf course was beautiful.  I think Teaneck is marvelous. I like the flower plantings around town. The Garden Club grows the plants for the town. Mr. and Mrs. Ackerman, my neighbors, were so active in the Garden Club. I have enjoyed living in Teaneck. My parents died when I was young and I was left the house. It used to be a quieter street. I remember when George Washington bridge was opened.  My father drove me across it. It is still impressive. It used to cost a nickel to go to Hackensack on the bus. Monthly ticket to N.Y. was $13 but you could use it on Saturdays to go to places like Ridgefield Park.  My husband is with Teaneck Post Office and we like it here. My daughter has bought a house in West Englewood.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Miriam Johnson Freitag;xxxx;1975;Mrs. Miriam Johnson Freitag, xxxx, 1975 (Interview taped 7/9/1975) I was born in Bogota, but my family moved to Teaneck when I was young.  We lived on Kipp Street, Oritani Place and Linden Avenue. I remember an old couple named Kitty and Sam Dunn who lived on Kipp Street.  Fire destroyed the two-family home.  Kitty and Sam lost everything. I can't recall how it started, I was under 10.  The Morrisons had a large colonial house at the bottom of Oritani Place.  She kept a lot of hens.  They offered the Duffs a little house perched on the side of a hill.  People in town furnished the house.  That was my first taste of volunteer work.  I believe he worked for the paper mill.  I remember Spiedhoffer's Bakery in Hackensack.  We would walk down Pomander Walk, turn right over a large sand dune, cut through the dunes and cross a wooden bridge to Hackensack.  My mother would always buy us something nice at the bakery.  It must have been where Arnold Constable's was.  There was Mac Fadden's Drug Store in Hackensack where everybody met.  One house had no cellar.  We had a large iron stove with nickel trimming.  Mother had an oil heater for the living room.  The kitchen was our family room.  Cedar Lane from Teaneck Road to the bridge was barely wide enough for two cars.  These cedar trees arched like the sabers at West Point weddings.  My cousin and I loved to walk to Hackensack, over the plank bridge.  Winifred Reiners, one of my friends from the school on North Street, would invite me to her house.  Her father was the bridge tender.  When a boat came he raised the bridge.  It was an unusual house, English style with a gabled roof and a big chimney.  It was gray.  The Reiners were very friendly.  I remember going down River Road to Napping's Rink toward Bogota.  I think that's where the Swim Club is.  They'd put up a flag with a red center.  That meant Skating today.  My father was a builder in Teaneck and Bogota.  He had a nice business by the time I was 12.  I remember Miss Brianard in the eighth grade at Emerson School.  A very nice person and excellent disciplinariam.  She was the principal -- an ample woman with red cheeks and dark hair.  Miss Helen Scott was my fourth grade teacher.  She was an opera fan.  She went to see Wagner's The Ring cycle.  On Friday afternoon she would tell us about it, humming the theme from each opera the explaining it.  Then we'd have a test.  I remember Miss Ferris and Miss Wilke.  I went to kindergarten in Bogota before School 3 was built.  We went then to what is now the Borough Hall.  There was a store on Catalpa Avenue between Oritani and Kipp, owned by a family named Weber.  I remember the big cheeses and banisco cookies in  big tin boxes.  Among our neighbors were the Grahams, English or Scottish people who had two great dens.  During World War I Mrs. Graham had chickens.  I used to get them for my mother--they were a dollar a dozen then.  There was a field between our house and Webers and a large rock.  There where we used to gather.  There was a lovely family named Erickson -- Karin was my friend. Her father had a Model T touring car.  On hot summer days we would go black berrying, wearing old clothes and a hat and carrying a stick.  Ne part of body was exposed.  The stick was to beat down the bushes.  The berry patch was from North Street to Cedar Lane and up to Larch Avenue.  North Street was a dirt road with lots of rocks.  What was then Phelps Woods now has a thousand houses.  We loved Phelps Woods.  I was in Miss Emily McGill's Campfire Girls.  She taught us about WoHeLo -- Work, Health, Love.  She took us to the woods and we cooked fudge forever and it was never quite done.  Beautiful woods -- pine trees across from where the main building of Fairleigh Dickinson is now.  We belonged to the Smith Community Church.  Every year the congregation met in Phelps Woods for an outing.  It was so cool. coming in from the summer heat.  The soft pine needles under foot. There were horse back riders there.  When we lived on Kipp Street we would gather mushrooms.  My parents came from Finland.  My father loved mushrooms.  We'd take a large paper bag and go to a field near Larch Avenue and Kipp Street.  The mushrooms were wonderful.  My father know which to pick.  We'd go home with a big bag full, wash them, put them in a skillet with butter and have a fine meal.  Occasionally we'd go canoeing in the Hackensack River.  You could rent them at the Bogota Boat Club.  The Cadmuses were a stately couple and Captain Phelps something else.  He had a large car and a chauffeur.  He was so picturesque and looked so elegant with his Van Dyke beard and Captain's hat.  We know his two gardeners, Charles Baruda and Mr. Robert Stevenson.  Captain Phelps made nice homes for them.  His house was where you enter Fairleigh Dickinson University.  There were huge violets there.  Drinkwort was one of the gardeners.  The Morgans lived down the way.  The Dorisis were an Italian family who lived on Chestnut down from Cedar Lane.  All the family worked on the farm.  Rita Barrie lived with her grandfather on Paradise Farm.  A horse farm on Queen Anne Road.  George Watson, her grandfather trained race horses.  The farm ran down to the West Shore Railroad.  It was enclosed with a large white fence.  Rita came to school in the Phelps Manor Bus for children who lived beyond the railroad.  It was a joy to go to Paradise Farm.  They had an Irish maid Kitty and a butler.  They had leather furniture in the living room.  Her grandfather went back and forth to England and Scotland. Rita marries Ben Wood.  I went to Leonia High School on the trolley.  I walked to Main Street, Bogota.  I must mention the Artist Deskow.  He had two daughters, Ruth and Elaine. His house was fun to go into.  It was a colonial house across from School3, Elm Avenue and North Street.  It has been there since I was 6.  The girls' father's studio had a large window with many panes -- it was later the Dara-Dale Dance Studio.  Teaneck was a nice quite town.  I remember the old fashioned fire gongs.  There was one near Weber's Store on Catalpa and one near the Kenwood Fire House.  The firemen's balls were very nice affairs.  They had them upstairs.  There were masked balls and other gatherings.  All organizations used it.  I belonged to the Christian Endeavor and we'd meet there.  In 1922, some one spread a rumor that the world was coming to an end.  On the night it was supposed to happen, every one got on a high place.  We gathered across Oritani Place and Larch Ave.  There was no moon or stars -- the world was coming to an end.  The town people waited and when nothing happened they started talking.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Sadie Laight;xxxx;1973;Mrs. Sadie Laight, xxxx, 1973 (Interview taped 2/17/1973) Recalls first services for Jews in Teaneck held in Israel Doskow's studio.  Later started Sunday School on Palisade Avenue.  She became active in the Sunday school in the late thirties and served as a volunteer for 12 years.  Dr. Harry Rosen was the first Bar Mitzvah in Teaneck. Ben Rosen had the first delicatessen  in Teaneck.  In 1941, there were 6,000 Jews in Bergen County. First synagogue was established in Englewood in 1901.  There was talk of a bridge across the Hudson in 1910, many thought Fort Lee Road would the main access and acquired property there.  Diamond's tailor shop was where people gathered to talk things over.  When George Washington Bridge was opened in 1931, many jews came from Jersey City, Bayonne, Hoboken and Union City.  On holidays people were lined up on Fort Lee road from the Ferry to Teaneck Road.  People from New York and Brooklyn came later, they were regarded as pushy at first, buy many later proved to be wonderful workers.  Asked if she was aware of restrictions, she said she was somewhat aware, but was too busy to bother -- some signs were up in Ridgewood.  She could not recall a sign on the site of the present Carriage Club.  Mrs. Laight was a charter member of the Woman's Club but resigned when a prospective Jewish member was turned down.  She was a member of the Auxiliary to Holy Name Hospital and secretary at the Teaneck Jewish Community Center until just before her death in 1973.  Jewish families in Teaneck in order of arrival:  1910 -- Bernard and Minna Lippman  1916 -- The Ettens  1917 -- The Felvins  1920 -- Sadie and Gustav Laight  1923 -- Dr. Leo Treinis  1925 -- Minna Schoenberg  1926 -- Israel Doskow, served on Board of Education  1927 -- Mike Stolzer and Henry Eysman  1928 -- Ackermans, Hellers, Benheims, Diamonds  1929 -- Ben and Regina Gordon  Cornerstone of  Teaneck Jewish Community Center was laid in 1948 -- there was no problem in acquiring land.
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. William Ward;1908;1976;Mrs. William Ward 1908, 1976   (Interview taped 3/24/1976) I have lived in Teaneck over 50 years. We came from West New York in 1917 or 1918.  My husband's father had settled here--on Linden Ave. It was all country and it was lovely.  There was just one store on Cedar Lane. We shopped in Bogota where there was a National Grocery Store on Main Street.  We walked to Hackensack to the butcher store. Our nearest neighbor was just two houses away, but there were many vacant lots. There was no high school when we came, but my daughter was in the first graduating class at Teaneck High.  My son and daughter went to Emerson School.  I was interested in the P.T.A. and became president.  I was active in school and church. I was a charter member of the Community Church. We used to meet in the  Kenwood Fire House. In the beginning we went to Bogart Memorial Church. Our church was first called the William N. Smith Community Church.  He started it or gave money toward it. Now there are not more than five charter members left--Richard Graham passed away not long ago. Max Hasse's mother was a charter member. They lived on Chestnut Street near the railroad.  Frederick Shields was our first minister.  There was a big farm on Linden Avenue.  The farmers used to come with a wagon of fresh vegetables. We had an ice man who used to bring us a piece of ice--that was before electric refrigerators. Our ice man was Mr. Thomas.  There were no side walks. We walked, but most families had some sort of a family bus. There was no Route 4 in those days. There were trees all along Cedar Lane. There was a small grocery store there. Where J &J drug store is now there was a house.  I remember Archie Hart's house on River Road and Cedar Lane--where Fairleigh Dickinson buildings are now. There was a lovely tea room there at one time. It was so nice living here in those days.  You knew every one, there have beer big changes. I don't remember who was mayor.  I know Mr. Lewis was in politics.  My husband was a painter. He and his brother teamed up.  They painted the Bogota Municipal Building. To go to Now York we took the trolley on Main Street and then the ferry to 34th street.  I started working at the library in 1927 or 28, before Miss Norton came.  We had started a little library at Emerson School and I took charge of it, helping children select books and all.  Mrs. Jordan had asked me to see about it. When they wanted some one to help Miss Askew at the Teaneck Library, Mrs. Jordan asked me. I was there 30 years.  I missed it so when I left--that was 10 or 11 years ago. But you find other activities.  A year or two after I was in the library, Agnes Norton came.  I was there the day she was interviewed. Mrs. Jordan was on the library board.  People in those days were willing to give their time.  I hear Conrad Jordan is in California. I didn't know where Louise was.  Mrs. Shulenberger was also on the library board. She worked hard to get Hawthorne Schoo1.  They started a little church in Glenwood Park.  I remember the Depression well. The library was a blessing then.  Mr. Romaine was very active in helping people--giving them food, a box of cereal or some flour.  Mrs. Lippman was a prominent woman.  I was with a group invited to her lovely home. I think it was a school group. We had a delicious luncheon. I remember when they chopped down the trees for the athletic field! Mrs. Lippman and some of the women from the town furnished refreshments.  We grow to like Teaneck very much. We were able to buy this lot and build our home.  I was out this morning raking leaves. I was 91 last October.  I don't feel that old.  I think it's activity that keeps me going  Today I went to the Reformed Church in Hackensack,  a group from Luther Bible College sang. It was delightful. I went with Anne Wood -- Her husband, E. Warren Wood, took so many pictures of Teaneck. He was great loss.  I walked quite a lot -- over to Route 4 or to Hackensack, but my daughter takes me to the shopping centers. I do remember the Terhune house on River Road. They tore it down. I feel sorry when I hear of an old building being torn down.  There were a lot of farms here in the old days. I remember the beautiful lilac bushes in back of the Phelps ruins where the Municipal building is. I guess they cut them down to make room for cars. The town takes good care of its tress. It is a nice little town and I admire Mayor Kieliszek.  She is doing a fine job.  When I go walking I feel I'm lost. I don't meet a soul.  They go swishing by in their cars, I don't tire in walking.  We've had some wonderful people here who did a lot.  Miss Matte Scott, she lived in a lovely house on Teaneck Road that is gone now. You could sit on the window sills. I remember the Hans Christian Anderson tea house on Cedar Lane near Frances Street.  When I went to work there the library was just the first part as you enter. There was a small room at the back. Miss Norton fixed up as an office. Then Alice Rust came. There were just three of us. I did most of the shelving. We had a balcony and that was where the big tomes were kept. I carried them up there. We had no aides as they do now. We know every one who came in.  Children read more story books then. Now there are so many outside activities they don't have time to read--trips, sport, TV.  The trolley fare was 5 cents. postage was 2cents. We had a mail box on the street. Now they use jeeps to make the rounds. There was a house on the corner when we came here--then 3 or 4 vacant lots. There used to be a man who rode horses between Elm Ave. and Linden.  There were German people at the corner. There was a big wheel and a hammer on Linden Avenue used to announce a fire. Sheffield Farms was here.  There was a big open field where I used to gather dandelions and make wine. Milkmen delivered with horse drawn wagons. Little farmers sold vegetables and there were carts from which people sold peaches reasonably.  Bergen county was full of farms in those days.  Things have changed, but I have enjoyed living in Teaneck. It is a nice town.   
TeaneckTownship;Mrs. Vida Muller;1900;1975;Mrs. Vida Muller 1900, 1975 (Interview taped 11/17/1975) I have lived in Teaneck all my life. We mofnly--then twice again and in the fall two more nights.  We rented some costumes from New York.  This was one of the first developments of Nelson Ayers. Around here were beautiful shrubs and trees. Phelps brought lots of trees here. There were wild flowers, big violets and ferns. About where Windsor Road cuts through there was a spring with a big tin cup hanging there. The hoboes used to come there for water. The hoboes told us tales and stories. When we told my mother we spent many hours with the hoboes she didn't like it. They were usually alone, you seldom saw two together, but they were talkative and told good stories.  I remember once Mr. Madison bought ice cream cones.  He covered them with something--we didn't have plastic or waxed paper-- and hid them under the leaves of the skunk cabbage there. We hunted for them. That was great.   West Englewood, Ogden, Maitland and Warwick Avenues were being developed,. Where Essex is there was a farm. There was one north of West Englewood. There was a big Phelps house on the left. It was all open fields--no houses. I don't remember cows, they were mostly truck farms.  They used to close Ogden for a play street. One night we went over to a farm, down a hill and into the woods.  It was dark.  It was kind of dangerous but we didn't think about that. After playing we'd go to someone's house for cocoa and coffee for the adults.  We had electricity and gas for when the power was shut off. My father turned the petcock for the Gas until the electric came on. We had a coal furnace. The house wasn't insulated too well. We used fire places upstairs. We undressed before the fire and would run upstairs to bed. My mother would put hot water bottles in the bed. We had a coal stove in the kitchen. That was handy, you could keep things warming on the back of the stove. The streets were not full of houses--one here and there.  All the men worked in New York. We played ball down by the station and -- when the men came home they'd play with us -- a fire plug or a manhole would be a base.  My father cut down 36 trees on our property. Mr. Ayers didn't like to take down trees. My father was on the Board of Education. He led a tree chopping when they cleared ground for the athletic field. Tommy Costa recalled that. It was a big day. Every one in town worked on it. Teaneck always had a volunteer fire department in those days. My mother told how once a shed in back of the railroad station burned while 35 women and one retired man watched. There was no water -- nothing they could do. No men were home.  When we were young my grandmother made our clothes. Later we usually went to New York on the West Shore. You could get a train any time. There were many trains and you could go and come when you wanted.  Macy's was the place to go. We didn't have too many clothes. Mother would spend a whole day shopping maybe twice a year. There was always something special for children at Christmas. We'd go to shows. I never go now. Twenty years ago we didn't have television. New York was there and you could go. The railroad was cheap. We never felt hickish. We did more than kids do now.  We'd play kick the can, cops and robbery, running games. We'd make candy on Sundays. Have the girls over and make a batch of candy. It was wonderful.  There were no stores around here. There was Etten's and Mr. Brarman from Englewood delivered meat. There was the ice man. Goodmans had a tiny dry goods store--parents of the present Goodman. The post office on that street was THE post office. At Teaneck and Bogota there was a pole with a big arm out where the mailbags hung. The men sorted the mail on the way to Weehawken.  We had a phone and a car- a 1918 Dodge.  It was marvelous. We ran it for 10 years and sold it to a boy who drove it to California and back. He told us he never had any trouble. However it had low compression. When we'd go to camp in New England there was a hill the car couldn't go up. We'd get water from a brook and wait until the engine cooled. We got the car from Kobbe and Flannery.  I don't know that my family banked. If they banked. It wasn't here. I worked in New York when I first started. After the war, I had been away and decided I'd like to work locally even for less money, but there wasn't that much difference. You had to have a car. I was glad I made the change. But it was great to go to New York on the train and boat. You made lots of friends. We used to even have birthday parties on the train.  I don't remember Holy Name Hospital, but I remember when the Phelps home was there. We were always associated with Englewood Hospital. I remember the old town hall and the library. Cedar Lane was a dirt road, but we didn't get to that end of town much. There was nothing on Cedar Lane. My father was on the Board of Education.  Back in the 20s Halloween was so much fun. It was not the trick or treat idea nor like Cabbage Night. There was much running around, wheeling and dealing, and some one chasing you. It was fun giggling and laughing. You didn't know what you were scared of.  Thanksgiving was more a time for costumes. Halloween we'd have parties with cooked spaghetti and peeled grapes for eyes. Once we got 50 cents.  There were 7 of us and we sat down to figure how we'd divide it--7 cents a piece. We took it back. We put on Plays.  There was penny candy--some 5 for a penny.  I don't remember swimming. My father was a camp director and we were away for the summer--did our swimming there.  My father used to take us to Harrington Park. There was a long stream where you could skate for miles -- not a thousand people on a block of ice. Winters used to be colder. We used to pile as many people in a car as we could get. Drivers were mostly older people. Children didn't have cars.  I didn't belong to Girl Scouts. I belonged to the Girls Friendly Society at church. I think it is still going.  I was in the first class at Taneck High, I went a year and a half to Englewood.  The school was brand new. Children came who had gone in Bogota and Englewood. This brought us all together. We had a football team. I think Harry Rothenberg played the whole game--defense, offense and all.  Parades? I remember the one during World War I. I was small. The parade drove down our street and ended up at the bandshell. Some one put us in front and we walked very slowly. That was a permanent bandshell. There was a big railroad station in gay 90s style. Painted green.  There was lots of action there with the express, the engines and shipping.  The railroad was very important.  This area has a lot of history--back to the Revolution. River Road is one of the oldest. The railroad helped the town grow.  We had a church bazaar every year. Every one worked for that. They served supper and there were things in the afternoon, a big fund raiser. You did it and you went. Every one was participating.  As the town developed, younger families moved in.  Now there are many Jewish families here. Their children are on this street, running in and out of the houses. Our little old church is now a synagogue. Our new church is quite differentia not that active now. Church is no longer the center of social life but Father Denny is trying to make it so.  I think Teaneck was marvelous in the teens and 20s. There was open space and it wad close to the city. I had hoped I'd never live too far from New York and I haven't been there in 10 years. Now we have shopping here and New York has changed. You used to get tickets for a Saturday matinee easily. Now you get tickets and wait six months. My father was a fisherman. Some Sundays we'd get up at 6 a.m. and go to the Saddle River, catch six trout and at 8 call the family to breakfast. Now you have to go all the way to Netcong and still not find fish.1 guess you'd have to go to Idaho.  It was a happy childhood. You remember the good things and forget the bad. Children are more sophisticated now with TV. They can have shows every night. I don't think kids are happier. Palisades Amusement Park was a big event.  We went once every Year--a marvelous experience. We didn't have that much money. We had to use our imagination.  We made puppets, played marbles -- your mother made a sack to keep them in. We never worried about dating. There was no pressure on us. Now they're afraid they're not socially acceptable if they don't date. We had a chance to develop.
TeaneckTownship;Lacey Walker;1892;1976;Lacey Walker, 1892, 1976  (Interview taped 3/1/1976) I came to Teaneck in July of 1923 or 24. I lived here until 60 when I moved to Englewood, then to Cape Cod and to Essex, Conn. After my second wife died I returned and now live in Ridgefield Park.  I lived first at 274 DeGraw Avenue, then 315 Crestview Place and at 2O5 Vandelinda Ave. from 1937 to 1960. I remember the trolley from Edgewater that came through Leonia, up DeGraw Avenue and on to Paterson. There was a ferry at 125th Street.  I was elected to the Township Committee and served on the Council in 1928 and 29 as fire commissioner. I was mayor or chairman of the Township Committee in 1930 until the Taxpayers' League took over in November,1930.  I was on the other side. They elected five. I was a Republican candidate and was sixth after the Taxpayers League elected five. I'd have been elected if we hadn't had so many Republicans on the Council.  I was active in the Masons and in the Teaneck Building and Loan Association from 1929 to 42. Through mergers this became Central Bergen Savings and Loan Association. I was a director for 49 years and am now a director emeritus. I can attend all the meetings but I can't vote.  The Masonic Lodge got its charter in 1929. I've been a member 58 years. We bought property and built a temple at the end of Minell Place--bought it from Mrs. Lippman . We lost it in the depression. After that we met in Bogota and then at the Kenwood Fire house.  Among those I remember were John Kelly, Christ Gloeckler, James Reilly, Bob Lewis and Augie Hanniball.  The Building and loan business was good in 1928 and 29.  One of the things we did was to have a master plan of Teaneck made by a professional.  Nelson Ayers had a plan to develop State Street.  It is unusually wide.  He built one apartment building and planned others. He had a lot of ideas. He was away ahead of his time.  When I moved to Teaneck, Queen Anne Road ended about where Copley Ave is. My wife, two children and I used to walk up and sit on the culvert.  Everything north of there was Phelps Woods. There was a building on the hill on Palisade Avenue, south of Cedar Lane, where they purchased horses for the Cavally in World War I.  We had three volunteer fire departments--Glenwood Park., Morningside Terrace and Kenwood as well as the main fire house on Teaneck Road.  I was a member of Morningside Terrace. All the land south of there was vacant. We used to have carnivals there.  Land the Volunteer Fire department owned, we sold it to the township about 10 years ago and they have the fire house there now.  When the Kenwood people sold,  the Masons bought it. I was active on the Council as fire commissions and was a volunteer fireman. I'm an exempt Fireman now. They tell me that will help out with my burial.  Ken Ridley was fire chief. The Longfellow School fire was in 1922.  My children went to Longfellow the next years.  Hillcrest Terrace ended at Morningside Terrace.  There was a big house there with a fire ring and hammer out front.  I remember the Board of Education fought Route 4 because they thought it would interfere with the high school. The Phelps Golf Course was north of Cedar Lane, east of Teaneck Road, south of Route 4. They had a beautiful clubhouse. We used to have lots of Republican meetings there.  I was with the American Petroleum Institute from Jan 15, 1921 to Dec. 31, 1959--39 years. I was secretary, assistant treasurer and convention manager. We had conventions all over the United States. Big ones at the Stevens Hotel in Chicago--now the Hilton. We had 6500 members, we'd have as many as 150 committee meetings a week.  I was born in Oscaloosa, Iowa Feb.16.1892. When I was 11 we moved to Des Moines. I worked a few years for the Rock Island railroad. Then I went to the Railroad Commission in the state of Iowa.When the commissioner moved to Chicago for rate cases he took me with him. I was there two years and was then offered a job with the American Petroleum Institute as a statistician. I went nights to the Walton Srhool of Commerce and got a diploma.  The Blue Bird Inn was an active place in the old days. Benny Rossi ran it. It was popular during prohibition. Lots of Po1itical meetings were held there. After Benny sold he opened a place in Park Ridge. His wife was a good cook.  The West Shore Railroad was important.  There were lots of commuters. I used to get on at Bogota and ride to Weehawken and go either to 42nd Street or Wall Street. There used to be a group on the 8:05 -- Republicans and Democrats.  I had a responsible position in the town. I seldom sat down to the evening meal that some one didn't call wanting a job, a favor or something.  I remember once there was quite a fire on DeGraw Avenue and Queen Anne Road. An invalid grandmother died in the place. It was where there is a gas station now.  As for the excitement when the Taxpayers League took over, I remember one fellow brought a duck or something to the Council room. As for naming Votee Park, I think its wrong. It should have remained Central Park.  There was a man from Glenwood Park on the school board--named Schulenberger. They generally called on him to vote first and he'd pass--then come back and vote afterwards.  The high school site was all woods. A lot of citizens went there and cut down trees before the building was built. When I was mayor they laid the cornerstone of the High school--1928 or 29. My daughter Mary was in the first graduating class.  She did it in 3 1/2 years.  My son was 2 years later.  When I first came here there were about 4000 people.  Now there are about 44,000.  Floyd B. Farrant had an office where the Gulf State gas station is. Later he moved to where James Sweeney's office is.  Floyd B. died and his son Floyd H. and daughter Louie Farrant Barnes took over. Farrant developed that area around DeGraw Avenue.  The Boys used to play baseball where the old A & P was.  When the Town Hall was built they made Jake Brinkerhoff custodian emeritus. He came over from the old townhall where School is now.  My first wife used to go to and give a lot of luncheons. Sometimes she'd take four or five women out for lunch.  While I was on the Council we used to go out with Augie Hanniball and his wife. They lived near the Armory.  I remember Joe Kinzley --the former sheriff.  He used to live in that Dutch colonial house on River Road. They had an enormous fire place. We used to have meetings there in front of that fireplace. Judge Ferry lives near there.  Where Fairleigh Dickinson is was all a park.  Archie Hart had a big house there. Glenwood Park was called Frog Hollow.  Bill Lindsay, the chief came from there. His son is now in the fire Department.  Murray was the Chief when I was on the council. He came with the Taxpayers' League. There were three Democrats and two Republicans on the Council. John Kelly was loud spoken.  I used to say "you can't scare me. If you're reasonable,  I'm with you."  He built all those concrete roads. It turned out to be a good thing, It was Garrison that put in granite curbs.