repository;interviewee;datebirth;dateinterview;text
DetroitWorker;Tom Shipley;1957;2016;Tom Shipley, 1957, 2016 Title Tom Shipley Description Tom Shipley was a student at Schoolcraft College who worked at a local gas station during the summer of 1967. He remembers the gas rationing and how his uncle asked his dad to bring alcohol for his workers who were accustomed to buying some after work while the stores were closed. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 06/28/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit MI Format Text Language en-US Type Written Story Text I was a student at Schoolcraft College in the summer of 1967 and one of the classes that I was taking was a Problems of Sociology with a Mr. Agosti who I believe lived in Dearborn at the time. We were talking about a lot of the sociological issues that related to Detroit and Mr Agosti would tell us things like the reasons that the expressways were sunken was so that people didn't see the blight in the city and they were planning the new I-275 and how that would not be in a ditch because it was in a more affluent area. Even the assigned reading had ties to Detroit and how poverty developed, etc. My father and uncle also owned a Standard Oil station on Schoolcraft and Greenfield in Detroit and another Standard Oil station and car wash on Schoolcraft and Asbury Park in Detroit. When the civil disturbance started things like putting gasoline in cans was prohibited, there was a curfew for selling gasoline and since we normally worked until 11 PM, it was nice to be sent home at 9PM or so at least for a week. The police usually detailed an officer to watch the gas tanks in the evening and over night. Gasoline was also delivered after midnight but that week there was no night delivery of gasoline. We also were able to see how the riots affected people as I worked mainly at the Schoolcraft and Greenfield station. Two of the guys lived near Joy Road and Grand River and one was a guy named Walt and the other was Julius McCoy. They used to ride together because McCoy didn't have a drivers license or a car. Walt was an older guy who had a 1963 Pontiac Bonneville convertible but he never put the top down. During the riots McCoy was mad at Walt because all that week, he drove the Pontiac to and from work with the top down on the Pontiac. We never had any incidents at the station during the riot but we would see troops on the Southfield Freeway on occasion. My Uncle ran the station on Schoolcraft and Asbury Park with the car wash and there were some issues down there. About 25 or 30 guys who worked in the car wash lived in Detroit and all of the liquor stores were closed that week. Many of the car washers made very little money and were able to advance 4.00 of their pay every day and that called that the 'Fast Four". They would use it to pick up something to drink on the way home but during the riots some started experiencing DT's. I can remember my Uncle asking my dad to bring in all of the excess alcohol we had at home because he needed to give it to some of these guys so they would come into work. We had plenty of alcohol in the basement bar of our house because at that time all of the businesses would give each other bottles for Christmas and dad only drank Old Grand Dad or Seagrams so there was plenty of extra alcohol to give away. In the middle of the week I had to drive to Kalamazoo because I was transferring to Western Michigan University in the fall and that was my assigned day to speak to my advisor and register for classes. Everyone wanted to know what was going on in Detroit as they didn't have the wall to wall news coverage that we have today. I can vividly remember that day because driving back from Kalamazoo, when I got to Detroit and was going north on the Southfield Freeway, I could see plums of black smoke east of the Freeway towards downtown. It really brought the riots home to me seeing part of the city now going up in smoke. Also my Grandmother Magdalene Stanton lived at 319 Josephine between John R and Brush, behind Northern High School. She was staying at our house in Livonia Saturday night watching some of my younger siblings but by Monday or Tuesday she was ready to go home and wasn't worried about the riots. My parents tried to talk her into staying with us in Livonia but there was no changing her mind. I drove her home down McNichols to the Lodge and then to Chicago Blvd and her house. Her neighbor Mr. Ross was sitting on his back porch and I think that he was a doctor as well as being black. When we pulled into her back yard he said "Mrs Stanton don't you worry. If I see any young punks coming around my gun is at the ready.' Most of her neighbors were professionals and it was always a very quiet neighborhood. My grandmother had lived there since 1927 and she wasn't worried about any danger. In the weeks after the riot, we did a lot of talking about issues on why people would go to this extreme and burn down the city. Mr. Agosti summed it up and said that for years people who were on the lower rungs of the economic ladder had been seeing things they could not afford. The riots were their opportunity to take what society was not giving them the opportunity to get on their own. The other observation he used to give us in 1967 was that if you wanted to see what Detroit would look like down the road in 10 years, just look at Flint. Original Format Email Submitter's Name Tom Shipley Submission Date 06/26/2016 Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Curfew, Detroit Police Department, Detroit Workers, Gas Ration, Schoolcraft Citation “Tom Shipley,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/283. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Tamara Perrin;1946;2016;Tamara Perrin, 1946, 2016  Title Tamara Perrin Description Tamara Perrin worked for the Michigan Bell Telephone Company and was a single mother living above a white woman in July of 1967. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 08/19/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Text Language en-US Type Written Story Text In 1967, I was 21 years of age living in my first home away from home on Dequindre off McNichols. I lived in a three room flat above a Yugoslavian widow woman name, Sophia Rugola. She had been the only person who would rent to me  as I was a single parent, mother of a two year old. It's also important to know who owned the majority of the land or housing at this time and how that came to be (read Colored Property). I did misrepresent myself and pretended to be married to my best friend Fenton French at the time and told her he was in the military  which would justify his not being there with me after I moved in. She later found out and told me that she knew I wasn’t married, but that I was a good girl I could stay. At that time I was working for Michigan bell telephone Company as a long distance operator and I was also attending cosmetology school at Virginia Farrell to become an entrepreneur. My working and going to a vocational school was made possible because of my Grandmother who babysat my daughter for me during the week and I had full responsibility on the weekends. In the summer of 1967, I got word there was a race riot and that I should not leave my home. My fear was that I was living at the same address as and above a white woman, who in my opinion didn’t understand the dangers we would both be subjected to. Her being white and I being black, and what others didn’t know about us as people of a peaceful nature and the harm they could do to us for just being in the same residence. I recall telling her not to go outside or near the window… And also thinking should I stay and go, because I didn’t want to be harmed. I also knew I had to go to work and that my only transportation was via public transportation.. On the bus!. It was a true dilemma for me, because I didn’t fully comprehend the race problem. I had a healthy education in the Detroit Public School system and was double promoted twice. As a child I had never really experienced racial prejudice beyond name calling. And that was something children did if you looked different from them. Half-breed was more common of the name calling I received until I moved from one the downtown area to the north east side of Detroit. And I was only called the “N” word once as a child by a playmate of another ethnic group. I didn’t know what the word “nigga” meant. And looked it up in the dictionary. What I found was niggardly meant stingy. I had experienced discrimination due to being a unwed mother. In fact the law at that time refused to put the name of the father of the child on the birth certificate if you weren’t married. I experienced being ostracized by my many of great aunts and uncles, for not marrying the father of my child. I was naïve to a lot of social dogma, stigmas and standards in the year of 1967. However, they would all become my significant emotional events to change my direction in my life’s journey. Being raised in the north I never knew what the southern experience was until I became much older and more informed through movies, books, and dialogue with others what the 67 riots really meant. It was like a boil coming to a head. It pulled the scab off of years of economic oppression and suppression opening doors to a new conversation regarding the true race riot that happened years prior in Detroit about blacks and whites. A conversation with one of my cousins revealed that one of my relatives son was shot and killed for violating the curfew. I wasn’t injured in the overall process of the 1967 riots per se. What I can say is that it did bring attention to an ongoing problem regarding equity and quality of life for many of the disenfranchised. Race and culture have a significant role in what opportunities have been made available and what those that have not. The riots have caused many to feel empowered and others powerless, some advantaged and others disadvantaged  it has brought life to some areas and demise to others. Its unfortunate we all have not learned from our past faults and mistakes to endeavor to embrace a better quality of life for us all. Since God's not making anymore land we should be trying to preserve what we have as best as we can collectively. There are win win solutions that exist to improve the quality of life in Detroit.  Original Format Email Submitter's Name Tamara Perrin Submission Date 08/12/2016 Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Curfew, Detroit Workers, Michigan Bell Telephone Company Citation “Tamara Perrin,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/360. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml  
DetroitWorker;Sharon Schafer;1948;2016;Sharon Schafer, 1948, 2016 Title Sharon Schafer, June 25th, 2016 Description In this interview, Schafer discusses growing up in Detroit and the importance of the Michigan Bell Telephone Company during the 1967 disturbance. She also discusses changes in Detroit since the 1960s. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 07/12/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Sharon Schafer Brief Biography Sharon Schafer was born March 23rd, 1948 and grew up in Detroit Michigan. In 1965 she began working for the Michigan Bell Telephone Company. Sharon Schafer currently lives in Troy Michigan. Interviewer's Name Hannah Sabal Interview Place Troy, MI Date 06/25/2016 Interview Length 00:12:49 Transcriptionist Hannah Sabal Transcription Date 07/06/2016 Transcription HS: Hello, my name is Hannah Sabal. I’m here in Troy, Michigan, with Sharon Schafer. The date is June 25th, 2016, and we are sitting down for an interview for the Detroit 67 Oral History Project. Thank you for sitting down with me today.  SS: You’re welcome.  HS: Can you start by telling me where and when you were born?  SS: I was born March 23rd, 1948 in Detroit, Michigan.  HS: Where did you grow up?  SS: I grew up on the east side of Detroit, on East Hancock, and then when I was five years old, we moved to Rossiter Street near Denby High School.  HS: Did you go to Denby High School?  SS: Yes, I did.  HS: Where did you go to elementary and middle school?  SS: At the time, I went to Wayne Elementary School, and the middle school concept was not available. The Detroit public schools was working it out at the time. I ended up staying at Anthony Wayne Elementary School from kindergarten until ninth grade. Then they broke off and made the middle school at another location.  HS: What did your parents do for a living?  SS: My mother was a homemaker and my dad worked for the Sanitation Department for the city of Detroit.  HS: Okay. And what was your neighborhood like growing up?  SS: There were a lot of kids and every household had kids. It was the ‘50s, and, you know, social media didn’t follow you around like it does now. If you had problems with kids at school, there was another group of kids when you got home and life went on. But it was a white neighborhood, there were no foreigners, or blacks or Hispanics living in the neighborhood. It was on the outside area of Detroit.  HS: So it was not integrated?  SS: No.  HS: All right. So where were you living in the 1960s?  SS: In the ‘60s, I lived on Rossiter Avenue in Detroit.  HS: And what were you doing at the time? Were you still in high school?  SS: I graduated high school in 1965 and I took a job with Michigan Bell Telephone Company and I was assigned to work as a Directory Assistance Operator. At that time, it was called information or 4-1-1, and we were on Michigan and Cass, were the main office of the telephone company was at the time.  HS: Okay. So you were still working at the telephone company in 1967?  SS: Yes.  HS: Okay. How did you first hear about the disturbance at 12th and Clairmount?  SS: My girlfriend and I were at Hayes State Park, away from Detroit, at a beach. We had no idea what was going on. We had the radio on, was playing rock ‘n roll music all day. Never heard anything until we came home really late at night. By that time, the city was closed down. She lived in Southgate. And when I called home, my dad was blowing a gasket: “How are you going to get home?” The city’s locked down by that time. But we truly had no concept of what was going on, if there was anything leading up to it or what was happening.  HS: Did you have trouble getting back into the city on your way back home?  SS: Ah, not really because my dad came to pick me up. He had city ID. Nobody every stopped us, but if they would have, he thought he could get by because of his city ID.  HS: Do you have any memories you’d like to share with us about that time period? Things that you witnessed or experienced?  SS: What I experienced after the riot had occurred—because I worked at the telephone company—there was an announcement on the television that if you were an employee, they would like you to come into work, if at all possible, because they wanted to keep the lines of communication open at that time. Anyone that could make it to the outer malls—which, Eastland mall was the closest one for us—we went there, we were all going to work Monday to Friday, nine to six. You got on a bus, you’re the only one on Gratiot Avenue going down to Michigan and Cass. They had a uniformed police officer riding shotgun in the doorway of the bus. We never saw anybody on the street, walking, nothing on the east side.  HS: So during that time, you were working at Michigan and Cass.  SS: Right.  HS: That whole week?  SS: Right.  HS: Okay. Did you have any trouble there at all?  SS: No, the National Guard was on duty, basically watching the downtown stores and we were the only place, just about, that was open at the time. So they would come from their breaks—the guys would come for their breaks to eat lunch and everything at our cafeteria. They put everybody to work that was an employee. There was automated long-distance billing, but it wasn’t completely available throughout the city, so we still had automated billing. You had an operator if you didn’t have automated billing system, the manual billing would take over. Your call would go into a directory operator, and she would type in the number you were calling from, and that’s how your long-distance phone call was going to be billed then. So they had supervisors, they had management—they taught them how to do that job. They had a quickie course, and we were mainly doing that, more so than directory assistance at that time.  HS: And the phone calls that you were receiving, were they people calling from outside the city trying to contact loved ones, or was it officials or politicians?  SS: No, it was people within the city that were trying to make long-distance calls, more than likely to relatives elsewhere who wanted to know what was going on with them. That was another reason that the building was kept open.  HS: So the outside—outside of Detroit could know that their loved ones were okay, basically.  SS: Right.  HS: Leading up the summer in July, did you sense any tensions in the city?  SS: No. I had no idea. I mean, we knew that there were problems in other parts of the country, but as far as what was going on in Detroit, I had no concept at all.  HS: So it came as a surprise?  SS: Right. To me.  HS: And what was your family doing at the time of the riots? Did they all stay home?  SS: No, my dad ended up going to work because—my brother was still in high school, he was just finishing high school, so he was at home. My mother didn’t drive—she was a homemaker—so she was at home. We were basically in the neighborhood, locally, or, like, I worked downtown during the day and my dad was working too.  HS: Were there any other things that you experienced during that week?  SS: A lot of the ladies that I worked with were absent from work because they lived in the neighborhoods nearby that was affected. It was only later when everything was calmed down that they came back to work that they said they had some pretty horrific experiences. You know, bullets going through their houses and laying on the floor, going to the basement, just in fear of their lives.  HS: Were you or your family relieved when the National Guard and then the federal troops came in?  SS: Well, yeah, you were hoping that people were going to be able to get things under control pretty quickly before it spread further throughout the city.  HS: You said you were pretty busy during that week. About how long before your phone traffic went back to its normal levels?  SS: I’d say within a week.  HS: Within the week?  SS: After it was over.  HS: Everybody has a different way they like to refer to this. Some people call it a riot, some people call it a rebellion, some call it an uprising. How would you describe it?  SS: Having not been down there to see what was going on at the time, although my father took us down there after it was all over, and, I mean, the destruction was unbelievable. Store windows smashed, burned buildings, trash all over the place. I would call it a riot. It was an uprising of some sort, civil uprising.  HS: Do you feel that the unrest affected your family or yourself in any way afterwards?  SS: Not directly. I mean, you were aware that people lived differently than you were. Kind of as a child growing up in Detroit in the ‘50s, we were protected from a lot of things. We didn’t know about divorce, we didn’t know about suicide, we didn’t know about drug abuse. We didn’t know about the hard times that poor people had because we weren’t one of them. So you were just sort of isolated, sheltered, and insulated from what was going on in the real world.  HS: So the riots kind of opened your eyes a bit to that?  SS: Right.  HS: I know it didn’t affect your neighborhood directly, but was your neighborhood impacted at all?  SS: I’d say no. Not really.  HS: What changes did you see in Detroit afterwards?  SS: Well, the suburbs were starting to develop out here, and a lot of younger families—I’m not sure why they chose to move, maybe they wanted a new house, maybe they wanted a bigger house—we were living in a post-war bungalow. Our neighborhood was basically built after the war in the late 1940s. So if you wanted a larger home or a newer home, then you would go to the suburbs. But the people I went to school with—my parents were older when they had me—the kids I went to school with, their parents were about ten years younger than mine. They left, the neighborhood changed and turned over several times, while I still lived there to go on to Wayne State University, to college and then to medical school. Really, life went on.  HS: So your family stayed in Detroit?  SS: My parents finally moved out in 1983.  HS: Do you know why they moved?  SS: They moved because my dad felt there was crime coming into the neighborhood and they felt unsafe. They were old, they were early seventies, so they moved to Clinton Township.  HS: Is there any message you would want to leave for future generations to avoid this from happening again? To prevent it?  SS: It would be nice if people could sit down and talk instead of trying to take matters into their own hands, but I understand the politicians sometimes give you the song and dance and nothing really changes. That’s what people are angry about. Poverty—I don’t know what the solution to that is. Throwing money at it is not the answer, I think we’re all agreed to that. But that creates a lot of problems. People have time on their hands and they want things and they don’t have the ability to buy them, so that’s kind of some of it. And then the drug addiction is starting to really become a real problem. I mean, we never dreamed of doing anything like that. But, people do. And now they’re talking about making marijuana legal. Who knows where that’s going to go? [Laughter]  HS: We’ll see. Is there anything that you feel like we haven’t discussed or that you’d like to add to the interview?  SS: No, but I found the article in last Sunday’s paper about how Detroit had its boundaries restricted, whereas other cities were able to geographically acquire more acreage by luring suburbs to annex themselves into the city umbrella with the hope of having city water and city sewer and Detroit did not opt for that. So the educated people with money are the ones that lived in the suburbs, and Detroit got left behind, and that’s kind of how the city went into receivership. Which is unfortunate.  HS: All right. Well, thank you for sitting down with me today. We greatly appreciate it.  SS: Okay.   Original Format WAV Duration 12min 49sec Interviewer Hannah Sabal Interviewee Sharon Schafer Location Troy, MI Files Schafer, Sharon.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Detroit Workers, Michigan Bell Telephone Company, Michigan National Guard Citation “Sharon Schafer, June 25th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/298. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Sandra Smith;1944;2016;Sandra Smith, 1944, 2016 Title Sandra Smith, May 16th, 2016 Description In this interview, Smith discusses growing up around Detroit, and how she sought to be an active member of the Detroit community. She also talks about her experience at the family-owned dry cleaners during the unrest. More specifically, she talks about the looters she encountered in the city that day. She also talks about the open classroom program she sought to implement into schools after the week ended. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 06/14/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Coverage Pontiac, MI Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Sandra Smith Brief Biography Sandra Smith was born in Detroit in 1944. She lived in places like Ferndale and Dearborn, but constantly spent time in Detroit as a volunteer for a church. She lived in Pontiac, during the unrest in 1967, and saw the impact the events had on Pontiac as well as Detroit. She later started an open classroom program to promote diversity in local schools. Interviewer's Name William Winkel Interview Place Detroit Historical Society Date 05/31/2015 Interview Length 00:58:22 Transcriptionist Hannah Sabal Transcription WW: Hello, my name is William Winkel. Today is May 16th, and I am sitting down with Sandra Smith for the 1967 Oral History Project. Thank you very much for sitting down with me today.  SS: You’re welcome. It’s enjoyable to do this.  WW: Can you please start by saying where and when you were born?  SS: I was born in 1944. I was born in Detroit, downtown, one of the hospitals down in Detroit. My parents lived on Montrose right off of Grand River in Detroit. They had a duplex there.  WW: Did you grow up in the city?  SS: I grew up in the city only until I was about three, four years old, and my parents—so my father could be closer to the airport, to Willow Run, where he was going to be running a flight school, and where there were new houses being built—so we moved out there.  WW: Okay. What was it like growing up in Dearborn?  SS: It was close to Mayberry RFD, if you want to be real. It was like a real neighborhood with kids playing out in the street. When the lights came on, you had to go home. People were neighbors. Wasn’t a whole lot different when we were in Detroit, quite frankly, when we were on Montrose. I was a little smaller, and the difference was on Montrose the houses were so close together, literally, my grandmother would yell across to the neighbor to ask to borrow something, and they would stick their hands out and hand things back and forth, because the houses were built so close together and you always had the garage in the back. But we had, I remember, when I was little, the very, very much the same thing there. These wonderful old houses, they were just grand. The basement on our house on Montrose—I used to be able to ride my tricycle in the basement because it had these wonderful Terrazzo [2:23??] floors and you could ride, but you didn’t dare fall into a door  it wasn’t hollow, it was solid as a rock and things like that. But in Detroit it was very much the same. It was that very friendly neighborhood, people would walk in the streets and kids would play out and people would walk on the sidewalks and say hello, and I remember as a kid we used to play out all the time.  WW: Was the neighborhood in Detroit interracial or was it all white?  SS: As far as I know it was all white.  WW: Okay. And was it all white in Dearborn, I’m guessing?  SS: Yeah, oh yeah. Dearborn we know is all white. There was Arabs, no problem moving in. Asians, there were moments. There were no blacks living in Dearborn at all. It was not interracial. It was white. By the way, we’ve had a Muslim community in Dearborn for as long as I can remember, since I was a little kid. From our church, our youth group, we used to go over and visit the mosque, it was on the east side of Dearborn. We used to go over and visit the kids over there and they used to come visit us, and I grew up working and being with the Muslim community, learning about the Muslim religion years ago.  WW: You spoke about how your family moved to Dearborn in part so your family could be closer to the airport?  SS: Yes.  WW: Could you talk about what he was doing there?  SS: Well, he was part of the original army air corps. He went into World War II and went into the army and they had this new group that was starting, and they found that he tested out very well, and he became part of the original army air corps. One of the fun things is I’ve got his little thing that wrote out all the different things every time he flew—  WW: His log book?  SS: His log book! I’ve got his original log book, and he literally with the group there, I can tell you how they flew the planes over. They had to fly all the planes over. And they go down into South America, down to one of the Caribbean islands, over the [5:03??], it was really cool. He flew in some of the most famous battles that they had over in Western Europe. David, what kind of plane did dad fly?  David: B-24.  SS: Okay, B-24 and one of the things they did—  David: Is that the Liberator?  WW: Yeah. Wait, B-29?  David: No, B-24 is the Liberator.  SS: And one of the things that he did, he was the captain, and one of the things they did is they would tow the gliders, the pilots in the gliders. Gliders had no engines whatsoever, and they had to be on tethers. They’d take them in, and at a certain point, they’d let go, and they would glide down into enemy territory. And he was involved in a lot of battles. And the interesting part is they didn’t have a lot of guns or anything, and they were sort of like flying, hoping they wouldn’t get hit. But one of the things he did was during the Battle of the Bulge, they got all these people that took all these people in, and then things went sideways in the Battle of the Bulge, and it became evident that a lot of people that they brought in were not ever going to see the light of day again, they were going to be killed. So he and his men defied orders and sort of commandeered the plane without orders and went back in and literally got hundreds of men out. I know when he died, we can’t believe the number of people that were at his funeral that said, “Your father saved thousands of lives. There’s lots of us alive because they brought our dads back.” He loved being a pilot, would’ve loved being a commercial pilot, except he had glasses. He’s always needed corrective lenses since he was a kid. And the army said that was okay, however, commercial airlines would not allow someone to be a pilot if they needed corrective lenses. So he couldn’t be a commercial pilot. So he decided to start a flight school.  WW: And what did your mother do for a living?  SS: My mother was an artist. She was originally an elementary school teacher in Detroit, taught several, three or four different schools in Detroit. She originally had gone to school, graduated from Wayne, but then she went to what was the Society of Arts and Crafts but is now the College of Creative Studies, and her field was art. What happened was, flight school was going well except I had a younger brother, and he developed cancer when he was a year and a half old and the doctors said he only had six months to live, and they suggested that my parents stay with him, let him have a Christmas, just be with him as much as they could because he’d be dying in a few months. So my dad ended up leaving the flight school, and my mother was doing the art, and they started a small art school in our basement, which eventually grew enough that they moved into a small shop over in Dearborn, and eventually they moved into a big enough company that it took up a block and a half over on telegraph. So that’s what they ended up doing.  WW: So you grew up in the 1950s. Going into Detroit—did you go into Detroit often?  SS: Oh yeah. All the time. We were probably there once or twice a week at least. From the time I was little I’d do things, I’d play golf from the time I was little. My uncle was the designer of literally almost all of the Detroit golf courses. So when I was little I used to go and sit with him on his little golf cart, and when he went around to inspect, I’d golf. Went down to Belle Isle a lot. I remember going out and sitting out at Water Works Park and watching the boat races, the old hydroplane races, which because my grandfather worked at the old Hudson’s—love the old Hudson’s—we used to go down there at least once a week, just to go visit the old Hudson’s. One of the fun things about downtown Detroit then, especially going to Hudson’s or Currents, because you always got to dress up and wear white gloves, wear all the dresses, everybody got dressed up, it was kind of special. But spent lots and lots of time in Detroit. Belle Isle was one of my favorite places. In fact, all through my years going up, and both of my kids, their whole life, they got to spend lots of time in Detroit. I went to Wayne State, and started at Wayne State in 1964. Was in the art school, was there in the evenings, and sometimes I’d be there until 3 o’clock in the morning. That was a time when a lot of the area behind Wayne, getting over toward the Lodge and that, there were a lot of older houses that were being torn down and abandoned and we’d park over there, and I’d walk out to my car at 2 o’clock in the morning. There was one day when it was 1964, and I always went to school at night, and one day I had a class early in the day, I had something to do early in the day, so I was down there and now I don’t have another class until 7 o’clock at night, and I literally walked down Cass all the way to downtown, just walked downtown, looked around, saw thing, went and visited somebody I had met, turned around, and came back. Just walked up Cass. I felt very comfortable in Detroit.  WW: Awesome. When you were growing up in the fifties, and going into the sixties, did you notice any growing tension in the city?  SS: I didn’t notice tension. I noticed things sometimes weren’t as nice as they—things were being let go. Buildings just didn’t look as good anymore, and sometimes it would just feel uncomfortable because it’s like you got a building that’s kind of run down that I notice more than anything. I grew up in Dearborn, which was not a mixed-racial city, and my dad always said I was the contrarian in the family. I was very comfortable with anybody. There were times where I would have somebody, if I was down in Detroit, I can remember there were a couple of times when there were some people that were black that looked like, “What are you doing here?” Or they looked like, I don’t know, but I’d walk up, say hello, and start chatting. I worked with Father Coughlin, I volunteered with Father Coughlin over in the old church in Corktown. And I remember the first time he showed up, he gave me hell. “What the hell are you little white girl from Dearborn doing here? You think you’re going to be a do-gooder, you’ll come in for the day, and then you’re not gonna come back.” He just read me a little riot act, like I was this terrible person, and it was like, “Okay, I’m going to show you.” I think I spent about six months, I’d show up there as much as I could. Grabbed a couple other people I had met down at school or whatever, and we’d go down there, and he loved to give us assignments that he knew would just drive us nuts. One of the assignments he would give us is he would give us names of these homes, the addresses of these homes, that we were to go in and help the mother. And he purposefully gave us probably some of the worst places, that were some of the hardest ones that he thought would be to work with. We’d go, “Okay, we’re here to help with the kids, what we can do.” Try to do as much as we could, and things like that. I cannot believe these people—I mean, Father Coughlin sent us so I guess it’s okay—but we’d take the kids and just take them out to play so mom would have a little time to do something for herself, and didn’t try to do the do-gooder stuff, just what can we do? We get somebody, a mother who hasn’t got a husband to help her, and she needs some time to herself to get things done, so we’d do whatever we could, and pretty soon, Father Coughlin decided that I was okay, and he started giving me things to do and treated me like I wasn’t the “bad white person who was showing up, the do-gooder from Dearborn that was showing up to do stuff.” I wasn’t fighting him anymore. I spent a lot of time over in that old Corktown area.  WW: Do you remember what church that was?  SS: It was just Father Coughlin’s church in Corktown, very famous church.  WW: St. Anne’s?  SS: No.  WW: Okay. No worries.  SS: It’s the Irish church that they always have, on St. Patrick ’s Day…. I never remember. But I just know it as Father Coughlin’s church over there. That was a hard-hit area, economically. That’s one of the reasons we were over there, it was like, “What can we do?” There were people over there and it was Spanish, black, there were Mexicans, it was a real mix of people. They were always just sort of aghast. I mean literally I was out by myself, or I might have another young lady with me, and we were out there by ourselves and never even thought about that there was, you know, that we needed to worry about anything. We just went and did stuff. I guess that was what surprised them. It was like, “Okay! We’re here! Let’s go!” Just, you know, “What can we do?”  WW: Did something in particular prompt you to start doing this charity work? Or were you just motivated to do it?  SS: I had heard about him, heard him talk about something that was going on, I think we may have had a trip, our church group might have gone down there, and saw some things and he said “Hey, here’s some things that you can do.” I think that’s what we did, we went down with a church group, with a youth group, and he said, “Here’s some things that we need down here.” And so the next week I showed up, and he was like, “What are you doing here?” And I said, “I’m here to help. What can I do?” Seemed like the right thing to do. I was not one of those people that was popular in school, probably the best thing that ever happened to me. I was bullied, I can tell you all kinds of lovely stories about things that happened in school and people that did terrible things to me, and boys that would make you think you were really popular one day and invite you all to sit down at dinner or at lunch, and you think you’re finally going to be the “in person” and they dump tomato soup on you to embarrass you. I wasn’t the popular kid and decided there were other things in life worth doing and I did them. I want to thank them, a couple of kids I went to school with who made me feel so bad because I never achieved what I thought I could when I was in high school and went way past what they did when I got older because I had the motivation and I knew I could do it, and now I didn’t have to live with their constraints. I just always felt that everybody ought to have a chance. Even though I lived in Dearborn, I was very, very motivated as to why we ought to have a mixed neighborhood. I was involved in integration stuff, did a lot of marches. My parents were not quite as happy about some of the things I did. I moved out and lived with our minister and his wife for a while because my parents weren’t happy that I was working on integration issues, including fighting our mayor when there was the big brew-ha with the family, I was there with the family when the thing happened that caused the mayor, Mayor Hubbard, to go over to run over and hide in Windsor so he wouldn’t get indicted for obstructing justice and allowing his police to not help what they thought was a black family moving in and it turned out to be a black family that were movers that were moving somebody in, it wasn’t even a black family moving in. I was involved in some of that. I just thought everybody ought to be who they were and it was okay. And you shouldn’t be labeled. I felt like I had been labeled when I was a kid, and you shouldn’t be labeled. Everybody should be able to do whatever they want, whoever they were, and live up to their potential. I was my own little champion.   WW: Going to the 1960s, your grandparents’ meat market, was that still on Grand River?  SS: No, the meat market, it was gone, I think it was gone by the time I was a little kid, it was already gone. My grandparents had moved out to California. By the time I was four, they had moved to California and the meat market was gone. My grandfather and my uncle, who then ran the meat market, they’d gone. But I owned, in the 60s, I got married in ’65, and my husband’s parents owned a—my father-in-law was a dentist—they owned a dry cleaners in Ferndale, and they branched out and bought one right on fashion avenue in Detroit. So, my then-husband and I managed both of those dry cleaners. The one over on fashion avenue—fashion avenue was wonderful back then, that’s when you had all kinds of designers, Beagle [21:49??] was there, it was a great spot. Louis the Hatter was right next door, it was really quite the interesting place, a neat place. It was right by the university. It was between the university homes and Palmer Woods were kind of right in that area. We were known for doing custom work with our dry cleaning, one of the things we did was we had a whole fleet of vans and we’d deliver, we delivered all the way down to the Fisher building and down there. We delivered all over Detroit. So we were right in the heart of everything, even though I lived here in Ferndale. We lived here in Ferndale and then we moved down to Pontiac, so I was actually up in Pontiac during the riots, which was interesting. I got to see both the Detroit area and the Pontiac, what was going on.  WW: We’re going to move into ’67 then. So you were living in Pontiac then. How did you first hear about what was going on?  SS: I wasn’t in Pontiac, I had just come back from Chicago. Was over at my in-law’s over in Battle Creek, and we got a call on Sunday morning from the manager of the dry cleaners and said, “There’s riots here, there’s riots going on in Detroit.” I don’t know if he actually called it riots, but he says, “There’s this thing going on down here in Detroit, and we’ve been broken into.” Into the car, and driving back from there, and you’re not thinking too much about it, like okay, a break in. We would always drive Southfield expressway and come across 8 mile, because we lived in Ferndale. And when you get up to the eight mile rise—and we’re coming through Detroit on Southfield, nothing. We came up on that rise, and I always remember coming up on that rise, and as we came up on that rise, all I can think of is seeing—just, the whole city was on fire. It was just heart-stopping, like “Oh my God, there’s my city. What the hell is going on?” You can’t believe it. You know what it’s like when you see a house fire and you see all that black smoke? Think of that probably multiplied by a hundred. It’s like just the whole city—and when you saw it, all of a sudden you start realizing what you were feeling all along. Shortly afterwards we got to the point where there’s that choking feeling, and it was like, “Holy God. This is not good.” It happened at like, 1 or 2 o’clock on Saturday morning?  WW: Sunday morning at—  SS: --it was like 2 o’clock in the morning—  WW: --3:55 in the morning.  SS:  So we’re coming through by before noon, probably ten or eleven o’clock in the morning, and it is just already just, wow. Drove in, and just went, “Oh my God.” At that point you go, this is really scary. When you see the smoke, you don’t know how much is covering the city. It was just mind-jarring. We drove up eight mile, went to Livernois, and cut across to the dry cleaners, and we had a full glass wall—you know, you had big sheets of glass wall—we came and one of the things we had, if you’ve ever seen dry cleaners, one of those trolleys to hang clothes up, those clothes all went right there along the glass wall. Well the glass wall, like three or four of them were already knocked out. Our manager—I can’t remember his name—he’d already been there, he’d already had someone in, they were putting up, trying to put wood up on the ones that had already been broken out. But they literally had come in and literally taken all of the things out. Probably the most jarring thing that I can remember was, other than coming up and seeing the smoke, when we first saw what was going on, was we were there trying to make sure everything was all closed up, everything was safe, sweeping up and things, and while we were there—and it’s bright daylight, mid-afternoon on Sunday, and some of our windows were not broken out, so you could still see out, and across the street were places like Claire-Perone’s [27:25??], you know all these nice shops were there. Just as I’m looking at the window—and there’s nobody on the street, no cars at all—all of a sudden, two cars come up, going north across the street, pull up across the street, I think it was Claire-Perone’s, one of the designer shops, one of the dress shops there—pull up, and it’s the first time I have ever felt uncomfortable about seeing somebody black. All of a sudden, these young black kids got out, and there was just a demeanor about them that just looked menacing. And they got out, they had bats, whatever it was they had, big pipes and all kinds of things in their hands, and they just all jumped out at once. And they went right to the windows, and started smashing the windows. There had to be at least six of them. Another car pulls up behind them, they get out, and they literally just smash those windows and immediately started going in and just pulling everything they could, throwing it in the cars, they were getting back in the cars, and they could not get in the cars for all the stuff they had in there. So they’re literally holding on, doors are open and they’re holding on to the outside of the cars, trying to drive off. It was crazy. But no worry about anybody around, nothing. They just went in and started, and you just stood there and for me, it was really jarring because I have felt so comfortable around everybody, and I suddenly felt fear, and I’ve never felt that before. And I guess it pissed me off, more than anything, really made me angry, that they made me feel that scared. Broad daylight, middle of the day. And pretty soon other cars came up and started hitting other buildings, not even thinking about us. Harry the Hatter’s next door, I had no idea, all I know is what happened across the street. It was just like, okay, let’s just go back in. I can’t remember if my husband called the police, but I have a feeling they were probably busy. I think he may have called the police, but I think he remembered them saying, “Uhhh, we’re kind of busy. That’s fine, but there’s a lot of stuff going on,” sort of blew us off. Okay, we’re on our own. At that point, we’re there and we’re thinking, what are we going to do? We’re all closed in there, and it still felt like, okay, I feel safe. And probably a half hour later I start hearing what sounds like cars behind the building. Cars stopped behind the building and next thing I hear is pounding on the back door. After seeing what was out there, I started feeling really uncomfortable. They literally smashed in and tore off the back door. I think at the time, I’m thinking, “I didn’t even know that was there!” but for some reason, before we got the place, whoever had had it before had put in like a metal jail—  WW: A metal gate?  SS: A metal gate! It was a thick metal gate, and it was locked. And all I can remember is going back to the door and there was this hand that came through and I just went up and I just said, “Get out! We’re in here! Get out!” And I heard, “I’m sorry, ma’am!” and they took off. All I can remember is seeing that hand, and again I was so angry because I saw that hand come through, and I didn’t care what came, but I do remember seeing this, no shirt, this black hand came through. Ordinarily I wouldn’t have been bothered at all, like, ehh it’s a black guy. But there was something about it, after seeing what happened over there, that just felt so intimidating and so scary.  WW: But you remembered his pleasantries! “Ma’am.”  SS: Oh yeah, “Sorry, ma’am!” and he was gone. I remember just sitting there for the longest time, just shaking, thinking, “Oh my God.” But it wasn’t like they were going to get the people, they weren’t doing anything. That was interesting. That night we went back home—he was a teacher, first-year teacher, and this was before teachers had unions, and we qualified for government subsidized housing. So we lived in a brand-new housing project on the north edge of Pontiac that had just been built. So we’re living literally on one of the townhouses that was literally just right up against the city. And by the way, it was hot, there was no question. It was hotter than hell. It had been hot all week. I remember we had gone over to Chicago, and it was hot before we left, so hot you’d have a bad thunderstorm and it’d get hot and muggy. It was really uncomfortable that week. It wasn’t any better in Chicago, either. So no air conditioning in these places, so that night we sat up with our next-door neighbors, and we were playing cards in the house. At the time, this was so—what was going on in Detroit, and nobody knew what was going on in particular, you’d hear all kinds of stories, oh my God, are they coming out? That’s was the worst part, you’d hear all these rumors on the news reports and everybody was like, what’s going to happen? We’re up in Pontiac and playing cards, went upstairs to make sure the windows were open upstairs, and all of a sudden we realized it had come up to Pontiac too, because we’re sitting upstairs and we can see the flashes and hear the gunfire outside. Oh crap. Just hang tight here, we’re okay, nothing we can do. We were not far from probably the least prosperous area, a not good area of Pontiac, and apparently some people decided that they would take advantage of the situation. It was exciting. The next day, my brilliant husband and one of the guys that worked with us decided they’d go out in the delivery truck and go. They went out saying oh they had some deliveries they had to make. Are you kidding me, you stupid? They decided they’d go up around Grand Boulevard, they went up and into not particularly good spots they should’ve gone into, and I was not with them, but I heard lots of stories from them about having to stop often because there was a big TV sitting in the middle of the road, or people running across, but they were talking about the people going in, just what looked like nice people, somebody battering the window of a store, and they’d be carrying out TVs, and they’d get it to the middle of the street and they couldn’t carry the TV anymore, so they’d drop it in the middle of the street. They were telling me all kinds of stories about what was going on, all the looting. Yeah they had stories down there. I thought, “Oh my God, they’ve died down there.” He said, “Well, we almost picked it up—well, the TV was just sitting right there…” I almost killed him. It was a frustrating time. It ticked me off that people would take, and I know they were angry, but what you had were some people that just caused unbelievable damage. It just really bothers me.  WW: How did your dry cleaners fare the rest of the week?  SS: We just closed. Closed up for that time. I don’t think there was anything open during that time.  WW: No, I mean did it get broken into again?  SS: No, it never got broken into again. No, we were fine, just that one time. It was literally those clothes right there, those people’s clothes, whatever was against the window. What they did, like they did with the stores I watched them loot across the street, they got the easiest stuff, that they could get easily. Yeah, Livernois was good pickins’! That was the big money stuff! It was good stuff there! A lot of them came, and, “Hey, let’s go down to Livernois,” but they all seemed to stop at Livernois. That was as far as they went, there and Outer Drive, nothing seemed to go beyond Outer Drive.  WW: How long did you keep your dry cleaners open after that?  SS: It’s still open. Oh yeah, it’s still going. I don’t own it anymore, but they had it up until—my husband and I divorced in ’82—’81, but the dry cleaners is still there. Harry Hatters isn’t still there, but the dry cleaners is still going.  WW: How do you interpret what happened in July? Do you see it as a riot, or what do you see it as? There is no wrong answer.  SS: The heat didn’t help one little bit, no question. If you’ve been through one of those summers. It had been the year before, let’s see, ’67, yeah that year, and the year afterwards, we had some really, really hot uncomfortable weather. People didn’t have air conditioning, buildings didn’t have air conditioning, it was really hot. I mean it was just muggy, crappy hot. I think you had some people that were just angry about everything in the world. I understand there were a lot of people in the black community that this was when a lot of things were going on. I was involved in a lot of things that were going on with Martin Luther King and all kinds of things that were going on at that time. And it was already that, things were not good. It just happened to be the perfect storm. You had a lot of people that felt like, “Hey, they’ve got…” whatever. People that just got caught up in the whole thing. Like my husband had said, when he saw people, these little old ladies running across getting the TV they had always wanted, or the toaster, or something else. What was so bad was they were destroying their own community, destroying the places they lived. And I know they were angry, part of it was there was this anger, and there’s no question, there were shopkeepers that always took advantage. You’d see them even where we were and it’d be frustrating to be shopping and see shop keeps that were obviously charging more and taking advantage of people and weren’t really nice to people, and they went after them, but then they started going after nice black man that had a business there, too. Sort of went nuts. It just sort of spiraled out of control. It’s frustrating to see how much of our own community we took apart, because they were angry. Their anger actually ended up being one of the worst things they could do to themselves at the same time. I just see it as being, it just boiled over and everybody got involved. The answer is, I think it was just a lot of frustration, and I can understand the frustration. Having been someone that’d been in a totally different way—and I’m not saying it’s anything like what the black community went through down there, the poor black community—but having the feeling that you can’t do what you want to do, or you’re not good enough, and you don’t get this, or you don’t get that, it’s going to cost you more to do this—you know, there’s a point at which I could see where that could get real frustrating. It was even more frustrating to see just what ended up happening.  WW: How do you see what happened then affecting the city now? Do you think it still lingers over us?  SS: Part of it is we—these areas that we talk about, these big open areas in the city, those big open areas are not from—you know, everybody says they’re from the crash and all that, but I got news for you. They literally became big open areas back in ’67. We literally had big areas around West Grand Boulevard, they had just bulldozed them down. It became just this big vacant area. All of a sudden there wasn’t anything there. I know one thing that happened, no question, there were a heck of a lot of people that were really, really embedded in the community and loved the community and said, “That’s it, I’m leaving.” And we’re not talking just white people. I know people that were black that said, “When I can, I’m getting out,” and they did. That’s one of the tough parts of what I see with Detroit now is so much of the brain trust that was down there, so much of the heart of the city and the people that were there that just loved the city just said, “okay, that’s enough. I don’t feel safe anymore. I want out.”  WW: What did you do after 1967? Did you continue to live in Pontiac and operate those?  SS: Ran those. I started teaching school, taught preschool and we still ran the drycleaners, but I was teaching school. Taught some in Bloomfield, then preschool, worked with the people that started the early education program in Ferndale. Did that, ended up running –one of my parents decided that you shouldn’t wait until you’re too old to enjoy life, you get to take over the business in Dearborn, so I started running their business in Dearborn, ended up doing that until we sold that. Did a lot of things. Ended up being a marketing strategist.  WW: How do you see the city now? Are you hopeful for what’s going on?  SS: I think it looks wonderful. I’ve been down there. I was down there, I got dubbed the Tree Mother for the tree planting over when they were doing the Hantz Farms. I’m out there, carrying around the trees and telling people to plant holes, or find the people that had holes and plant trees. There’s a lot, long way to go. Downtown is looking amazing, there’s no question. It’s exciting to go downtown. Getting out into the communities, it’s going to take a lot of work, with little pockets here and there. We’ll have to, but I think we’ve got to think outside the box. Just like the Hantz Farm, they had to fight to do stuff in the open areas. It is not going to come back as this great urban city. There is no way you’re going to bring all these people back into the city, there’s no way. There isn’t enough work there for them to do anyway if we did. I think we need to think outside the box in terms of different kinds of things in different areas. I love the idea of having areas that become think tanks for young new entrepreneurs, the idea of taking some of those areas like the tree farm, or literally doing some urban farming. Taking some of those areas, and even if they have some houses in the area—for instance, I was down in the area where the urban forest is, and it’s real interesting to see what’s happening with the houses there. The people are starting to feel better about them, they don’t have all this blight around them anymore, people aren’t coming in and dumping garbage, even with what they have, and they’re doing some fixing up on their houses. What’s really interesting is finding out tax values and how they’re going up, the value of those houses if you wanted to sell one is going up, so they’re feeling better about things, but I think the idea of taking some of those areas that really were hurt—I mean you can see a lot of that area, lately I went through some of that area and just went, “My God,” there was a lot more that was lost from the crash a few years ago when the housing development went right down the tank, but then I went, no, this has been vacant for almost forty years! Over forty years! It’s been vacant from when they had to bulldoze everything down from when we had the riots! This has been like this all along. I think that’s one of the things I see. For me, to talk about Detroit, my kids, my son was born the day that Martin Luther King died, they kept telling me he was a riot baby, but he was conceived a week or so before the riots, so we won’t call him a riot baby. But he was born the day that Martin Luther King was shot. Almost to the minute, as a matter of fact. And my kids, both of them—he’s the oldest one, I had a daughter three years later—I still brought them back. They lived in Detroit, I had them back in Detroit all the time. My son as he was growing up, he loved to do photography and things, and he was always prowling around somewhere in Detroit. At least once a week we were down at Belle Isle, they got to experience Detroit and all, the good and the gritty. They’d go with me down to father Currant’s church, and he’d say, “You’re bringing the kids?!” and I’d say, “Hey, I’m not going to get someone to watch my kids while I’m volunteering. They’re coming along and playing with the kids there.”  WW: It’s amazing.  SS: Ferndale is an interesting microcosm. Ferndale has a whole black community that is kind of part of Ferndale, the township, which was actually constructed after the war. I remember when I was a kid, they used to put [50:37??] huts there, right over on Eight Mile and Wyoming and in that area. They housed a black community. People coming back from the war and things like that, it literally was created as a black community. Ferndale was one of those communities, where they’re all part of Ferndale school system, and we’ve community that, I think we were the first communities in the northern states where the federal government took away all of our money that the federal government gave us. They literally took it away because we weren’t integrated. They had a beautiful school within walking distance in that area, but that was the only part of the school district that was black, and so now we were integrated. I worked with a few other people and was one of the people that got us back to having federal money. The Ferndale school district, back in the sixties, early seventies was a little on the conservative side, and they were just fine. “You’re not going to give us money, fine! We’ll do it the way we want to!” because the federal government wanted them to bus students in, and things are still a little raw from the riots and everything else and people aren’t quite sure, and so myself and a few other parents who had kids in elementary school said we wanted to start an open classroom program in Ferndale where anybody from the city could be part of this classroom. And it was going to have a whole different design in terms of how things were taught. To give that to the Ferndale school district was like, “Psh, not a chance, you can spin it anyway you want, it isn’t going to happen.” So I remember going in the year before we started the school, I took my son who was then in kindergarten, took him, and another friend who had two daughters, one was his age, one a year older, and we went over to the school, Grant school, which was the all black school, and very stern wonderful tall principal that was there, and I remember him looking at us like, it felt like meeting with father Coughlin. Like, who the hell are you, these do-gooders, what the heck are you doing, you know? And I was so frustrated at not being able to come up with something and I remember at the time the two of us were considering literally putting our kids in over at Grant School. He thought we were nuts. I said, “I want my kids to have more than a white education. You’ve got a good program here.” I loved what he was doing, it was a killer school. We talked about the open classroom program, and he says, “You know what, if you were to take your open classroom program, I would be amenable to you putting your open classroom program in our school.” So we started talking back and forth, and the two of us and some other parents really started putting together a program, and we went to Ferndale schools with our proposal for the open classroom program, and the proposal that we wanted to put it at Grant school. And the kids would then be bused over to Grant school. He said he would make room for it, he would rearrange, and we could do it, and we took it to the school board and said, “This may be your opportunity.” And with the open classroom, kids from Grant were able to be in the program too, that’s the reason we were able to get so much room because a lot of the kids in the open classroom program were from the Grant school which were all black, became part of the program, so it was a really, really nicely integrated program. We went to the school district and said, “We’ve got the agreement of the principal on this, this is what we’re going to do, this is how we’re going to do it, and we think if you put that together, it’s possible that it will satisfy the federal government. You might get your money back.” We never had a second meeting, they agreed that day. It was the coolest program in the world, it was such a cool program. The kids literally learned problem solving and critical thinking, and you learned things like fractions by cookie, learned things by doing and learned everything in a whole different way, but the neat part was—my daughter went with one of the black kids from the open classroom program to prom. They were just good friends. She still tells me, talking about Rodney and things like that. And it was just so neat, at a time when there was just this tension all over, and it’s so neat to see the kids that were part of that program and they just all sort of became a neat little group of people. They learned that everybody was normal people.  WW: That’s amazing.  SS: Yeah. And one of the neat parts, Ferndale was one of those cities that was ripe to become an Oak Park or a Southfield, and suddenly change its color and its texture. I remember people talking like crazy about moving out, neighbors gonna sell cheap, and all of a sudden, everybody’s gonna sell, and I kept saying, “Hang on, hang on, everything’s going to be all right.” And the open classroom, you started having in all the neighborhoods, somebody had been with and knew kids, and all of a sudden, the black kids weren’t coming over there from these schools, they were happy that that was there, but you’d see friends coming over. Whatever it was, people managed to not suddenly fly. There wasn’t that flight kind of thing. No, “Oh, it’s going to destroy our city so I have to leave,” kind of feel.  WW: That’s amazing, again. Do you have anything else you’d like to add?  SS: Nope.  WW: Well thank you very much for coming out.  SS: I gave you lots to use.  WW: Thank you for sitting down with us today.  SS: You’re welcome. My pleasure.           [TIME STAMP END OF INTERVIEW 58:22]  [End of Track 1]  Original Format M4A on iPhone  converted to WAV  1hr17min Duration 1 hr17min Interviewer William Winkel Interviewee Sandra Smith Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Dearborn, Detroit Workers, Ferndale, Looting, Open Classroom Program, Pontiac, Volunteers Citation “Sandra Smith, May 16th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/265. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml 
DetroitWorker;Ronald Navickas;1936;2016;Ronald Navickas, 1936, 2016 Title Ronald Navickas, August 23rd, 2016 Description Ronald Navickas was an employee of an armored truck company in 1967. He discusses his childhood in Highland Park and his memories of the week of July 23, 1967. He talks about why he moved and his impressions of the city when he returned and how he feels about it today. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 09/16/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Coverage Highland Park Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Ronald Navickas Brief Biography Ronald Navickas was born in 1936 in Pontiac, Michigan and grew up in Highland Park. He served as an Air Policeman from 1954 to 1958 when he took a job with an armored truck company. He worked with them until 1969 when he moved to Florida. He and his wife moved back to Michigan three years later, lived in Sterling Heights for 25 years, and now reside in Shelby Township. Interviewer's Name Julia Westblade Interview Place Detroit, MI Date 08/23/2016 Interview Length 00:36:14 NOTE: The recording is broken into two tracks Transcriptionist Julia Westblade Transcription Date 09/12/2016 Transcription JW: Good Morning. Today is August 23, 2016. My name is Julia Westblade. I am here in Detroit, MI with the Detroit Historical Society’s 1967 Project. Can you tell me your name?  RN: My name is Ronald Navickas.  JW: Thank you so much for sitting down with me today. Can you tell me where and when you were born?  RN: I was born November 3, 1936 in Pontiac, MI.  JW: Did you grow up in Pontiac?  RN: No, I did not. My family moved from Pontiac, actually from Michigan to the state of Maryland when I was very little. We spent probably the first four or five years of my life in Maryland and then at the beginning of the World War II we moved back to Michigan to Pontiac and then in 1942, I believe it was, we moved to Highland Park, MI where I attended the schools and lived until I went into the service in 1954.  JW: What brought your family back at World War II?  RN: I think it was monies. Due to the fact that we were living on a farm in Maryland and when push came to shove the demand for workers was paramount here in the area. So my mother worked out at Willow Run. She was a line inspector when they were building the B-24s. My dad was a draftsman for Lincoln at that time and living in Pontiac, she had to commute every day from Pontiac to Willow Run and my dad rode the train from Pontiac to Detroit to his job.  JW: Did your mom continue to work after the war ended?  RN: Yes she did. My mother and father divorced when I was ten years old. We were living in Highland Park at that time. She continued working. She worked for Burroughs – at that time it was Burroughs Adding Machine Company.  I have no idea what my father was. I think he was working for Fischer Body but I’m not sure at that time but we had nothing in common and he had departed and end of story as far as he was concerned.    JW: What was your neighborhood like growing up in Highland Park?  RN: Very diversified. A lot of different ethnic groups, in fact, I still meet with some of the guys I went to high school and grade school with even to this day. We had a very unique city. It was independent of Detroit even though it was surrounded by Detroit we had our own water supply, our own fire, our own police. We had two hospitals, our own educational system and it was the best of both worlds living there at that time.  JW: Did you primarily, when you were growing up, did you primarily stay in your neighborhood or did you explore around the city?  RN: Well, we could explore because we had a transit system at that time, the DSR, where we could jump on a streetcar, go downtown. We did a lot of walking in Highland Park. Everybody basically knew everybody. It was a situation where we were a little enclave very much – I would say not cloistered but we were a very proud little city.  JW: So you primarily stayed in Highland Park but did you go explore with the bigger city of Detroit at all?  RN: We did. Sunday back in those days was a typical Sunday drive. We would get in a car and we would of course drive over to Belle Isle and we would have to do the routine of going across the boulevard, getting to the bridge, and going under the tunnel and having to honk the horn. That was traditional. And then of course getting out and walking around Belle Isle and seeing what was and what wasn’t. It was always families that were out at that time, something that you don’t see that much of anymore.  JW: What were your impressions of the city at that time in the 50s and early 60s?  RN: I thought it was a box of gems to be discovered. It had anything and everything that would boggle your mind. Things today that we look back and we laugh at but, I mean I remember the huge stove down on Jefferson as you went going to Belle Isle and I was always amazed by that because I could never figure out who would stand there and cook on it. Going up the State Fairgrounds, you used to have car races there years ago and so many different aspects of the city that were just beautiful to go look at.  JW: Then you said you entered the service in what year?  RN: I went into the regulars in 1954, I was originally in the reserves. I was stationed out at Selfridge. I was an air policeman out there at 17 years old. Still wet behind the ears but I went into the regulars in 1954. Left Detroit. Went to San Antonio, TX. Did four years and was a nuclear and thermonuclear weapons mechanic when I was in the Air Force. Came back out of the service in 1958 and couldn’t find a job because nobody needed a hydrogen or atomic bomb repaired so I went to work for an armored car outfit and they were located on Seldon between Cass and Second. We had started out there as a rookie driver and worked my way up to a messenger were I had my own route and my own vehicle and everything.  JW: Is that where you were working throughout the 60s?  RN: Yes, I started there in 1958. It actually was 3 months after I got out of the service. I left there in 1969 and moved to Florida where I went and married my wife.  JW: Very nice. In the early to mid 60s, did you notice any tension in the city or anything?  RN: Towards the – about 1966 – correct that, I would say 1965, I noticed that there was a lot of stress and of course I think it was created by the Detroit Police Department. At that time they had a STRESS unit and it was looked upon as though it was a special tactics type of outfit who predominantly went after minorities which I didn’t see. Of course I was never involved in it but there was a lot of – I could see ethnic slurs, I could see tension in places especially when I worked in downtown Detroit. I worked all over. I worked from Eastern Market to Western Market. I worked down in the Port Authority and all the wholesale houses for all the produce companies and I could notice that there were attitudes then that were displayed that because more and more evident as time went on but when the civil unrest I’ll put it – it wasn’t a race riot as people want to call it in my opinion, it was an upheaval. We first noticed, it was a Sunday morning, I had finished playing golf at I can’t even remember the name of the golf course now. Anyway, Glen Oaks, I believe it was at 13 Mile and Orchard Lake Road, we were coming in off the golf course and noticed a huge, huge fire and at that time we went in to actually have a drink after our round of golf and they had the television on and we saw what was going on. I immediately left there and went home to get my family. Low and behold, one of my golf partners was my wife’s uncle and what I ended up doing was taking my family from Highland Park to Northwest Detroit to get them out in what I thought was a safe area. As I drove back into Highland Park, I could see madness.  People breaking windows, just looting and I didn’t care what store it was. They were just grabbing anything and everything. I got my family out to my friend’s house. I went back to the house and it was all hell broke loose. I was in the house and I could feel the building, my house start to shake, it was rumbling and then I realized it was tanks heading from one of the armories down Hamilton through Highland Park and going down the Davidson and about a half hour or so afterwards, I heard the gunfire, the 50 caliber open up and that in itself was a very, very sobering moment. I stayed at the house. I could hear gunfire. Monday morning I got up and went to go to work and in the process I was driving down Hamilton in Highland Park. I was approaching Davidson and I saw an individual standing out in the middle of the street, armed and come to find out it was either a paratrooper from the 101st or the 82nd Airborne who was questioning me where I was headed. I was in full uniform and I had my sidearm on, my weapon, and I had another weapon in the vehicle to take with me. And in the course of it, he actually warned me not to go in which I totally appreciated. And then I noticed there was a sandbags off to one side and they had a 30 caliber machine gun trained on me and that sort of made my mind up. I wasn’t going to go into town. I turned around, came back, called into the office. I told them what had just transpired and come to find out all of the armored cars that we had with our company had been not commandeered but had been requested and taken over by the Detroit Police Department and the rest of the State Police, they were using them to transport people from point A to point B for safety reasons. When I finally did make it back into work, it was almost total devastation. Places that you would never feel that would be touched by any of this were gutted. Going past tall apartment buildings and windows smashed out and curtains flapping in the air. It looked like a bombed out city and there was still sporadic gunfire. In fact the Saturday after I was making a stop. My driver had gotten out to get the deposits from the company and as he came back out, he needed some other bags or whatever, I can’t remember, he went back inside and as I was sitting there doing some paperwork, I felt the truck rock and I thought he was back to drop off more money and there was no one there and I couldn’t figure out what was going on. Did it I think two more times and finally he came back out. I opened the door and I asked him had you been out knocking on the door. He said no, I was inside. Come to find out we had taken three shots to the side of the armored car which came from a burned out building and we had no idea. We couldn’t hear the reports from the rifle because they were firing from inside. It was – even that, almost a week later, there was still chaotic conditions. There were still squads of police going after idiotic snipers. It was something that no matter who relates it, it’s unbelievable.  JW: You said you took your family to a friend who lived out of the danger zone, why did you then come back? Why didn’t you stay with your family?  RN: I think it was a little bit of, I don’t think it was false bravado, but I think it was a little bit of I don’t want anybody messing with our house. Because I was allowed, and legally so, to carry a weapon, I figured that I could protect the house. I knew almost every police officer on the force in Highland Park. I had three or four of them that were very, very close friends of mine and I figured if push came to shove, I could give one of them a call if something happened. Of course, that was the days with no such thing as a cell phone and you needed a landline and if I needed help, I could be there rather than just leave it open to somebody looting it. But I guess it was just, I wanted to protect the property.  JW: So did you stay alone in the house for the rest of the week?  RN: Yes, I stayed – I went and I picked up the family, I think it was about three days later I picked them up. Brought them back and I was totally, totally blown away by what we witnessed on our ride back from the Northwest side of Detroit to Highland Park. It was one stop that we used to have that our company used to service was Star Furniture which was on Livernois just south of Puritan and it was now just a smoldering hulk. There were so many things that you wouldn’t believe. Safes that we had in stores that had been melted right down to the concrete. The only thing left was the capsule that contained the monies. There was just things that I don’t even know how to describe some of it. I won’t say it was horrific or horrendous but it was unbelievable.  JW: As you were driving out to pick up your family, how far out did the damage go out?  RN: When I went to pick them up, I would say from where we lived, at that time we lived on a little one block street called Kirwood, it was between Pilgrim and Puritan, one block west of Hamilton. To drive out Puritan, I would say, if I went across Livernois to going toward Schaffer, there were signs of looting out about that far. I don’t know anything that transpired other than that area or from me going in town because I made no attempt to go anywhere else. I do know that the curfew was on. People were having, if you needed gas you had to get outside the city to buy gas. You couldn’t buy gas in Highland Park, you couldn’t buy gas in Hamtramck. You had to go north of 8 Mile because the idiot fringe was using it to make Molotov Cocktails so they figured they would restrict the flow. Well, where are you going and where are you going to get it. As far as any type of incendiary makeup fuels and oils and whatever, but as far as the devastation that I saw, I would say it would be to Puritan up toward Shaffer and that was it in that area, but heading into town, south of Highland Park, I never saw anything happen in the city of Highland Park.  JW: Okay,  RN: Which to me was a compliment to all of the people, all of the residents, but once I crossed from Highland Park into Detroit, it was a different world, totally.  JW: Did the Highland Park police stay in Highland Park or did they go out into the city and help there?  RN: They basically were protecting in the city, I don’t know if a few of them were handed off to other agencies.  My buddies all stayed in Highland Park. My one brother-in-law had just graduated the day before from the Detroit Police Academy when this started and it was unbelievable. He ended up going to Vietnam and he said it was almost the same way when he saw what was happening here in the city back during the riots. Or I shouldn’t say he went to Vietnam. He had been to Vietnam and had come back and said it was just as chaotic here as it was there. Unbelievable.  JW: So then you said you stayed in the area until 1969?  RN: Yes.  JW: So why did you move?  RN: Number of reasons. The situation that took place created a carrying a gun. I almost killed a person.  JW: We can stop for a minute if you would like.  [End of Track 1 00:21:51]  [Start of Track 2]  RN: I had been making a stop and in the course of I had ten thousand dollars on me and an inebriated person who was joking at the time created a scene and in the process I was forced to draw my weapon and I found out at that particular moment that the gun had become mightier than me. I decided at that time that a change of venue would be best. Thank God it happened because I went into partnership with a friend of mine. We decided to go into business. We ended up – he was a Detroit Cop who had had enough, too, and we both moved to Ft. Lauderdale, Florida where I met my wife. We got married, lived down there, moved back here it was three years later, wasn’t it? Have resided in Michigan ever since.  JW: When you came back did you move back to Highland Park?  RN: No, Highland Park was on the demise then. People had used the terminology “White Flight” for reasons that I will never know. No, my wife and I moved back to Detroit. We hadn’t two nickels to rub together at the time so we moved back to 6 Mile and actually Seymour and Gratiot Detroit’s northeast side and we lived there for a period of time and then we moved out to Sterling Heights. Lived out there for 25 years in our house and we now reside in Shelby Township.  JW: How did you find the city when you came back?  RN: Changed.  Drastically changed. Polarized. I see a city even today that is polarized but to me it’s just my opinion, I see a city that is following in footstep with our country. I don’t understand it but for reasons that certain factions have, it’s divide and conquer right now as far as I can see. I see a city that is building. I see a city that is predominantly putting a lot of rouge and lipstick on but I don’t see any substance. I see a town that right now has looking here, I can look across at the Detroit Institute of Arts, a place I used to go to when I was a kid in grade school, loved it. Still do.  And my wife and I used to go for the Wassail Dinners years ago and now we hardly even come into the city and not for fear but there’s really nothing here that we would want to become part of anymore. And we’re members of the Detroit Zoological Society. We used to volunteer there. So many different things that we used to be a part of in this city and now sadly to say, we just don’t want to be a part of it and we feel in the past there was some commonality to it. I would go to ball games all the time. I would be at Olympia all the time. When I was a kid I was hung up on sports. Now I don’t even want to partake in any of it and it’s because of, I find, attitudes that – and it’s always using the same terminology. “White Flight.” It’s “You people did this and you people did that.” I don’t know why. I can’t figure it out and nobody can explain it to me.  JW: What do you think would need change in the city to change that view?  RN: People’s attitudes towards each other. I see there is so much I would say individualness if there is such a word. I see people today who think more of themselves than they do of the whole. I see more selfishness. I mean, think when you sit back and look at the city of Detroit, 40s and 50s when I was grade school and high school, it was nothing to jump on a streetcar and go from here to there. To go to amusement parts, we had so many of them around the area. Today, I mean, they reopened up Belle Isle and it turned into a beautiful park. Prior to that, if you drove over to Belle Isle, you had to be careful where you drove because of the broken glass.  It was just the attitudes and we some that is still there. There’s a lot of beauty in this town. Beautiful stuff, but you only see about four different factions that are benefitting from it. Why do we need another hockey arena? We had one that was torn down, this one of course is on its last legs so we’re building another one. We’re going to have a soccer arena in town. Not we. Detroit’s going to have.  And if you get a chance and just a plug for the, what is it? United States Baseball League out in Utica. Grassroots place, but people feel comfortable. People feel safe there. And to cross 8 Mile Road, I don’t know. I have no idea just what my own personal thoughts are about trying to create, it wouldn’t be a Utopian situation because you’re going to always have people who begrudge others something but just the decency towards each other would be appreciated.  JW: So do you have any wisdom for the city of Detroit?  RN: Yeah, don’t relive the past. Right now all I can say is that I enjoyed my time when I was here working here. I enjoyed my time visiting and seeing all the jewels that were on display for the city and for the people of the city. And now I just see, I don’t know. I don’t know how to describe it. I’m not that knowledgeable in the English language, I’ll put it that way.  JW: Is there anything else you’d like to add or any other memories you have?  RN: Oh, memories? Geeze. I could start singing the song.  No, I just, I do appreciate what you’re doing here because there’s so much of that year that should be remembered.  Not for the tragedy that took place but things that took place with people actually coming together to help each other during that time. Everybody hears about the Algiers Motel incident.  Everybody hears about so much negativity and there was a lot of people who bent over backwards, like in our neighborhood in Highland Park. The street I lived on, we had a diverse neighborhood. People, black, white, pink, purple, plaid. It was every group you could think of. And we all liked each other and even after the riot, or the civil unrest, let me correct that, even after that, we still liked each other. It wasn’t a situation where somebody held a grudge against you because you were of a different color. They liked you for who you were. Now that seems to have changed. If you’re of a certain color, you’re frowned upon. You are thought less of and I don’t think that’s right.  JW: Why do you call it a civil unrest rather than a riot?  RN: Well, I would say it’s a civil unrest of the simple reason that it was basically the whole city. It ignited so fast and spread so fast, I mean, when you say a riot, a riot had to me, my definition of a riot is something that happened in one locality. This was throughout the city. There were people who were just aching to get involved. I had stocks that I didn’t even recognize.  I had about three or four places I had to go on Trumbull and we had no idea what was left, what customers we still had with the company. And I would have to call in to my office if a specific customer wasn’t open. Well, the day that I went out, that Saturday after the unrest, the reason, I was on the two-way radio and I was on Trumbull where I must have lost it was six customers in a row. And it wasn’t because they were closed  it was because they were no longer there. The buildings were torched, they were gone. Burned to the ground. They were still removing bodies from the basements of some of these stores where people had been looting and got trapped inside and it was something like I say. It was from here to there. It was a situation you had to experience. You had to sit there and say to yourself and say I can’t believe human beings would do this to each other and for what? And a lot of hate. A lot of hate came out of it but it was everybody. It wasn’t just one specific ethnic group. People shot for looting, I mean, it’s just. I told my wife, I still remember going into one store that was a customer, in fact, it was just around the corner from here. It was over on Third near Seldon and when I pulled up to make the pickup I noticed that the front plate glass window had been smashed out. It was boarded up. The brothers who owned the inner city market that serviced the area were being brought up on murder charges because the people who had come through, had broken the window out, jumped through the window and when they jumped through the window, the brothers were waiting inside with shotguns and blew them back out onto Third. Because of the attitude at that time, because they were protecting their property, the city didn’t see it that way. Or somebody didn’t see it that way and they were charged with murder.  I’d have no idea what took place afterwards if they were found not guilty or whatever but it was a time that the city after all these years is still trying to heal. Hopefully it will.  JW: Alright, well, thank you so much for coming in to share your story.  RN: I appreciate it.  Original Format Audio Duration 36min 14 sec NOTE: The recording is broken into two tracks Interviewer Julia Westblade Interviewee Ronald Navickas Location Detroit, MI Files RonaldNavickasPhoto.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 101st Airborne, 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, 82nd Airborne Division-US Army, Belle Isle, Detroit Workers, Gas Ration, Highland Park, Looting, Snipers, STRESS, White Flight Citation “Ronald Navickas, August 23rd, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/391. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Marvin Myers;1932;2016;Marvin Myers, 1932, 2016 Title Marvin Myers, July 7th, 2016 Description Marvin Myers opened a corner store on Grand St. and Linwood one week before the unrest in 1967. He discusses the impact the week had on his store as well as later altercations with customers. He also briefly mentions his time serving in the Korean War. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 07/19/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Coverage Grand St. and Linwood Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Marvin Myers Brief Biography Marvin Myers was born in Detroit in 1932. He served in Korea and eventually opened a corner store on Grand St. and Linwood for thirteen years. Interviewer's Name Julia Westblade Interview Place Detroit, MI Date 07/07/2016 Interview Length 00:20:29 Transcriptionist Julia Westblade Transcription Date 07/18/2016 Transcription JW: Today is July 7, 2016. My name is Julia Westblade. We’re here at the Detroit Historical Society with the Detroit 1967 Project. Would you like to say your name?  MM: Marvin Myers. M-Y-E-R-S.  JW: Thank you and can you tell me where and when you were born?  MM: I was born on November 3, 1932.  JW: Very nice. Were you born here in Detroit?  MM: In Detroit. Women’s Hospital.  JW: Very nice. When you grew up, where did you live in Detroit?  MM: I grew up, we had a house on Brush Street in Detroit. Then we moved in 1942 to Pasadena, which is one block north of where my store was. I lived in that area until I went into the army.  JW: When did you go into the army?  MM: 1953, the Korean War. And I got discharged in 1954, and I was sent to Korea. When I got to Korea, there were still fighting and we landed in Pusan, which is a port, but you couldn’t dock on the port. They didn’t have any docks, so we had to take beach craft to the land. We got on trains and the train right next to us was a Red Cross train and there were tiers of wounded soldiers three deep. Three high. And I thought, oh my god, I’ll be home in two weeks, but nothing happened over there. I was in the 1169th Engineering Corps in Korea. The headquarters company. I ran the PX.  JW: So then, in Detroit, what did your parents do?  MM: My parents. My father had an auto parts store on Caniff in Detroit and while I was in the service he had leased the store out and they moved to Tucson, Arizona. They went to Florida first, and my father had arthritis and it was just a little too humid for them, so they went to Tucson. When I got discharged and came back to the states, they were going to send me to Chicago to get discharged and I told them I wanted to go see my parents first. So I got discharged in San Francisco, and then I went to Tucson, Arizona.  JW: How long were you in Tucson?  MM: I was there probably about a year. Then I moved back to Detroit. Oh, and then I went to pharmacy school at Ferris Institute. I was probably in my senior year and this one particular professor particularly didn’t care for me and he wasn’t giving me good grades so I had to drop out.  JW: Oh, that’s too bad.  MM: But I got a business degree out of it so I was there for four years. Bill of Rights, that paid for it.  JW: Oh, good.  The neighborhood where you grew up in Detroit, was that an integrated neighborhood or no?  MM: Basically, Pasadena was more Jewish than anything. Then when my parents sold the house, they had to sell it to – it had started to turn black, and he sold it to a black person.  JW: And that’s when they moved away from Detroit or did they go somewhere else first?  MM: Well, they moved to Florida. They did buy a house around 8 Mile Road. It was a very small house, she said. I had never even seen it because I was in Korea, and from there they sold that and they moved to Florida.  JW: When you moved back to Detroit after living in Tucson –  MM: My maternal mother had passed away when I had just turned five and my father remarried and she had a daughter which was about a year older than me. She had never married and I stayed with them for a while. They had an apartment on Pasadena a bit closer to Dexter. And I had odd jobs when I was going to college. I worked at Good Humour. I was a Fuller Brush Man. I kept myself occupied.  JW: Oh good. When you moved back to Detroit after the war, what area of the city did you live in?  MM: Again, she was living in Pasadena with her husband and they had a rollaway couch and I just sort of slept while I was going to college. Most of the time I was up at Big Rapids.  JW: So is that the area where you were in 1967? Were you still in Pasadena?  MM: No, I got discharged it was probably ‘55, ‘56 in Big Rapids and I was there for about four years.  JW: So then leading up to 1967, did you notice any tension in the city or did you notice that anything was going on?  MM: Well, at one time when I was open, there was merchandise being taken out of the store and I was open seven days a week. I did have somebody helping me out at night and in fact, he worked for Guardian Alarm so I could just see where the merchandise was being depleted and were we making any money. I hired somebody to bring in a lie detector and I told everybody in my help that I was going to take the test, too. And they all refused. So I just told them, “Thanks, I’ll pay you. Goodbye, thanks.” So then the people in the area knew about it, that I was going to give them a lie detectors test, then they all walked out on me. So I did keep a couple people that I knew that was pretty good. Well then, after that, I decided, I’m going to stay there all the time. I closed on Sunday and I closed during the week at seven o’clock which is really unheard of in a liquor store and on Friday and Saturday I stayed open until eleven. That’s what I did. I was there all the time. I had one day off during the week.  JW: And when was this? What year was this? Was this 1967?  MM: That was before the riot.  JW: And where was your store located?  MM: I mean after the riot because I had reopened again. The riot was in ‘67. Probably around early ‘70s I decided. I would even, when the store was closed, I would park across the street with my wife and see if they were taking merchandise with paper bags and stuff like that.  JW: Where was your store located?  MM: Grand Ave [Street] and Linwood.  JW: And when did you open your store?  MM: ‘67.  JW: ‘67?  MM: 1967. I was there one week. I was open Monday and closed Sunday. At that time on Sunday you could only sell liquors, it’s Michigan law, you know beer and wine, from 12 on and people going to church and this and that. That’s when we opened at 12 o’clock and I started to get phone calls. “Get the hell out of there. They’re rioting on 12th Street.” And I walked outside and I saw fires and smoke down Linwood and people were giving me dirty looks that were passing by. And she had the car. There was no cell phones at that time. I had to wait for her. A black gentleman owned the gas station across the street. He came over and said, “Marv, close up. Get your money  put it into a bag and come across the street. There’s nothing going to happen to you.” Which I did. So I closed around three o’clock and then I had to wait for her.  Nothing happened until after I left. We went out to dinner. After dinner I called up the Guardian Alarm and they said—they must have been so busy they didn’t know what the hell they were talking about. When I told them who I was and where the store was located, she said, “Oh, you’re okay. Don’t worry about it.” After we finished eating I said I’m going to take a ride down to the store and there was nothing left. You saw the pictures. We just left. I had merchandise in a vestibule leading down to the basement and had boxes piled up. Didn’t even unpack yet. I put everything that I could in the car and drove off. Then we were driving down toward Fenkell and there was a Robinson Furniture Store Warehouse and they had broken into that. People had couches on the cars on their hoods, and the police had them all lined up with their hands on the wall. That was funny. They had chairs on their cars that wasn’t even tied down. Then we went down Fenkell, stopped at a light, a bunch of people were on the corner there and they looked at us and I said, I’m getting the hell out of here, and went through the red light. Get out of there.  JW: You said that the man across the street, the gas station owner across the street was a black man, right? Were most of the other shops in the area, was it pretty well mixed or was there one more –  MM: No, it was all black.  JW: All black. So did you –  MM: And my help was all black. In fact, one of the guys when I first opened, I mean officially, worked for Guardian Alarm and I couldn’t even trust him. At that time I was open seven days a week and we were missing too much merchandise. That’s when I decided to close on Sunday and closed early on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday and open late Friday and Saturday. That was that.  JW: What other things did you see in the city? You said they called you, they said there’s riots and you need to get out. Did you see the effects of the riots as you were driving away with your wife later that day?  MM: I saw Robinson Furniture with the couches there and the police were lining everybody up that was trying to drive away against the wall. It was so early during the riot, probably 12th Street really got hit bad. They didn’t burn me out because there were people living upstairs from me otherwise they would have burned me out, too.  It was just this little small strip of stores. I was on the corner. There was a shoe store next to me that wasn’t hit that was black-owned.  There was a plumbing store and some other stores. They did a good job on me.  JW: Some people describe this event as a riot but other people use other words. How do you describe the events of 1967?  MM: I thought it was a riot. I don’t know, what other words were they using?  JW: Some people call it a rebellion. Some people call it an uprising.  MM: No, it wasn’t a rebellion. It was just a riot that had started on 12th Street and it just accelerated. At that time probably 90 percent of the police force was white and when you raided a blind pig like that, it was all black and that’s what happened.  There were just discrepancies between the blacks and the whites, especially the policemen raiding them at 2:30 in the morning.   JW: How long did it take for you to get your store back in order?  MM: In July, probably September or October. At least a good few months.  They broke the in [unintelligible]. I had jewelry there that was on consignment. They broke the cases. It was a mess, you can see in the pictures. It was just funny that they didn’t open up where the vestibule was and all that merchandise. They could have just taken all the boxes. Yeah, fun and games.  JW: How do you think that the events of 1967 impacted the city?  MM: Well, my impression is you can’t keep a good man down, so I reopened. I was held up a few times during the time I was open. I was contemplating probably putting in the glass and I just couldn’t see myself working behind a cage for the rest of my life. Then, in probably around 1978 or ‘79 I got shot.  JW: Oh wow.  MM: In a hold up. There was a guard I had in the store on a Saturday night. The two of us were going to go on vacation that Sunday and I called the police department to give me the extra protection while I was gone for a week so two guys came in. They had the guard covered. The other guy comes around the corner, behind the counter, and he starts walking in front of me and I was oblivious of what the guard—that the guard didn’t know anything so I took a bottle of whisky and I hit the guy on the head and I ran around the counter and jumped under—I had a potato chip rack. And they started shooting at me. It hit me twice. One in the arm and one in the leg so that was my vacation in the hospital. And the funny part about it were the police, I guess saw these guys. They were across the street and when they started shooting they just ran out of the store and ran to where their getaway car was, so they were never caught.  JW: That’s too bad. How long did you keep your store open, then?  MM: I had it probably about 13 years. After that, I got rid of the store, sold the store and got rid of my wife. So I killed two birds with one stone. But we did have a son which was good.  JW: Let’s see. What message would you like to leave for future generations about your memories of Detroit before, during, after the events of 1967?  MM: Probably, try to treat people like you would want to be treated. Even now, you can see where blacks, and especially when police arrest them, they pound them on the ground and everything like that and I’m sure they wouldn’t want to be treated like that. That would be my message. Treat people like you would want to be treated. I’m serious.  JW: No, that’s good. I agree. Is there anything you feel that we haven’t discussed yet that should be added to your story?  MM: There was one columnist in the Chronicle that was one of my customers and I got held up and she wrote an article on me-I should have brought it—about how I’m really good to the people that lived around the area and that it was a shame that they had to do this to me. I should have brought it.  JW: You can send it to us. You can email it or something like that if you’d like, yeah.  MM: Okay. I’ll try to find it.  JW: That’s a great legacy.  MM: She was a big columnist for the Chronicle and she wrote an article on me.  JW: That’s great. That’s very great. All right, well, is there anything else you’d like to add?  MM: I think you got about everything.  JW: All right, great. Well, thank you so much for coming in and sitting down to tell us your stories,  MM: I’m glad you asked. I just read the paper and I was just sitting there thinking how it might be interesting.  JW: Well, we appreciate it.  MM: Thank you.  Original Format audio Duration 20min 29sec Interviewer Julia Westblade Interviewee Marvin Myers Location Detroit, MI Files Myers, Marvin.JPG dhs_2016_109_001_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_002_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_003_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_004_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_005_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_006_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_007_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_008_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_009_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_010_sf.jpg dhs_2016_109_011_sf.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Arson, Business Owners, Detroit Workers, Korea, Looting Citation “Marvin Myers, July 7th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/317. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml 
DetroitWorker;Kenneth Volk;1931;2016;Kenneth Volk, 1931, 2016 Title Kenneth Volk, July 6th, 2016 Description Kenneth Volk was a vice president of the National Bank of Detroit the summer of 1967. He remembers going to work the week of July 23 and being sent to the other branches to see how they were doing. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 09/23/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Kenneth Volk Brief Biography Kenneth Volk was born in Detroit in 1931 and grew up in the Linwood and Elmhurst area, near Central High School. He worked at the National Bank of Detroit during the 1967 unrest. Interviewer's Name William Winkel Interview Place Bloomfield Hills, MI Date 07/06/2016 Interview Length 00:20:17 Transcription Date 09/12/2016 Transcription William Winkel [WW]:  Hello, today is July 6th, 2016, my name is William Winkel.  I am in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan.  This interview is for the Detroit ’67 Oral History Project, put on by the Detroit Historical Society.  I’m sitting down with Mr. Kenneth Volk. Thank you for sitting down with me today.  Kenneth Volk [KV]:  My pleasure.  WW:  Can you please tell me where and when you were born?  KV:  I was born in Detroit in 1931.  WW: And what neighborhood did you grow up in?  KV:  I grew up in the Linwood and Elmhurst area, where the Roosevelt, Durfey, and Central High Schools are.  WW: What was your neighborhood like growing up?  KV:   It was a nice neighborhood  it was a closely knit neighborhood. The schools were, for me, like a couple of blocks away, so I walked to school from grade school through high school.  WW:  What high school?  KV:  Central High School.  WW:  What did your parents do for a living?  KV:   My dad was in auto supplies and my mother was a housewife.  WW:  Was your neighborhood integrated?  KV:   A little bit, yes.  WW:  What was the makeup of the neighborhood? Was it a Polish neighborhood, or - ?  KV:   No, it was-- I think-- primarily Christian and Jewish.  WW:   Okay. Are there any stories you’d like to share from growing up in that neighborhood?  KV:   Well, none that I can think of at the moment.  WW:  [laughs] Not to worry.  How long did you stay in that neighborhood?  KV:  We lived there until 1951.  WW:  And why did you move out of that neighborhood?  KV:  Basically, my parents felt that they wanted to have a little larger house, and they actually moved to another area in Detroit, around Finkel and Sorrento.  WW:  Okay. What was the new neighborhood like?  KV:   It was not too different from the neighborhood we’d moved from.  Where we had lived, the house was a frame house, and where my parents lived, it was a brick house and it was two stories instead of one.  WW:  Do you have any recollections from the 1943 riots in Detroit?  KV:   Yes, I was 12 years old at the time, and I was walking to school. Basically, I didn’t see anything relating to the riots except that the National Guard was stationed in the back of the Roosevelt Elementary School, and they had pup tents put up, and it was sort of like a military situation there when we were walking to school. But otherwise we really had no real impact from the ‘43 riots.  WW:  Okay.  Growing up, did you see the city changing at all, throughout the 1940s and into the ‘50s?  KV:  Not really, I don’t think that we experienced much of a change in the neighborhood, basically my parents moved to have a little larger house, then I moved out when I got married after I got out of the Army.  WW:  What year was that?  KV:   I was in the Army from 1953 to 1955.  WW:  Why did you join the Army?  KV:   I didn’t, I was drafted.  [laughs]  WW:   [Laughs] Fair point! After you got out and got married, where’d you move to?  KV:  We moved to Six Mile and Myers. We lived on Mendota. It was a rather small house, so when we ended up with two children we moved into a larger house on Freeland, which is just south of Eight Mile Road.  WW:  And what did you do after you returned to the city, for work?  KV:  When I got out the Army?  WW:  Yes.  KV:  I joined a large public accounting firm, and I spent about ten years with that firm.  WW:  And did you notice the city changing at all in the ‘60s?  KV:   I really didn’t notice it that much, no. One of the things that precipitated our move out of the city was the fact that our kids were going to school, is was the Vernor school. The people in the neighborhood were concerned about the fact that Detroit Public Schools was going to build an intermediate school on Wyoming and Penbrook, and that was a rather rough neighborhood to start with. The people were very much perturbed about it, and a representative from the Detroit Public Schools had a meeting at the Vernor school for the neighbors. At that time, there was the Vandenberg School, which is an elementary school, on a huge piece of property. It would have been easy for them to build an intermediate school there, and it was in a good area. At any rate, as a result of the meeting with the representative from the Detroit Public Schools, his response to our concerns that was that we had nothing to worry about, that there would be, quote, adequate police protection, unquote. One week later, you could pick the house you wanted to buy, because there were “Sale” signs all over the place. At any rate, as I had mentioned, we had already made arrangements to build a house in Southfield so, it really didn’t make a lot of difference to us.  WW:  And what year was that?  And what month?  KV:  We put the house up for sale in March of 1967.  WW:  And did it sell right away, or did you stay in the city?  KV:  Actually, it took about a week.   WW:  Wow.  KV:  It was very interesting, the gentleman that bought the house, I had told him that our builder said that our house would not be ready until December first. He didn’t care, he put a very substantial deposit on it, substantial as it was at that time, and he was willing to wait.  Fortunately for him and for us, we had possession of the new house by October 31st, so it was actually a month before the builder had planned to make it available to us.  WW:  Okay.  How did you first hear what was going on, in that week in July in ‘67?  KV:   I believe it was on the radio. It was quite extensively covered on the radio.  WW:  And where were you working at the time?  KV:   National Bank of Detroit.  WW:  Did you go to work that week?  KV:  I went to work as usual, [on] Monday morning. I drove down to Seven Mile and Shafer, which I usually do, parked my car, and took an express bus to downtown Detroit. Going down the expressway, I could see smoke billowing on either side of the expressway. When I finally got down to the office, I found that basically the only people that were there were the management group from the bank, and since I was a vice president in the main office audit staff, I was elected to go to two of the branches that were in the heart of the riots.  Our trip to the first branch, which was at Grand River and Grand Boulevard, was by police car, accompanied by an armored car, and another police car in front of the armored car. I was sitting in the back of one of the police cars with one of the branch managers. When we got to the branch on Grand River and Grand Boulevard, there was considerable devastation up and down the street.  There were many fire hoses scattered up and down Grand River, and it was a rather sad-looking situation.   The branch on Grand River was next door to Charles Furniture, and Charles Furniture was totally destroyed. The branch suffered a lot of water damage, and in [our] attempt to open the vault in the branch, there was difficulty, because the water that had been played on the branch had apparently started to rust the doors of the vault.  Since we were there for a while, I went out to stand in front of the branch with one of the police officers who was in essence guarding the front door, and an individual, I believe he was a reporter for one of the newspapers, came across the street. He wanted to come in and see what was going on in the branch.  Of course the police officer said that wasn’t possible, and asked him to step back across the street. The reporter was rather adamant about wanting to go in, so the police officer lowered his rifle, and asked him politely to please walk across the street, which he did.  After we got the funds out of the vault and proceeded to the branch on Linwood and Clairmount, our trip took us down Chicago Boulevard. And of all things, as we were driving down Chicago Boulevard, the armored car stalled. The gentleman [who] was the branch manager was in the back seat of the police car with me looked like he was going to faint  he turned all white.  And the police officer who was sitting in the front with a shotgun, lowered the window and put the shotgun out the window to make sure that he had a good aim at whatever he was going to aim at.  Interestingly, the city of Detroit, the police department was divided into two sections, one was the East part of Detroit and the other was the western part of Detroit. Unfortunately, we were in a police car that was assigned to the east part of Detroit, and they had no idea what was happening on the west side of Detroit. So they heard shots being fired, and I guess they didn’t really know what to do, but at any rate, I think it only took maybe fifteen or twenty seconds and the armored car got started again, and we went on our way to the branch at Linwood and Clairmount.  That branch was still actively involved in the riots, and while we were in the branch we could hear gunfire, and one of the policemen came into the branch, and we asked him what was going on, and his answer, which I never confirmed, was that they just finished shooting a person off of one of the rooftops. At any rate, we completed the removal of the funds from the Linwood-Clairmount office, and we headed back to the main office in downtown Detroit. And that was basically it.   One of the things that did occur, the branch manager at Linwood and Clairmount gave me an envelope and asked me to give it to one of my associates at the main office. It was sealed, so I didn’t know what was in it.  When I got back to the office my associate had already left, and I put the envelope on my file cabinet. The next morning I gave it to him, and I found out there was six thousand dollars in cash sitting in it, and luckily nobody pilfered it during the night.  WW:  Wow.  KV:   So that’s basically, my experience with the, ah, the ’67 riots. On the next day, on Tuesday—  WW:   Ah, just some quick follow-up questions—  KV:  Sure.  WW:  On your way into work that morning, was the bus empty, or were there people in there also on their way to work - ?  KV:  Usually the bus was full, but on that day I think there were maybe eight or ten people.  WW:  And the trip to the Grand Boulevard location, was that eventful?  Or did you not see any devastation until you got there -  KV:  No, no, there was some devastation along the way, not anything to the extent that there was when we got to Grand River.  Grand River was the heart of devastation, and Linwood and Clairmount was pretty much destroyed.  WW:  And you talk about the fire department presence on Grand Boulevard, what was the police presence on Linwood and Clairmount?  KV:  There were a lot of police on Linwood and Clairmount, there were several in the branch, there were a number of them on Linwood itself. As I mentioned, one came into the branch and said that they had shot a sniper on a roof of one of the buildings on Linwood.   WW:  Okay. And on Tuesday?  KV:  Well, on Tuesday when I went back to work, things pretty much got back to normal as far as the bank was concerned. I might add, the street we lived on was just down the street from the Eight Mile Road Armory. We saw military vehicles going up and down our street. Another little incident was that my cousin, who was ten years old, came with his mother from Philadelphia to visit us, and when he saw the military vehicles moving up and down the street he was just petrified. He said to his mom [that] he want[ed] to go back home.  WW:  Was there a sense of relief when you and your family moved out to Southfield from Detroit, afterwards?  KV:  I would say it wasn’t a sense of relief, it was just something that we had planned on doing. You know, the neighborhood that we had lived in in Detroit was a nice neighborhood, it was just that that house too, became a bit small for us. And the house in Southfield--we went from like a 1200 square foot house to a 2300 square foot house.  WW:  Oh wow.  KV:  So it was a bit of a change.  WW:  Did the events of that week make you view the city any differently?  KV:   With sadness, basically. I had lived in Detroit all my life, and it was a good city.  [I] got a good education, I felt there was a lot of freedom, as far as being able—when we lived near Central High School, I used to go across the street to pick up my buddy to go to school.  And I’d just walk around the back of the house, and walk inside. We never had the doors locked or anything. So it was a very low-key neighborhood.  WW:  How do you interpret the events of that week?  Do you see it as a riot?  KV:   In what respect?  WW:  Do you see it as a riot, or do you see it as a rebellion, as civil disobedience?  KV:   Well, I looked at it as being a riot, after seeing what had happened on Grand River, there was considerable devastation there. Also, my grandparents lived off of Finkel and Livernois, and there was a lot of devastation there too. So yes, it was definitely considered not a—it was an uprising, as far as I was concerned.  WW:  And do you believe that it still, the events of that week, still affect the city today?  KV:  Absolutely. Absolutely. There are still buildings there that were devastated by the riot, that are still sitting there boarded up.  And I think that what happened was a death blow to the city of Detroit.  WW:  How do you view the city today?  KV:  Well, I’m happy to see that things are moving ahead and are beginning to pick up in Detroit.  Unfortunately, there was so much devastation there that you have many areas that were once residential areas, or business areas, that are totally vacant lots.  WW:   Uh-hum.  KV:  So, there’s a lot of work that has to be done to build Detroit back up again.  It’s gone from-- I believe-- like a million seven hundred thousand people to six or seven hundred thousand people. And the city has a much poorer tax base, and that just makes it much more difficult for the city to provide services for its people.  WW:  Thanks so much for sitting down with me today.  Is there anything else you’d like to add?  KV:   No, I think pretty well covered it.  WW:  Thank you very much again.     Original Format Audio Duration 20min 17sec Interviewer William Winkel Interviewee Kenneth Volk Location Bloomfield Hills, MI Files Volk, Kenneth.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Detroit Police Department, Detroit Workers, National Bank of Detroit Citation “Kenneth Volk, July 6th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/409. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml 
DetroitWorker;Joseph S. Ajlouny, Jr.;xxxx;2016;Joseph S. Ajlouny, Jr. xxxx, 2016 Title Joseph S. Ajlouny, Jr. Subject Joseph Ajlouny drove with his father to check on their family's grocery store on the corner of Forest and 17th. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 05/23/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Text Language en-US Type Written Story Coverage Forest Avenue and 17th Street, Memorial St. and Schoolcraft Avenue, Grand River Avenue Text My father and grandfather operated a market in a small building at the corner of Forest Ave and 17th St. It was a classic neighborhood grocery store with fresh fruit and vegetables and a meat counter. Due to the curfew, it was closed for several days. When they learned from a neighbor who lived in a home attached to the market that the electricity was cut off, dad was worried all his meat would spoil. Plus he was concerned there would be a break in and that his knives would be stolen. So he decided to risk a trip to the market despite the warnings to stay off the roads. His goal was to retrieve the meat and knives and otherwise secure the place. He also wanted to give the neighbor who was looking after the place $20 as a thank you. Sensing an adventure was at hand, I insisted on going with dad and we left our house on Memorial St. off Schoolcraft Ave at about dusk. My only vivid memory of the scene was the militia in the streets and the smoldering of buildings on Grand River Ave. With great anticipation we turned the corner onto Forest and were relieved that the market was not damaged. After dad unlocked the doors and we went in, a police car with its service lights arrived to investigate our activities. Dad gave them a box full of ice cream bars and sandwiches because they would soon be ruined if not eaten. I ate some too. Well, we secured the meat and knives so I regarded our mission a success. In 1969 we moved to Royal Oak after dad and his father purchased a market on the corner of Main St. and Twelve Mile Rd. which is still there today. The building that housed the old market still stands but it has been vacant and derelict for more than thirty years. It is a symbolic of similar old neighborhood businesses that died a quick death in the aftermath of the fear and insecurity so many small merchants felt after the conflagration of July 1967. Original Format Email Submitter's Name Joseph S. Ajlouny, Jr. Submission Date 05/23/2016 Files Joseph Ajlouny.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Curfew, Detroit Police Department, Detroit Workers, Forest Avenue, Grand River Avenue Citation “Joseph S. Ajlouny, Jr.,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/256. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;JoAnne Werbrouck;1948;2016;JoAnne Werbrouck, 1948, 2016 Title JoAnne Werbrouck, August 20th, 2016 Description JoAnne Webrouck remembers growing up in Detroit and after training, she got a job taking reservations for Hilton Hotels in downtown Detroit. During the week of July 23, 1967, she used the unexpected day off of work to peruse wedding venues before having to return to work early in the week. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 01/27/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name JoAnne Werbrouck Brief Biography JoAnne Werbrouck was born in 1948 in Grosse Pointe, Michigan and grew up in Detroit. Her father worked as a barber and her mother served as a captain in the army in the Public Health Service and worked as the head of dietary at St. John Moross hospital. In 1956, her family moved to St. Clair Shores and after graduation, she attended a trade school in Minneapolis, Minnesota. She got a job making reservations for Hilton Hotels in downtown Detroit in November of 1966 and worked there for 20 years. In 1968 she married her husband Thomas. Interviewer's Name Bree Boettner Interview Place Detroit, MI Date 08/20/2016 Interview Length 00:28:16 Transcriptionist Julia Westblade Transcription Date 01/27/2017 Transcription BB: Hello, this is Bree Boettner with the Detroit Historical Society’s Detroit 67 Oral History Project. Today is August 20. We are in Detroit, Michigan and I am sitting down with JoAnne Werbrouck. Thank you so much for sitting down with us, JoAnne. The first question we’re going to ask you is where and when you were born.  JW: Alright. March 31, 1948. My parents lived in Detroit. The hospital was Cottage Hospital which is in Grosse Pointe. My big claim to fame in Grosse Pointe: I was born there.  BB: Who were your parents? What are their names and what occupations did they have?  JW: My father was Michael Hoffenberger. He at that time, I’m not quite sure whether he was going to barber school? He went to the Detroit Barber College. When I was born he probably was but then I know he was also working at the Detroit – there was a Marine Hospital on the river somewhere around where Park Davis was on the river – as a boiler operator. He eventually became a barber. That’s one reason we moved to St. Clair Shores.  My mother, Jane Elizabeth Grant Hoffenberger, was born in New York, was a graduate of Cornell. She was a captain in the Army in the Public Health Service. She opened St. John Moross Hospital as the head of dietary there. So that happened, like, in the Fifties though by the time that was. So at the time I was born she was a homemaker and, as I say, he probably was at barber college or had recently graduated. I don’t know which.  BB: So you have any siblings?  JW: One brother.  BB: Older or younger?  JW: Younger. John. He lives in St. Clair Shores. He wasn’t down here at any point or time then.  BB: So you were born in the city of Detroit. What do you remember your neighborhood being like growing up?  JW: It was a new home but it was a small brick bungalow house and the homes around were larger duplexes and I didn’t go to school there at all. I can’t remember the local church name because I didn’t stay there that long, I guess.  BB: When did you move?  JW: Let’s see, it was 1956 that we moved to St. Clair Shores. They had purchased property and built a home there and my father opened a barber shop there around the corner so that he could walk to the barber shop. So he was the proprietor of the barber shop and by then she was either getting ready to open the hospital or it had opened. I don’t know exactly. He had a shop on Woodward for a while before that. They’ve passed away and I recently came across the paperwork of the address – I didn’t even know there was such a thing – and I have the original paper that’s signed by Mayor Cobo. I’m going oh my god! Nobody even knew who Cobo was – what is Cobo Hall? Who is it named after? And we tried to find it but you go by Woodward so fast and there really wasn’t that exact address so it’s probably long gone, the building.  BB: Wow, that’s still a pretty cool piece of history. Okay, so you guys moved to St. Clair Shores, what was the community like growing up? What schools did you attend in that area?  JW: I went there from kindergarten so it was, I guess, how many kids or wherever. So first I went to this school, Beechwood. Went there until fourth grade and then they were – I don’t know if probably there were so many kids then that probably it was an overflow thing, but we ended up for the fourth grade only in the basement of a junior high school for school. So physically I was in this building, Chippewa Junior High School. And then after that at fifth grade, the local Catholic school, which was right across Harper from where we lived and started a fifth grade. I went there and that first year I went there, they had started forth grade so my brother started with me. So I went there until eighth grade and then to the local high school because after that I told them I was not having any more Catholic school so that was the end of that. So then I went to Lakeview which was a public school.  BB: And what year did you graduate from high school?  JW: 1966.  BB: So did you go to college?  JW: No, I didn’t want any part of that either. But I thought I was interested in travel, the field of travel, but I never airplane traveled and I of course was too short to be a flight attendant anyway so I went to what I guess you would call a trade school in Minneapolis. And I left there in November of ‘66 and that taught you airline reservations – it was run by an airline – airline reservations, ticketing. They did air traffic control but that was only open to boys. So I went through that and then thought I’d come back. At that time Detroit had Washington Boulevard. That’s where all the airlines were, the ticket offices, the reservation offices, so I thought I would work for an airline.  I came back and I had an interview with Delta Airlines which was, again, on Washington Boulevard and got in there and it was like this huge, empty space with cubicles and I thought, I don’t want to be part of this. I want a desk. So I didn’t take that. A while later, a short time later actually, my mother saw an ad in the paper for Hilton reservations at Hilton Hotels and I went down for that and they had desks and I liked that so I took that job and that was my first job ever. I went in there in November ‘66 and it was a small office with only five of us there but we made reservations around the world. Because of the auto industry it was a bigger volume office. We were open from 8:00 in the morning until 7:30 at night and we took calls not just from the state of Michigan  they had WATS [Wide-Area Telephone System] lines then where the people could use. That was a toll-free. We took part of Ohio, we did Windsor, part of Ontario. So it was a larger office because we had an office in about every state.  BB: Where was your office located?  JW: We were in the Hilton Hotel, which is now gone, on Grand Circus Park. And me being the new one, my hours were from 11:00 to 7:30 at night. It took a bus, I had a brand new car but I didn’t want to use that. I took a bus to and from work and that was getting me to work.  BB: What was the city like when you first started working down here? Because you said it was ‘66.  JW: Right. Going back to being a child, with my mother being in the hospital, she’d have every other weekend off on schedule. My father did a lot with us. He brought us down here a lot to the Historical Museum, to the DIA [Detroit Institute of Arts], to Belle Isle, to the Ford Auditorium. So I knew those venues but as far as shopping or anything, I’d never been to Detroit. By then Northland had opened. That was a big shopping center so my mother buzzed out there so we’d go out there. But never been down here for that. So that was all new other than seeing Hudson’s at the parade. So I got to experience that because working at Grand Circus Park, on your lunch hour I had an hour so I could walk over to Crawley’s or to Hudson’s or Winkelman’s, that was a big women’s store on Woodward. I could go to those shops and be back in time, grab something for lunch and be back. There was a – no that’s not there – big Kresge Five and Dime, at the time, on Woodward. A lot of action there. That was multiple floors. That was a huge store. There were really no parks other than Grand Circus Park but you really didn’t have people, I guess at lunch it was too busy, people moving in and out. There was an underground garage there. When I eventually started driving to work, I parked under there.  BB: How long did you work with Hilton?  JW: I was with them for 20 years.  BB: Okay.  JW: But we moved in – I don’t remember the exact. I’m thinking it was maybe the late Seventies we moved out to Troy so we left here. It didn’t matter because we were the reservation service so we didn’t have to be in a hotel and at that time then, the Troy Hilton opened across the street from us anyway so that was alright.  BB: So that kind of takes us, because you got your first job in ‘66, that kind of leads right into the events that happened in July of 1967. So, my first question for that is how did you first hear about what was going on on the 23 of July?  JW: I think primarily television. We also had a neighbor across the street that owned a business and he was on Woodward almost to Highland Park, I’d say. And what he had was a fleet of automobiles. I can remember Cadillacs, always him having Cadillacs and how he got people I don’t know. But he would get people to drive them to destinations like California or Arizona and then they’d fly back. And I don’t know if they did that one their own or what he paid them to get there but that was his business. So I remember him coming over and telling, because they knew that I had gotten that job. And I don’t remember what day of the week that all started –  BB: It started on a Saturday night into Sunday.  JW: Okay, so it started over a weekend. So I was probably totally oblivious to the whole thing other than them saying that. Then my father right away, because I was 19 years old, flipping out because he was down here when they had he called it a race riot in the Thirties?  BB: ‘43.  JW: Because he was in the Coast Guard and witnessed some of that, too. I remember him talking about dragging for bodies and things, so he didn’t want me to come down here at all. Our main office was in New York City so they, I think, didn’t know what was going on and the magnitude from what they saw on television. I don’t remember if I got a phone call or how they contacted me or whatever but my supervisor lived in Windsor and she was a Canadian citizen so she couldn’t get over here so there was a scramble about that and how we were going to staff the office and the hotel itself could do some of our work but of course they wouldn’t have access to our records and reservations and people cancelling and so on. It took her, if I remember, days before she got here. Again, I was working until 7:30 and nobody knew the situation. It was mostly this way but what was it like down there? So my neighbor told my parents he’d take me to and from work, I just would have to go when he could be at his business so we did that for a couple days and then things started to get back to more normal where I was taking the bus again.  BB: So, Monday morning, the 25 [24] you went back to work? So Monday morning you were at work?  JW: No, I wasn’t and the funny thing about that is I only know that because I wasn’t engaged at that point but we knew we were getting married. So we were going to plan a wedding but I was starting to work and he worked afternoons at the time and my mother working so she’s going, well, you’re off and I’m off so let’s go look for a venue. So that’s how I chose my wedding day. It ended up being the 26 of July in 1968 so that’s how that happened otherwise I don’t know when I would have gotten married. So I wasn’t working that day but I think I went back the next day. That might have been the first day.  BB: Did it affect the operations of your job at all? The event? Because you mentioned there was cancellations?  JW: Not at all. Just people, everybody wanted to know what was going on and were we exposed to anything and what was it like down here and blah blah blah? But that maybe was like a pocket over there and all I know is that when we got here, he dropped me of right in front of the hotel and here’s this tank in the middle of Grand Circus Park and there were a lot of I don’t know if that was militia people or who those were. They were young guys, though, all young. Reserve, probably Reserve.  BB: The National Guard, yeah.  JW: Yeah. And I was struck by that that they all had guns and everything but they were just walking around kind of nonchalantly and –  BB: Were you ever approached by them?  JW: Yeah, talked to a few people. As they say, they didn’t seem upset particularly but, again, I don’t know what even happened. You never saw windows, like in the hotel were there were shops, windows weren’t broken, nobody came this far for any of that. But all anybody kept saying to anybody else was why would they wreck everything when that’s where they lived? Why would they loot their own peoples’ businesses? It was like, you couldn’t understand that. It’s still like that with Missouri with the looting and all that recently? Why do people do that? That doesn’t make any sense to me either. But I was the typical, suburbanite kid back then. I’d never seen a black person until I think I was seven. And when my mother, going to the hospital to visit her and introduced to her, I can remember this, to her assistant who was a young black woman, attractive black woman, and I thought, Why are her hands white on this side? Why are they black on this side? [laughs] What is that about? But I never asked anybody because I thought there must be a reason for it. As I say, being then with my husband with the union, sometimes we’d be in a room, we’d be the only white people but it was like by then you were accustomed, you learned. Especially with the union how strong everything is with the blacks in the union. It was a whole new experience there for sure.  BB: So going back just a little bit just so we have some context for the audio recording, you got married in ‘68 and what was your husband’s name?  JW: Thomas.  BB: And what was his job? So that we can get it on record.  JW: Then he was working for Chrysler. He worked for Chrysler his entire life, same plant which is the Conner-Jefferson plant where they make the Jeeps in Detroit. He was in Detroit, too. And he started out on the line as teenager. I think he started when he was 16 or something when he went in there and went to school in between. And then we were trying to decide what was he going to do  what was he going to be? And he was leaning toward pluming which in the plant is a pipefitter position. It’s a skilled position so you had to wait for that to open up to take training. And then he knew about the tuition refund program so he started going to Macomb Community College with Chrysler paying for that and ended up with a degree from Wayne [State University] in Labor and Industrial Relations. All paid by Chrysler. It was a wonderful opportunity so shortly after that he was back down here and we were back down here, too, going to different venues with his class and things because he’d be going at night. But he eventually got into the union, became a steward on the different shifts and then when he got to days, steward on days and he became the committeeman. He also was on their boards and their chairman and he had all kinds of positions there. I was quite proud of what he ended up being – with my help, of course. [laughs]  BB: [laughs] Behind every great man there’s a better woman, isn’t that the saying?  JW: Exactly. But during that time the plant was still open. They worked more in a skeleton-type crew though so production may have been down. I don’t really remember that but the skilled people would be on a skeleton crew.  BB: So you guys, after the events in ‘67 you and your husband, or then fiancé, it never deterred you from coming back downtown?  JW: No, no.  BB: Through the Sixties and Seventies, did you see any changes in the city of Detroit at all having worked down here?  JW: Well, I think it really started going down and then there was the talk around that time shortly after about casinos and revitalizing that way and we always went to the Tiger games. So we were always at the ballpark, the old Tiger Stadium. Talk about a new stadium, talk about this, talk about that. And there wasn’t a great deal of input. People just didn’t really want to come down here. When I started taking the bus again and I ran into, again shortly after this time, a group of young men on the bus. And you’re talking because, you know, they’re cute and you’re young so they ended up being with the Peace Corps and they were coming down here and they were going to be staying at this Hotel Tuller which was around the corner from the Hilton. Kind of a cheap hotel, but they were going to work more clean up, like Cass Clean Up, and food distribution down there but they were all excited about it and I remember thinking about it, thinking that that was really a neat thing. Of course, knowing about President Kennedy, that this was a good thing to have and they ended up knowing a few people I knew from school. So you knew, again, they were your same age and they were actually doing something to help and not really getting paid for it. But yeah, things just kept getting worse and I think that’s one reason that they moved us out of here. Troy was building at the time, a lot of businesses going to Troy for headquarters out of Detroit and that’s funny, too, because we were just going down Maple Road which is where our office was and I said to my husband, oh that used to be the Handleman Company. That came from Woodward out there and that’s all closed up. Things have changed. Even that they were more books and printed material so that’s like Internet now so that’s all gone and changed, too. But now, again, so much when we come down here and drive around Woodward and come by Michigan Avenue, every time we come, I swear, it’s like, oh this is new and look at that and oh that looks nice and oh wow! It’s getting exciting for us, too, even at this age. It’s like wow-ee. And all the young people coming. It’s wonderful, just wonderful.  BB: Is there any other stories or things that you remember about your time here in Detroit or about the event at all?  JW: No, not really. No, and then like I say, everything just kind of went back, meshed back and I don’t think we even, cause again, when we would come down here, never got back, other than when he was going to Wayne. Then you could still see remnants after, later. Burned out things and kind of like it is now where you see so many buildings that why don’t they tear that down? Off of Cass, but Cass is picking up, too, because we come to the DSO [Detroit Symphony Orchestra] because we’ve got season tickets there. So we take Cass to get back down downtown and that’s looking good, too, so thumbs up to all that. But no, I don’t think there’s anything else. That’s why I said I didn’t know if what I had to say was –  BB: No, it was good.  JW: Good. Alright, good.  BB: So, thank you so much JoAnne for sitting down with us. We really do appreciate it and if you do, by chance, think of anything afterwards, I did give you my card. Thank you.  JW: And now that I know that you’re doing this and I saw in the paper it said that you could even be doing things into next year.  BB: Yep.   Original Format Audio Duration 28min 16sec Interviewer Bree Boettner Interviewee JoAnne Werbrouck Location Detroit, MI Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Detroit Workers, Michigan National Guard Citation “JoAnne Werbrouck, August 20th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/480. 
DetroitWorker;James VanVlerah;1930;2016;James VanVlerah, 1930, 2016 Title James VanVlerah, September 27th, 2016 Description In this interview, Vanvlerah briefly discusses growing up on Detroit's west side. In July 1967 he was an engineer at the Delray Power Plant, where workers were called in to stay on premises for the duration of the disturbance. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 09/29/2017 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name James Vanvlerah Brief Biography James Vanvlerah was born in Detroit in 1930. After a brief stint in the Air Force, he returned to the metropolitan Detroit area, where he worked as a power plant engineer for Detroit Edison. Interviewer's Name William Winkel Interview Place Detroit, MI Date 09/27/2016 Interview Length 00:34:25 Transcriptionist Julie Vandenboom Transcription Date 1/30/2017 Transcription WW: Hello. Today is September 27th, 2016. I am in Plymouth, Michigan. This interview is for the Detroit Historical Society's Detroit 67 Oral History Project, and I am sitting down with -  JV: James Vanvlerah.  WW: Thanks so much for sitting down with me today, sir.  JV: You're welcome.  WW: Can you please start by telling me where and when you were born?  JV: I was born in Detroit, Michigan, in 1930. July 29. We lived on Elmira, 10050 Elmira, which is just west of Wyoming.  WW: That's southwest Detroit?  JV: It's west Detroit, I guess. I don't know if it's southwest Detroit.  WW: Would you like to share any memories of growing up in that neighborhood?  JV: Yes. We had a horse-drawn wagon for milk. And he - we used to tag along behind him, because he had ice. In the summertime, you could reach in and grab a piece of ice off the milk crates. And of course, everybody burned coal, so there were coal trucks, and you had a coal chute, and we also had an ice man. We didn't have an electric refrigerator. The ice man came  he had a big leather thing on his shoulder and he'd carry the tongs. You'd put a sign in your window, it was four-sided - 25, 50, 75, or 100, depending on how much ice you wanted. So, we had horse-drawn milk wagon and trucks with coal, because everybody burned coal, of course. So those were different times. We roller-skated in the streets, those kind of things.  WW: Growing up, was that neighborhood integrated?  JV: No. It was strictly a white neighborhood. We were not wealthy, by any means, but it was a working class neighborhood.  WW: How long did you stay in that neighborhood?  JV: From 1930 until 1940, and my folks were renting a small house, and the landlord wanted to sell the house and my folks didn't want to buy it, so they arranged to buy a house just west of Southfield, just north of Schoolcraft. It was a new neighborhood, lots of fields, so we moved out there.  WW: What was it like growing up in that new neighborhood?  JV: Well, as I say, it was - the school, Vetal Grade School, was only two streets over, so - in Brightmoor, actually. It was a nice neighborhood. I made friends. I was in the sixth grade. I didn't have too many friends in the sixth grade, but then they moved me - we had fifty-some odd kids in our sixth grade class so they picked four or five of us and we moved up into the last half of the seventh grade, instead of - we missed the first half of the seventh grade, which was fine.  So we - but we had a very small class. It was - I had several friends in the neighborhood, and we graduated together. We had a graduation ceremony at Vetal School, for the eighth grade. But my buddies and I that lived nearby, we walked together up to Grand River, which was a mile. Took the streetcar up to Redford High School, out at Six Mile and Grand River.  WW: So, you were comfortable moving around the city?  JV: Oh yes. We went shopping down at J.L. Hudson's, and Crowley's, and Kearns, of course, downtown. We took the Schoolcraft bus to Grand River, and took the streetcar downtown. And we didn't think anything of the blacks, or Hispanics, or whoever. We just mingled on the transportation system. There were no blacks living in our neighborhood, but it wasn't a wealthy neighborhood.  There was no segregation in the area we lived in. I mean - it was a segregated area, I guess. The blacks didn't live in our neighborhood.  WW: You would have been in the ninth grade or so in '43. Do you have any memories of the '43 race riots?  JV: Just that my father worked downtown, for the Board of Education, on Broadway, back behind Hudson's, and he traveled around to all the schools because he was a supervising engineer for the Detroit Public Schools, and there were 250 schools at that time, so he - we were concerned - I know he and my mother were concerned about the fighting that was going on in the streets in Detroit at that time. I don't remember how long that riot went on, but it was - I know we were concerned about my dad.  WW: Did you - were you hesitant to venture around the city after that?  JV: No. No. Things had quieted down and we continued to shop. My mother - J.L. Hudson's was the place to go in the summertime, of course, because it was air-conditioned. There were no other air-conditioned stores. Maybe Sanders. Sanders Chocolate Shop. They were air-conditioned. And Kearns was too, probably. But my mother and us kids continued to go downtown and shop. We were not concerned after the riots in '43.  WW: You said your father worked for the school board?  JV: Mm hm. He was the supervising engineer for Detroit Public Schools. He was a graduate engineer, also.  WW: What did your mother do for a living?  JV: My mother raised my brother and I. She did not work. Of course, we only had one car in the family. At that time, there were no - there were no two-car families at that time. So, she stayed home and raised my brother and I.  WW: And then - you said you went to Redford High School?  JV: Yes.  WW: Was Redford High School integrated at that time or no?  JV: No. No. And of course it's been torn down since.  WW: Growing up, being a teenager in the forties, did you notice any tension in the city?  JV: Not where we lived. No. And at that age, you know, you're interested in tennis and ice skating and baseball. We weren't aware of any tensions in the city that affected us. Not where we lived.  WW: After you graduated from high school, did you stay in the city?  JV: After I graduated from high school I went to University of Michigan engineering school, and - where my father had gone, and graduated - I think I was programmed but I wasn't that interested in history and English, so math and science were what I was interested in. Actually, I wanted to be an automobile mechanic and my father said, "You can do that, but you're going to builder's college first." And after I graduated from college I didn't want to be a car mechanic anymore.  So that's what I did after. And I went out - I lived in Ann Arbor with my dad's mother and his sister, the first year, so I didn't live in a dormitory. And then I found another engineer, we decided to live together and we rented rooms for the remaining years.  WW: And when you came back to Detroit, this is where you settled?  JV: Well, we knew we were going to be drafted. This was - graduated in February of '53, and the Korean War was on. The Korean War wasn't over until the summer of '53. So, we knew we were going to be drafted. I didn't take ROTC. And so, I had a draft notice, and I knew I was going to be drafted, so I went out to Ann Arbor to say goodbye to some beer-drinking buddies, and one of the guys that had graduated in June of '52, from engineering school, was in this bar, with an Air Force Second Lieutenant uniform on. I said, where'd you get that? He said, "Well, if you go up to Selfridge Air Force base, they're giving direct commissions to engineering graduates."  I said wow. So, the next morning I took my college credits up to Selfridge and I took some tests and a physical, and other exams, and I raised my right hand, and I left there a Second Lieutenant.  WW: In the U.S. Air Force, you said?  JV: In the U.S. Air Force. And I had spent all my money on an engagement ring for who's now my wife, so I needed the money. The money was going to be a lot better than a G.I. solider, so that's what I did.  WW: How long were you in the service?  JV: A little over three years.  WW: Did you have to go overseas at all?  JV: I spent - we got married and I spent a year and a half in Japan. So, my little girl was born while I was away. My father died while I was away. Our first year of marriage was a real thrill. [laughter] I wound up having to go to Japan, my daughter was born, my dad died. So - it was an interesting year. But we survived.  WW: After spending all that time away, when you came back to the city, did you notice any changes in the city?  JV: Well, we lived with her folks, up in Royal Oak, while our house was being built. Well, when I came back - when I first came back, I was stationed - I had to spend my last six months in the service in Yuma, Arizona. And when I came back, we lived with her folks up in Royal Oak until our house was finished.  But I was working at Conners Creek Power Plant, working shift work, as engineers do, there in the power plant, and I don't recall any - and Conners Creek is at the foot of Lycaste, it's on the river, right across from Belle Isle, so it's on the east side - but driving to Conners Creek Power Plant, or anywhere in Royal Oak, there was no more things about the - no tension or anything with blacks or anything, that I was aware of.  WW: How did you see the city progress going through the late fifties, early sixties?  JV: Late fifties, early sixties, I had been transferred down to Enrico Fermi Power Plant. So I was diving thirty-three miles from - we had built a house in Dearborn Heights, near Ford Rord and Inkster. So I was driving to Fermi. I was not driving through the city. More of a rural drive down to Fermi.  WW: So did you - while you were living in Dearborn Heights and working down in Monroe, did you not go into the city much?  JV: Probably not. Although - yes, I did. Detroit Edison had a pistol club, and we had a range on the corner of Willis and Cass. It was a substation. And so our pistol team shot every Tuesday night there, on Willis and Cass. Upstairs. So I'm a target shooter, pistol target shooter, so every Tuesday night I'd take my son and son-in-law down there and we'd go shooting. Never had any real - there were no tensions with the people living in downtown Detroit that I was aware of.  WW: Going into the sixties, given all the social movements that were going on, did you see any changes that were happening in the city? Whenever you would come in?  JV: Not that I remember. Of course, occasionally - well, then, in '67 I transferred from Fermi to Delray Power Plant. In '67, and - spring of '67. But I had been in and out of the Detroit Edison general office building on the corner of Second and Grand River, and I had been - I used to go in and out of there occasionally. For meetings and things. Parking on the parking lots near Detroit Edison's headquarters was not a problem. Didn't worry about being attacked or anything, and they were not supervised or enclosed parking lots either. But we weren't aware of any problems in the sixties. Early sixties. But as I say, I didn't transfer to Delray until spring of '67.  WW: What prompted the transfer?  JV: A promotion. I was a junior engineer and a senior engineer, then they offered me a staff job at Delray Power Plant.  WW: And Delray Power Plant is situated right off of Livernois and Jefferson?  JV: Yes. Yes, on the south side of Jefferson, adjacent to Fort Wayne.  WW: And what was that neighborhood like in '67?  JV: Well, I - we used to - I know a little bit about that because our power plant was stoker fired - we burned coal, and it was stoker fired, and the dust collectors were minimal. So we put a lot of dirt on to the neighborhoods. Flue dust and coal, things that came out of the stack. And so the superintendent and I, we would get a lot of complaints from neighbors about the black stuff on their clothes lines, you know, on their clothes out drying, and so the superintendent and I used to have to visit the places and explain that we were sorry about the things that were coming out of our stacks at night. But there wasn't much we could do about it with - this is the way of the world.  In fact, Conners Creek, where I had started, was right adjacent to the Yacht Club - the Yacht Club that puts the Mackinac boat race on. The boat club was always complaining about the stuff that came out of our stacks at night. Landed on their boats and things.  So we were - but at Delray, we could - we felt sorry for the people that had the problems with the dirt, but there wasn't anything we could do about it, anyway, had to operate the power plant. And Mistersky Station, which was Detroit - city of Detroit power plant, only two blocks away from us. And they put out as much debris as we did - but I used to get smoke tickets from the city.  WW: Wow.  JV: Mm hm.  WW: So going into '67 you were still living in Dearborn Heights?  JV: Uh, yes. No. Uh, yes. We lived - yes, in Dearborn Heights. Yes. We had moved a mile south. My wife felt sorry for me driving thirty-some odd miles to work and back, so we moved a mile south - because - what I didn't realize was, we had another child coming, and she wanted a bigger house. So we got a bigger house, with a - only a mile closer. But we had wound up with four children, so - we moved a mile south.  WW: Going into that week in July, how did you first hear what was going on?  JV: I got a phone call from someone at the power plant - I don't remember who called me, it might have been the superintendent - saying that there had been a problem in Detroit and that all of the staff was to report to the power plant. This was like Sunday afternoon. And my daughter had been visiting a friend of mine, who had a job just like mine  we were both engineers. He was working at Conners Creek Power Plant and he lived up in West Bloomfield. And my daughter was up visiting with his daughter over the weekend. She'd been up there since Friday.  And so he got the same phone call, because he had to go back to Conners Creek, because he had the same job in operations that I did. So, we had - we arranged to meet the Parkers about halfway between West Bloomfield and our house, so they delivered the daughter - my daughter to us. And we came home, and then I gathered my - I was told to bring toiletries and clothing and things to the power plant, that I might be there a while. So that's what we did.  WW: Did you see anything on your drive into the city?  JV: No, I did not. I - to go to Delray, I used to drive down Outer Drive - take - well, Ford Road to Outer Drive and Outer Drive to - down near River Rouge, and go across the Rouge Bridge and into Delray on Jefferson. But I didn't see anything on the way that would have upset me. But I had brought clothing and things, so -  WW: What was the atmosphere like when you arrived?  JV: Well, the power plant operation did not stop. Other engineers and staff members were arriving, and the Edison Company provided metal bunk beds for us, that we put up in the plant, in the office building, and so we had - the operators continued to come to the power plant and the people that were - we had a security force at the plant, always, anyway, and they called all their people in. We had a gatehouse on the corner of our road into the plant at Jefferson. The gatehouse was not a real big building, but it was where the security people monitored - there was a gate, and they monitored the traffic in and out of the power plant.  And shortly after we got there, the - well, they arranged for the cooks and people to be there, to feed us, so they stayed at the power plant also, as well as the operators, and us staff members, and security people.  WW: How many people total do you think it was?  JV: There were probably 80 people.  WW: Did they give a reason as to why all of you were required to be there, and why they expected you all to stay?  JV: We needed to secure the property and the equipment. It was security, really. And eventually they called the National Guard in, and they came and occupied the gatehouse too. I don't remember when they were there - when they arrived - but Edison had arranged for that to happen.  WW: And what was the mood inside of the power plant?  JV: Well, we were concerned, because we could hear shooting on Jefferson, so we knew that things were not good. And so we were - we divided up the duties and we monitored, even at night, we were up on the rooftops of buildings and making sure - and patrolling the perimeters to make sure that nothing untoward was happening. And we never saw anything that would have jeopardized the operation of the power plant. There were no forced entries anywhere, over the fences, or anything.  So, people normally - operation of a power plant is kind of a noisy operation in the plant itself, so people wouldn't - that aren't used to that - wouldn't want to come in there anyway. But there was a large building on Jefferson that was our switch-gear building. It was a three-story building, you know, several hundred - at least 200 feet long, right along Jefferson, on our property, which housed the 24 KV switch-gear inside. So we didn't want anything - and there were windows, and maybe I think one or two doorways on to Jefferson, so those were locked and barred normally anyway, but we didn't want any forced entry into the switch-gear because that could have been disastrous to the people that were in places they shouldn't have been.  WW: And how long did you and the rest of them have to stay?  JV: You know, I'm not sure. I don't remember exactly, and I wasn't keeping notes at that time, of what I did, but I think we were there about a week, is my recollection. And of course the cooks and the food, and they fed us, and we slept, and we worked - we worked shifts, kind of thing. But otherwise, the normal operation, my normal job, went on in the daytime. At night we divided up the hours for patrolling, helping our security people cover the areas.  WW: Given that you heard gunshots but you didn't see anything, there were no attempts to break in. Was there, towards the end of that week, was there a sense of "Why are we even here? Can we just go home?"  JV: You know, that's been 49 years ago, so I don't remember a lot of the details of things - nothing untoward happened to us while we were there. We just operated the power plant. And we could hear shooting, but there was never anything - and of course, we weren't hanging out at the gatehouse, to see what was going on on Jefferson either. We were concerned with running the power plant.  But really, I think we were glad to be able to go home. My wife, of course, was very concerned. She's left unprotected, so to speak, if something should transpose back out where we lived. And of course, she was concerned about my safety also. I was in Detroit and things were not good. So, she was concerned about me also. So, she was glad when I got home, and I was glad to be home too.  WW: How do you view the events, how do you interpret the events of July 1967? Do you see them as a riot? Do you see them as an uprising?  JV: Well, we spoke of it as a riot. I didn't know at the time what had caused it. It wasn't until later that we found out what started the whole thing and how many people were involved, and - I think there were 25 people killed or something.  WW: 43.  JV: 43? But most of this activity, I think, took place in the downtown area, and not out where the power plant was. And certainly not out in the neighborhoods where we lived. So, we were not aware of - well, we were locked in - we weren't aware really of what was going on. We didn't get a lot of information anyway. So, it was a different kind of an experience but we were glad when it was over and we could get home. Not fun sleeping on cots and being locked in.  WW: I bet.  JV: So we - one funny experience earlier - this is prior to this - when we were first married I was - we were helping - I was working at Conners Creek - they were building St. Clair Power Plant and they needed some people to help run the tests for the acceptance tests of the unit that was being built. So right after we were married, in February '54, the - I was up there on an acceptance test and we got this terrific snowstorm and the state police closed all the roads. We had a lot of snow. A foot and a half of snow. So we were locked into the - we were told we couldn't go home.  So they provided - this was two days after we were married, so I was all of a sudden away from her, and she said, "Is this how our life is going to be? You're going to be locked in?" [laughter] Anyway, it was just a snowstorm. We were only there for two - a couple of nights, and they cleared the roads and we came home.  But this, for a week, was a different situation, and she was concerned about my safety, and I was concerned that I wouldn't be there to help her if she needed help.  WW: How long did you continue to work at the Delray Power Plant?  JV: From '67 - spring of '67 'til '73, and then I was transferred in the same job, down to Trenton Channel Power Plant. Which was a bigger plant - more equipment, newer equipment. And so I worked at Trenton Channel Power Plant for - from '73 until '81, I think.  WW: Were you - so, the riot in '67 - did it make you want to transfer, or were you still comfortable in your job at Delray?  JV: I was comfortable with my job at Delray. I wasn't - they thought I was doing a good job so they thought I could move up to a bigger plant, so I was happy to go.  WW: Do you believe the events of '67 still hang over the metro area today? Do you think we're still affected by it?  JV: I'm sure that the people that are my age remember it. The younger folks probably don't know anything about it. You know, I'm 86, so I remember, but people that were born after that, or very much after that, I don't think are affected by it. Their parents, their grandparents remember.  WW: Are you optimistic for the state of the city today, moving forward?  JV: I hear a lot of good things, and see a lot of good things happening, so - the housing thing, is improving. They're building more central - central places to live, you know, so I think that's a good thing. I'm surprised - I'm always surprised when I hear how many areas - how many acres are still empty and how many houses need to be torn down yet. Of course, Detroit was a city of houses - individual houses - and people drove. That's why we don't have any central system for moving people around. It was cars. Cars and individual houses. But I'm sure if I drove in the city very much I would be amazed at the number of vacant lots and burned out houses there are. You see pictures on TV all the time.  But they're also trying to develop urban farming in Detroit, which I think is a terrific thing. There are acres and acres of land that's not being used. Some of it, of course, has got dilapidated or burned out houses on it. But there's still a lot of empty property that could be used for farming. And I think that's - that's a good thing that's going to happen, hopefully.  WW: Is there anything else that you'd like to add today?  JV: No. I don't think so. I wasn't aware of any non-segregation in Detroit until I took a bus -  when I was called into service, I was sent to San Antonio, called in at San Antonio, Texas. Rather than fly and spend $100 for an airplane ticket, I decided to take a $20 bus ticket. And it wasn't until we got near St. Louis that I started seeing separate bathrooms for blacks. Separate drinking fountains. We had none of that in Detroit. We didn't - it was all - whatever it was. There was no segregation for transportation or restaurants or bathrooms or drinking fountains. I was amazed. And this is what the South was. There were separate places for - you know, motels. They couldn't stay - blacks couldn't stay in regular motels. So I was surprised. I had never seen that. But that's what it was. So I saved $80 but I learned a lot. [laughter] This was a non-stop bus ride. But I'm glad I took it.  WW: Well, thank you so much for sitting down with me. I greatly appreciate it.  JV: You're welcome.  Original Format Audio Duration 34min 25sec Interviewer William Winkel Interviewee James Vanvlerah Location Detroit, MI Files VanvlerahJamesImage.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1943 Detroit Race Riots, 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Detroit Edison Power Company, Detroit Workers, Selfridge Air Force Base, United States Air Force Citation “James VanVlerah, September 27th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/609.
DetroitWorker;James Boucher;1941;2016;James Boucher, 1941, 2016 Title James Boucher, June 29th, 2016 Description Boucher narrates the unrest from the experience of a commuter. He recalls taking the train from Ann Arbor to Detroit–where he worked at the National Bank of Detroit on Woodward–and noticing that the normally bustling finance district was deserted. His building was closed briefly, and then guarded on Woodward by Federal Troops. He is happy to see the recent revival of Detroit, and notes that young people living in the city is crucial to its vitality. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 07/12/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name James Boucher Brief Biography James Boucher was born in Bay City on December 1, 1941. He lived in that area until moving to Ann Arbor for Business and then Law School. He was commuting from Ann Arbor to Detroit when the 1967 disturbance occurred. He later moved to the suburbs–Royal Oak and then Bloomfield Hills–where he currently resides. Interviewer's Name William Winkel Interview Place Bloomfield Hills, MI Date 06/29/2016 Interview Length 00:15:39 Transcriptionist Emma Maniere Transcription Date 07/11/2016 Transcription WW: Hello, my name is William Winkle. Today is June 29, 2016, I am in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan. This interview is for the Detroit Historical Society’s 1967 Oral History Project, and I am sitting down with Mr. James Boucher. Thank you for sitting down with me today.  JB: You’re welcome.  WW: Can you please tell me where and when were you born?  JB: I was born December 1, 1941–a few days before Pearl Harbor— in Bay City, Michigan where I grew up. After that I went on to the University of Michigan Business School, and then the University of Michigan Law School. I came to Detroit upon graduation from Law School in May of 1967.  WW: Was it just the job offer, or were you drawn to the city?  JB: It was the job offer. I decided I wanted to stay in a bigger city than Bay City, and Detroit was attractive to me in that sense. That’s what got me here.  WW: What was the bank name again?  JB: National Bank of Detroit, later known as NBD Bank, and then with a series of mergers, Bank One and ultimately JP Morgan Chase.  WW: What was your first impression upon moving to the city? Had you ever been here before?  JB: I had been here as a visitor to baseball games and coming down to see shows in some the theatres in Detroit once in a while, that sort of thing. But I’d never spent any length of time here. Kind of a weekend thing, come to a ball game or something.  WW: What neighborhood did you live in when you moved here?  JB: When we moved here, we lived in Royal Oak.  WW: What made you choose Royal Oak, then, instead of moving into the city itself?  JB: One of the things was there was good transportation from Royal Oak into Detroit, at that time they had commuter trains. My wife was going to be teaching in Birmingham, Michigan, so it was just a better location for us–  WW: Right in the middle of the two.  JB: –to settle into, yes.  WW: When you first came here in May, did you sense any tension at all in the city, or were you thrown off completely by July?  JB: I don’t think I had an awareness of anything that serious going on. I certainly was aware of differences between the races. Backing up, I had been in the South in the fifth grade with my parents driving to Florida for spring break vacation, and seeing the things that were the shocking to me. I recall in some of the Southern cities you would see men and women’s restrooms, and then another one outside like an outhouse almost that was marked “Colored.” And different drinking fountains even, and so on. So I was certainly aware of that situation from that time on. But I don’t really recall thinking anything particularly was about to explode in Detroit, no.  WW: How did you first hear what was going on July 23?  JB: What day of the week was that?  WW: That was a Sunday, sorry.  JB: That was a Sunday. I think it probably was on the Sunday news on TV, Sunday evening news I suppose. But on Monday morning, I had the radio on, and at that time Mayor Cavanagh was on the radio saying, “Everything’s under control in Detroit, come on into the city today.” So I got ready and went to the train station and got on the train to come to Detroit.  WW: Was you train trip uneventful, or—?  JB: Well it was I guess uneventful pretty much except there were probably twenty people from Ann Arbor that got on the train, and then the train stopped in Ypsilanti and some more people got on there, and one of the people that got on in Ypsilanti had a transistor radio with him. At that time, the mayor was back on the radio saying, “Don’t come into the city.” And of course the train wasn’t going to turn around, we kept coming.  WW: Was there a sense of panic or frustration on the train?  JB: No, I don’t think so, it was just wondering what it was going to be like I think in the city. The train came into the old Michigan Central Depot and we all got off the train and walked up through that park there to Michigan Avenue where we would catch the bus on into downtown Detroit, and the bus came along and there was no one on it. Normally, by the time the bus got to that stop, most of us always had to stand on the bus. So that was strange. We didn’t think much of it. The bus dropped us off down by the edge of Cadillac Square, and we got out and it just was very strange because normally at that whole circle there would be bustling with people and cars and so on, and there was absolutely nothing in sight–there was no person, no vehicle, no nothing. We got off and walked about a two-block walk to National Bank of Detroit where I worked, and about halfway there, as I remember, a truckload of National Guard troops came charging down the street, and they had probably 12 guys or so in the back with rifles, and it just went on its way. We later learned that the National Guard didn’t have any ammunition provided to them at the outset, so I’m not sure what they were going to do with their rifles. But anyway, that was the fact, and we proceeded onto the bank, and there were very few people there, most people didn’t come in. We couldn’t leave because we had to get a clearance from Washington from the Controller of the Currency to close the bank, and we had to get that approval, and that took probably an hour or an hour and a half, something like that, to get the approval. We finally got it, and we were then going to leave the bank, but of course the train wouldn’t come until five o’clock at night. But one of my colleagues who also lived in Ann Arbor had driven in that day, and so he and I and the other passenger on the train that day that all worked in the same department at the bank drove back out to Ann Arbor in his Volkswagen. That was an experience that we were kind of on edge, I would say, until we got to Dearborn. I remember walking over to Cobo Hall where my friend had parked his vehicle, and in front of Cobo Hall there on, I think it’s Washington, there were a series of fire engines in a row parked there, and they were bullet-riddled, I remember. There was also one state police car with state troopers standing out in front of it looking very frightened. Never noticed a state trooper being frightened before. That was pretty much the story. In the bank lobby, all the bank security guards were spread out along the whole length of the building because it was all glass on the Woodward side–it still is I guess, for that matter. That was the story of the first day.  WW: On your initial train ride in, and when you were leaving in your friend’s Volkswagen, could you see any smoke in the sky, or did anything give you an indication of what was going on?  JB: Well, I think we had already been aware of the smoke in the sky from the news on TV the night before. Yeah, we could still see it, sure. Yeah.  WW: As you were leaving the city, did you see any looting or any disturbances that were going on or was it clear sailing?  JB: No, we didn’t see anything out of sorts just driving up Michigan Avenue.  WW: How long did your bank stay closed?  JB: I think it was re-opened either the second day or the third day, I believe. I didn’t come in the first day it was open I know. I came in, I think, the second day it was open. By that time, I think they had replaced the National Guard troops largely with the federal troops, the airborne division. Military people from Fort Bragg and Fort Campbell, I think. Both camps were in Detroit and they were patrolling out, they were standing out along Woodward Avenue on the outside of the bank, and it was a very secure feeling with those guys.  WW: Just to clarify something, you said you lived in Royal Oak at the time, but you came from Ann Arbor?  JB: Well, no. When I first came to the Detroit area, we lived in Royal Oak, but when I got out of law school and joined the bank in the beginning of May of 1967, we were still living in Ann Arbor, we didn’t move over here until August. I think we had some rental time still on our apartment in Ann Arbor, for one thing, and we had to find a place where we were going to rent and so on over in the Detroit area.  WW: Did you have any other experiences the rest of that week?  JB: No, not really.  WW: Okay. First, how do interpret what happened as a riot, or how do you see the events that happened?  JB: I think “riot” is the correct term, yes.  WW: After the riot finished, did you think twice about your decision to stay and work in Detroit?  JB: Not really, no.  WW: Any reason to that?  JB: I liked my job, I liked what I was doing, I had a number of friends there by that time. It wasn’t any reason to leave.  WW: How long did you work in the city of Detroit?  JB: Well I was there two different times. I think when I first started, I was there for about a year and a half, and then I was transferred out to an office in Birmingham, Michigan. Worked in Oakland County for a number of years. Then later had another few years back in Detroit, and then back out into the suburbs again in Southfield initially, and then Bloomfield all of my life.  WW: Okay. What are your thoughts on the state of the city today?  JB: I’m pleased to see that it’s doing much better than it was. I mean it took it 50 years to go down from its peak, probably in 1950 or thereabouts, and so it’s going to take time to come back for sure. A lot of new and exciting things going on downtown with companies putting their employees in downtown Detroit so they have a younger workforce down there. They have lots of new restaurants and entertainment facilities and the sports and the opera and the Fisher Theatre and so on that are doing well again I think. I always felt that the problem with Detroit was it was a weekend town, for the most part, they didn’t have young people living downtown like you would see in Chicago or New York or San Francisco. Everybody–well, not everybody–but most people that worked downtown lived in the suburbs and they would only come down on the weekends as a rule to use the entertainment venues and what you need is the young people living down there that will make those survive and have success.  WW: Is there anything else you’d like to add?  JB: Well, I’m trying to think. I do remember a friend of mine, the day after the riot, drove through I think Twelfth Street it was and filmed it, which was very interesting to see. I remember afterwards at his house seeing it. I had another friend, another colleague at the bank, who loved going to fires. He saw that thing going on, and he decided he had to go see it. So he drove over and parked his car and was walking down the street closer to it and all of the sudden a Black gentleman came up to him and said “Mister, you don’t belong down here, you better go back.”  WW: Wow. Well I bet he was very busy that week.  JB: Yeah, yeah.  WW: Thank you very much for sitting down with me today.  JB: You’re welcome.  Original Format WAV Duration 15min 39sec Interviewer William Winkel Interviewee James Boucher Location Bloomfield Hills, MI Files Boucher, James.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Detroit Workers, Gun Violence, Mayor Jerome Cavanagh, Michigan National Guard Citation “James Boucher, June 29th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/299. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Henry Heatley;1937;2016;Henry Heatley, 1937, 2016 Title Henry Heatley, August 12th, 2016 Description Henry Heatley began working for the Bell Telephone Company when he was 18 years old. He worked throughout the week of July 23, 1967 and discusses the political climate then and now. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 09/27/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Henry Heatley Brief Biography Henry Heatley was born in Detroit, Michigan in 1937. He was raised in the city, served ten years with the National Guard and began working for the Bell Telephone Company when he was 18. He retired as a cable splicer. He and his wife currently live in Detroit. Interviewer's Name Julia Westblade Interview Place Grosse Pointe, MI Date 08/12/2016 Interview Length 00:24:56 Transcriptionist Julia Westblade Transcription Date 09/23/2016 Transcription JW: Hello, today is August 12, 2016. We are in Grosse Pointe, MI at the Grosse Pointe War Memorial. My name is Julia Westblade and I am sitting down with –  HH: Henry.    JW: Okay. This is for the Detroit Historical Society’s Detroit 1967 Project so thank you so much for sitting down with us.  HH: You bet.  JW: And you can you tell me where and when you were born?  HH: I was born in Detroit in 1937 on Cadillac between Kerchival and Vernor. Down in the old neighborhood.  JW: Did you grow up in the city?  HH: Yes.  JW: What was your neighborhood like growing up?  HH: Well, I’m in the house now that I was carried into when the house was built in 1937 on the east side of the city. It was quite nice then but it’s Detroit now and not much more needs to be said. A lot of empty houses. The people have gone. Good riddance to most of them, quite frankly. As long as they’ve gone, I don’t care where they went as long as they went. So the neighborhood is quiet but there’s 70 empty houses on the street and the county has got a lot for back taxes and what have you.  JW: But when you were growing up, was it an integrated neighborhood?  HH: No, it was mostly white. It was 99 percent white. It changed when the city started to change in the 70s, 80s, you know.  I knew a lot of kids around. I think it was more Roman Catholic than Protestant. That’s all I could work out from our gang but that’s all I can tell you about it. Everybody got along fairly well. There was no gang troubles or anything like that.  JW: And then where did you go to school?  HH: Elementary was Clark School. It’s on Bremen between Buckingham and Somerset, I think. Still there. Still a functioning school. Then I went to an intermediate school, Jackson on Marlborough just below Waveney and that’s closed now. And high school was Southeastern High School on Fairview.  JW: And were those integrated or no?  HH: They were when I was at Southeastern. Of course larger neighborhoods came to go to Southeastern High School and it was about 10 percent black and 90 percent, roughly, white. Something like that. There was never any trouble, though.  JW: But your elementary schools for the most part weren’t integrated?  HH: No. I don’t remember any black kids in there. They came from a smaller area, too. There was a Hossimer Elementary down by Jefferson, a few streets away so you wouldn’t get a large area. Southeasten they got them from all over. Some out of the Southeastern area. They came from other parts of the city and they were going to school there. I don’t know why or how but they were.  JW: What was the city of Detroit like when you were growing up?  HH: It was a booming town. It had a high population. It was two million or – it was way up there. Pretty close to the industrial base. All of the car companies were here and a lot of iron foundries below Jefferson past Mount Elliot. A lot of iron works down there. There was a big stove industry in the old days here when they used wood burning stoves. They were all made down there. It was busy. My father was a police officer and he was busy. You’re always busy but Detroit has always been a rough and tumble place. There’s culture on one end  you have the Art Institute and the Symphony and what have you but there’s always a tough element in the city, too, because of the industrial place.  JW: Did you explore much of the city or did you typically stay around your neighborhood growing up?  HH: When I was younger I was around my neighborhood but when I started at Bell Telephone at age 18, we have to drive around more.  JW: And what was your job with Bell Telephone?  HH: I started as pulling wire and installer and then I got into maintenance repair. That was the best job in the world. [whispers: Didn’t have to work as hard.] Then PBX repair, repairing switchboards and things like that. That job has disappeared now. They don’t use those old cord boards anymore where you plug in a cord and turn a crank to ring. Stayed in repair and cable splicing. I retired as a cable splicer. And that took me even farther afield. We went way over in the west side. They’d run you all over the place.  JW: So traveling around the city like that, did you notice any growing tensions in the city in the early 60s or maybe even late 50s?  HH: In the 50s, no. In the 60s there was a few grumblings but if you lived in the city you say so what. You lived with it. Nothing really – so the riots, they started on the west side really. It was worse on the west side than the east side. We didn’t get over there very much and so I wasn’t aware of all those tensions.  JW: How did you first hear about what was going on in the summer of 1967?  HH: I was coming home from my girlfriend’s house on Whittier and Gratiot and I heard something on the news that said – a police car pulled up behind me and they had their windows open then. Of course they didn’t have air conditioning in the cars then. I said, “Hey what’s on?” “Never mind what’s going on. Just get home and stay there.” I was coming down Whittier just below Gratiot and that’s how we knew it. We went into work the next day and they wouldn’t let us go in certain areas of city. I don’t know what was going on there. We were mostly on the east side. We didn’t usually go past Mount Elliot, something like that. We didn’t get down too far for a few days.  JW: So the policemen just said something is going on. We don’t know. Just go home?  HH: Yeah, just stay home.  JW: Did that worry you at all?  HH: No. My father was a policeman and I grew up with guns in the house. They don’t frighten me. We worked on the streets, that doesn’t bother me, either. We look at the world differently than, say, you would working on the streets.  JW: When did you realize how serious the situation was?  HH: When I saw the fires on the news and read about people disappearing. And there was a  fireman at St. Jean and Mack. Someone sniped at him and shot him and killed him. One of the good citizens from down there. And that was probably never solved. You don’t know who does those. There’s too many people on the run.  That’s when I knew it was. I took a camera to work one day and did a lot of what I thought were nice photographs and took them in to be developed at Cunningham’s Drug Store and they wouldn’t develop them. They said nothing came out. They were lying  they all came out but they thought we shouldn’t see that for whatever reason. Who are they to be judges on that?  JW: So you never got them back?  HH: No. I mean, I got a roll of blank of film back.  JW: What do you think happened to them?  HH: Well, they destroyed them. They didn’t want you to see them. You see some things on the news but some of the things I got maybe weren’t on the news.  JW: Interesting. So then, what did you do during that week with your job at the Bell Telephone Company.  HH: We stayed around the garage for a couple of days where the vehicles were and then they put us out two to a vehicle. They really hated to do that. They get a lot more done when the two guys are separate then together, for your safety. And they wouldn’t let us carry guns so how safe could we be? And we didn’t go in the bad parts. And we just did our work with people sitting on the porch. It was in the black neighborhoods, sitting on the porch. “Hi, how ya doing?” I said, “Hi, how’s it going?” And that was it. There was no trouble.  JW: But could you see the destruction in the city as you were driving around in those areas?  HH: Yeah, in some parts, yeah. Burned out houses mostly. In some of the area, now this is mostly out on the west side, 12th Street, Dexter, those areas, some of these no-good so and so had set fire to buildings and a couple of them had set fire to the building they lived in and didn’t realize it. They’d burned out their own house. That’s how bright they are, or stupid. How ever you want to look at it. You’d see them sitting out in the street with a – take a couch out of somebody’s house or a chair and be sitting out there relaxing with a beer in their hand after a hard day in the streets. They have to sit down and get some rest. That was about it, I guess. Oh, at Southeastern High School, which I attended and graduated from, an Army unit was bivouacked across the street. So the Army and National Guard were here then, too, but I was out of the National Guard by then. I did 10 years and was out in 65 I think and this was 67, I think. They were bivouacked across the street and they were regular Army. 82nd Airborne. RA, not National Guard. And across the side street, Goethe – should be pronounced Ger-ta but nobody did. They wouldn’t know where you meant down there. The German philosopher – There’s an apartment over there and the third or fourth floor of the apartment somebody was in the corner there and they could look down on the field across the street and he opened fire on the soldiers and you could hear the gun fire from our house. It was summer time and the slight westerly breeze so it carried the sound waves a bit. Nobody had air conditioning. The windows were open. And you’d hear a Bang. Bang. Bang-bang. And they answered with a machine gun. And it was a .50 caliber from what I could tell from the rate of fire.  Tut-tut-tut-tut-tut-tut-tut. They got him. And I was talking to a couple of policemen a few days later and they said they had to pick him up off the floor with a blotter. There was nothing left of him. They’re the .50 caliber bullets that are half an inch around. And the whole corner of the building was chewed up where the bricks and mortar were hit by bullets. They just sprayed the corner of the building. After a year or so later, they patched that up. You could see all the new mortar in the new places. It stood right out white. It hadn’t aged with dirt and the new brick put in. But that was the closest it got to us, I suppose. Close enough. But some of the National Guard, I understand, were not issued live ammunition. I don’t know why, but the regular Army was. So they might have had two different jobs and send the RA in for something heavy but how much actual gun fire went on down at the west side, I don’t know. They didn’t say much about that. There were probably more bodies to account for than people let on.  What else would you like to know?  JW: You said that you were formerly part of the National Guard but had gotten out before –  HH: Yeah, 10 years.  JW: So did you know some of the men who were stationed there?  HH: No, that was 82nd Airborne on the field and they were regular Army and I didn’t know any of them. The other fellows, I might have if I’d seen them but they were in their area and we were in ours.  JW: So you didn’t communicate with any old friends to get an inside look?  HH: No, a lot of fellows I knew were out by then. Some got out and you can get out in five or six and see an opening then grab it just to get out. Or eight years.  JW: So you think there was a sense of relief in the city when the National Guard and the 82nd Airborne came in or do you think that people were less comfortable having them there?  HH: I didn’t see any discomfort about it. You could take a little solace in the fact that somebody can go to bat for you if it becomes necessary but where we lived there was no trouble at all. Just another day. Only when you went to work and started heading west, that’s when you saw it.  JW: So then your work with the Telephone Company, was it just putting up the lines that had been knocked down?  HH: No, that was our job anyway. You had to pull wire. We didn’t have enough cable facilities to get all the lines in so you had to wire – what we called Wired-Off Limits. Go down to another terminal or another source and you had to pull wire through the trees. That was work, too, by the way. Then phone installation in buildings and houses and things like that.  JW: So you worked through the riots, too. There wasn’t time to take off or anything like that? Cause I know a lot of people didn’t go to work that week.  HH: No, we didn’t get a week off.  We got a day or two off ‘til they could size up the situation and people went down to the Bell Building. They had to go down to work, 1365 Cass.  Cass and Michigan is where it is. They had to go down so you didn’t get much slack time. Plus they knew what you’d try. Give them an inch and they’ll take a mile. So yeah, we had to go in.  JW: What else do you remember about what happened in the city that week?  HH: That’s about it. Usual noise and chaos and disruption. After a while you don’t even notice it but you see it all the time, like the police, you get used to it. Your sense of humor accommodates that. It was a little bit warped, I might add. Cops have a black sense of humor. It’s what the people have to deal with. We learned to make a joke out of it. When you hear about shootings on a Friday, some of us didn’t work on the weekends. I usually did on a Saturday if I could for the money. We’d take a bet and watch the number of shootings over the weekend and we’d throw a quarter or fifty cents into a pool. Whoever came closest to the number killed won the pool. That’s how you look at it.  JW: Was your father still on the force at that time or had he retired?  HH: No, he’d passed away. He died in 1960. He retired in 1952. Thirty-three or thirty-four years. Right after he got out of the army in World War I he went on the Police Force so he didn’t see it, no. The cops in the old days, they were from the old school. They did things differently. You didn’t worry about being politically correct or anything else. If you had to shoot somebody, you’d get a coroners jury made up of transients off a park bench. Buy them lunch, give them a bottle of whiskey, here’s what you say, here’s what you sign. That’s the end of it. Now they want to prosecute them for police brutality. Some of these whining liberal groups get on their back about it. They don’t realize what a rotten job it is. They wouldn’t do it.  They want the best protection but they don’t want to back them.  JW: We’ve heard – they’re called the Detroit Riots and we’re heard a lot of people use the term riots but we’ve also heard terms like rebellion or civil disturbance –  HH: That’s the political aspect. It’s a riot. When you wreck the place it’s a riot. They did it in ancient Rome and anywhere else. You got something you didn’t like then go on a rampage. It happened all through history in other countries. There’s no rebellion. I know who would say the rebellion: the people who did some of the rioting. They thought they were disenfranchised, they could well have been in some cases. I don’t know. But is that an excuse to riot? I don’t know. Did it change much? I don’t know. There’s been a lot of rancor and discord today. Especially since when I add this last president we have got in office [Barack Obama]. The rancor and discord have increased greatly. The hatred’s in Congress and everything else around the country. Where’s the end of that going. And when the lady [Hillary Clinton] gets in, if she gets in, it’s going to increase even more for what she’s going to do.  JW: So how do you think the city of Detroit has changed since 1967 or maybe because of 1967?  HH: The industrial base started declining. They also built the expressways just before that which facilitated a way out of town easily. Come in to work if you have to but you get home to the suburbs easily. You don’t stop and start through twenty miles of traffic. So the population decline started. The industrial design and the city is having financial shortfalls and the one mayor, forget his name, had an Irish name. White guy with an Irish name. Instead of addressing the shortfalls he put on a city income tax and that did it.  JW: Was that [Mayor Jerome] Cavanagh?  HH: Yeah, that’s him. Cavanagh. He put on a city income tax instead of seeing where’s the money going. Where’s it being stolen. And a lot of it was – is – being stolen. People didn’t like that. Then the bussing started. That really did it. They should have seen what was going to happen there. Some of these liberals they want to tell you who to have your morning coffee with, if I may say so. It ain’t going to work. So, no, the city isn’t better off. It’s coming back a little bit under the present mayor [Mike Duggan]. He’s doing a pretty good job. He’s lowered our property taxes. They were always over assessed before and Kwame [Kilpatrick] and those crooks wouldn’t do anything. Now ours have dropped to 25% since he’s been in office. And he’s not through yet. Every time they reassess, they say, oh it’s not worth that. You couldn’t get that for the house. We had in ‘08 and ‘09 when we had that big recession, it cost more to put a roof on our house than we could have gotten for selling the house. $7000. Now it’s up to $25-28,000.  They’re coming up. But before all of this started, I could have gotten $140,000 for the house.  JW: So where do you see the city of Detroit going?  HH: Good question. Until they do something about the taxes and the crime and the corruption, I don’t see it going anywhere. One of the big problems is that school board. I don’t think that’s curable in anyway. They want to get their own control back now the state made a mess of it. Probably did, but the city made a mess of it in the first place, which is why the state took it over. Now they want to get it back so now the thieves are going to start walking into the school board. They are corrupt to no end. And no one wants to call them that. You’ll offend them. You can’t do that nowadays, but that’s the way it is. But I have no kids in school so, in a way, I don’t care. My life is, by and large over. Not quite as much as Ray’s was but I’ve got, what, ten years left or something like that. I don’t care.  JW: If you could leave a message to the future of Detroit, what would it be?  HH: Integrity. Responsibility for behavior. Act like you’re supposed to act. Don’t be corrupt and crooked. Stop looking for something to steal. That’s it. The guns might be a problem but I’m a life member of the NRA so I don’t want to hear too much about guns. I don’t do it. I grew up with a gun hanging in the kitchen. My father was a policeman. He’d hang it in the kitchen. He says, “Leave it alone.” I’d say, “Okay.” I left it alone. Now they grab it and go out and shoot somebody. That goes back to personal responsibility. Nobody has any. It’s always somebody else’s fault. The guns have always been there but they didn’t start this stuff until 10, 20, 15, 20 years ago. That’s why we fight so hard against the Supreme Court and everything else. They want to take them away from you. And it won’t work. You will get the guns in the country. Where there’s a will, there’s a way. You will get them in. There will be black market. The price will go up. You will get them in. Look what Prohibition did. Did it work? No. Prohibition lead to the beginning of all organized crime in the United States. Trying to stop the booze. They got it in. Canada shipped it in by the carload. It was controlled by the Purple Gang in Detroit who were Jewish not Italian. You knew that?  JW: Yeah, I’ve heard of them.  HH: Even Al Capone stayed out of this because he was afraid of the Purple Game. They were sociopathic. I mean, they were really violent. They’d kill just for something to do and get paid for it if they weren’t running the whiskey business.  They were awful.  There’s a book out about four years ago called Detroit Land about the movers and shakers and things in the city. It’s well done.  Wayne State Press did it. Chapter 23 is on the Purple Gang so go to your library and it’s only 20 pages long. It’s heavily summarized but you’ll see just what they did. And maybe your library up the street has it.  JW: Yeah, it’s possible.  HH: I Xeroxed that article. And they weren’t caught for most of what they did. They got away with most of it. Some of them do time in prison. The Collingwood Street Massacre at Collingwood and 12th Street – that’s almost in the center of the city. They shot several people there in that apartment house. They caught a couple of them. They did 20 years or something but they got out and one of them a week later did a contract killing of somebody to make some money. He got by with that one by the way. They didn’t get caught for most of what they did. There’s 500 murders attributed to them and one or two percent proven. Even knocked off a state senator, William Buckley I think his name is. The Purple Gang did him in, too.  I forget why they did it. And I know fellow, I see him from the gym who had one of the killers working for him in the steel business. He was an old man then, gave him a job just to give him something to do and he’d tell him some of the stories they got into and I can’t believe the guy would say something like this. He never said I did this or I did that but he’d talk about everything else that went on. He said, you know I did time in prison for this murder and that was one crime I didn’t do, was that senator. He didn’t do it. He was clean on it, but they hung it on him and he did time.  JW: Well, is there anything else you’d like to add about what you remember from 1967?  HH: No, I don’t think so. That was the truculent 60s. The wild 60s. It was a crazy place. We just shrugged it off. Leave them alone and they’ll leave you alone. That’s all.  JW: Well, thank you so much for coming in to sit down with me today.  HH: You should write, do your memoirs for some of the things you see when you’d get in people’s houses. What goes on in people’s houses. It could make your hair stand up. Their behavior is somewhat uninhibited is the word. And they say you should keep notes on this and I’d said, I’d have to change everybody’s name or I’d be sued. So I said, no I didn’t do it but some things I’ve run across, I could make your hair stand on what some people do and sexual exploits and all and it goes on right in front of you.  JW: Anything you’re willing to share.  HH: I don’t know if you want to record some of this stuff or not.  JW: That’s up to you.  HH: I remember one case, it’s good for a laugh. When I was in installation, they had a row down around McDuggal or someplace down there about where the phone was supposed to go so I was just standing and they were arguing and they got into a row, a big fight over it. Bloody big fight. And one threw a gourd at the other that was sitting on the mantle or something. It went crashing into the dining room window into the driveway. Put a dent in the guy’s car that was sitting out there as I recall, in the hood. And I said, “Well, we seem to have a difference of opinion here.” And she says, “White Boy, you shut the f- up.” I said, “Okay, I’ll wait out in the truck for you. You give me a call.” Another one was down around the same area roughly. Somebody wanted a phone in the basement and there was no lights on down there so I hung a light on my belt so I could keep my hands free. And there was a guy in bed with his girlfriend down there – is this okay? – he didn’t bother budging. He didn’t miss a stroke, he just pointed to the corner where the phone was. I had to walk over the mattress on the floor to get to the phone. We used to run across a lot of stuff like that. The drinking that goes on in people’s houses and so on and so forth. I don’t want to take up any more of your time.  JW: Okay.   Original Format Audio Duration 24min 56sec Interviewer Julia Westblade Interviewee Henry Heatley Location Grosse Pointe, MI Files image1.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Detroit Workers, Mayor Jerome Cavanagh, Michigan Bell Telephone Company, Michigan National Guard, The Purple Gang Citation “Henry Heatley, August 12th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/415. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml 
DetroitWorker;Harvey Greig;1938;2016;Harvey Greig, 1938, 2016 Title Harvey Greig, July 14th, 2016 Description In this interview, Greig relates how he first heard about the events of July, 1967  his week at work as an essential personnel member at AAA in Detroit  and his experiences driving to and from work. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 07/19/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Harvey Grieg Brief Biography Harvey Greig was born in Highland Park in 1938. He grew up and continued to live on the west side of Detroit for a number of years, before eventually settling in Brighton. During the unrest Greig was considered essential personnel at AAA in Detroit, where he worked most of his career. Interviewer's Name Hannah Sabal Interview Place Detroit, MI Date 07/14/2016 Interview Length 00:32:42  Note: The audio is broken into two tracks Transcriptionist Hannah Sabal Transcription Date 07/18/2016 Transcription  [INITIALS OF INTERVIWEE:] HG  [INTIALS OF INTERVIEWER:] HS  [REPEAT INITIALS EACH TIME EACH PERSON SPEAKS]  HS: Hello, this is Hannah Sabal. I am in Detroit, Michigan. The date is July 14th, 2016 and I am conducting an oral history for the Detroit Historical Society’s Detroit 67 Oral History Project with Mr. Harvey Greig. Thank you for sitting down with me today.  HG: You’re welcome.  HS: Can you start by telling me where and when you were born?  HG: I was born in Highland Park, Michigan, June 9th, 1938. I grew up on the west side of Detroit, basically in the 6 Mile and Schaeffer area. Went to school at King’s school for grade school, and Cooley for high school. I got married when I was in my early 20s, and resided in that same neighborhood for a couple years, then moved to Rosedale Park on the west side and resided there until the mid-80s.  HS: What was the neighborhood like in Highland Park? Was it integrated?  HG: I was there as a baby and—I was just born there, and we lived on the west side.  HS: Oh, right, right, you lived on the west side. So what was your neighborhood on the west side like?  HG: What was it like? It was brick homes, large homes. Lovely neighborhood. Mixed Catholic, Protestants, some Jewish people. It was a very lovely childhood.  HS: Was it integrated race-wise?  HG: No.  HS: So it was a white neighborhood?  HG: It was a white neighborhood for many, many, many years.  HS: What year did you move to Rosedale Park?  HG: We moved to Rosedale Park in the early ‘60s.  HS: Why did you move there?  HG: I bought a house.  HS: Okay. All right. Okay, so we’ll move into the 1960s, and we have this written history in front of us that you have provided, which will be attached with this audio. It says here that you were a management team member of the Auto Club of Michigan in the Detroit Automobile Inter-Insurance Exchange?  HG: That’s correct.  HS: Can you explain that position for me?  HG: I was working in what they call the building department, which was in charge of all buildings and facilities, as well as I was in charge of all communications—voice, data, telephones, teletype systems back in those days, all radio systems, those kinds of things.  HS: So a lot of responsibility in your job.  HG: Lots of responsibilities.  HS: Were you working during the week of the riots?  HG: I was working every day.  HS: What was that like? How did you first hear about the riots?  HG: I had been out in California and returned home on the weekend the riots started, and I was out visiting relatives in the Pontiac area. I drove by a State Police post on Telegraph and 59, and out of the state police post came a car with four Michigan State Troopers in one car with the lights on and the sirens going, and another car followed him, also with four troopers in the car. To this day, I’ve never seen four troopers in a State Police car in my life.  HS: Yeah, neither have I.  HG: Exactly, it doesn’t happen, so something major was happening and probably the news that night, I don’t remember.  HS: That would be Sunday?  HG: That was Sunday, yep. And Monday morning I went to work. I drove from Rosedale Park down Grand River in my car, and went to the office building on Bagley and Clifford. That’s where the three AAA buildings were. One of the buildings was United Artists’ Theatre building, and that was about 180,000 square feet. The little auto club building across the street, and we had space in the Teller Hotel, which was on Grand Circus Boulevard, I think.  HS: What happened on Monday, when you were at work? What was it like?  HG: It was really confusing. Most of our employees showed up to work Monday. I think that was the 24th?  HS: Yes.  HG: It was quite evident that the riots were in full swing. During Monday, we came to the conclusion that the employees should probably go home, for their safety. In closing the departments down, I was probably the last management person that stuck around the entire week. I went down, drove down there every day of the riots that week and the following weeks. We kept guards, we had security guards. We kept those guards on duty. We had some maintenance personnel, and myself. So I was kind of down there coordinating everything, and ensuring that our building and computer systems and records and everything else for the largest auto insurance company in Michigan continued to operate. That’s what AAA Michigan was in those days. The Detroit Automobile Inter-Insurance Exchange was the insurance of the Auto Club of Michigan.  HS: Going through this written history that you provided us, can you explain the bit about Michigan Bell telephone system?  HG: Sure. Back in the day, Michigan Bell was the carrier for the Detroit Metropolitan area. Back in the day, in 1967, there were probably 37 telephone companies in the state of Michigan, and they all had territories, and the territories were regulated by the Michigan Public Service Commission, and the metropolitan Detroit area was under Michigan Bell’s territory. So Michigan Bell provided all dial tone and those kinds of things for residents as well as commercial telephone services. Because of all the confusion and what was going on during those first couple of days, everybody—not everybody, but a lot of people in the Detroit Metropolitan area were calling their mothers, their brothers, their friends, whatever, and the telephone systems are designed that they can handle so many calls, but not everybody calling at one time. What happened to the metropolitan Detroit telephone system, Michigan Bell system, was that so many people went off hook to make telephone calls, a good share of the people went to make a phone call and there was no dial tone because they were all in use. That kind of was a major issue for the first week especially, and really the next couple of weeks.  HS: Do you think that exacerbated the fear that people were feeling?  HG: Probably, because the telephone was their lifeline to the police department, the fire department, including their security, so yeah, I’m sure that affected a lot of people.  HS: Did the company you work for experience any issues with the phones during that week?  HG: Yes they did, and we’ll get into that a couple of bullets down.  HS: Okay.  HG: My last bullet said, “Poor telephone service continued throughout the first and second week of the riots.”  HS: Onto the next page, let’s talk about the Essential Worker’s permit.  HG: Sure. So, our management at AAA Michigan and the insurance companies put together an emergency response team, a management team. I was one of the management team members. All of the—and I can’t remember how many of us there were, I think there were maybe seven—we were all issued an essential worker’s permit that was provided by Jerome Cavanagh, the mayor of the city of Detroit at that time. It was signed by our general manager at the auto club, and it had my name, rank, and serial number on the pass.  HS: And you have very kindly provided us with a copy of that.  HG: Yeah, took me a while to find it, but I finally found it.  HS: Well, we’re really glad you found it. So what did the permit allow you to do?  HG: The permit allowed me, first of all, during that first week, they—I don’t know if it was, probably the city government along with the state and federals, maybe—they put a curfew into effect. I don’t remember the hours of the curfew, but—  HS: I believe it was eight to eight?  HG: Eight to eight. I went to work prior to eight o’clock in the morning, and I was probably still downtown after eight o’clock at night. So the pass allowed me to go to and from work during the curfew hours without a problem.  HS: So if you were stopped, you could show them—  HG: And they would allow me to proceed.  HS: Okay. Awesome. So then, Tuesday, federal troops were ordered in, National Guard, tell me about that.  HG: Okay. President Johnson, United States President, determined that Detroit, the Michigan National Guard and the local police, including State and Detroit, weren’t capable of handling as much insurrection issues that were going on early in the week. So, it was determined that they would send in federal troops. So somebody in local government said, okay, the federal troops will assist the residents and provide security for Detroit east of Woodward. So Woodward was the dividing line for the support personnel. West of Woodward was Michigan National Guard, along with the state police and the city of Detroit Police Department and Fire Department. The city of Detroit police and state police and fire department also supported the federal troops on the east side of Detroit.  HS: So they were stretched pretty thin.  HG: Yeah, so it was the National Guard on the west side, and the 82nd airborne division, I believe, was on the east side of Detroit. They were kind of elite troops.  HS: Did you feel relieved when they came in, or did you sense a feeling of relief?  HG: None whatsoever.  HS: No?  HG: No.  HS: Were you worried at all during the riots?  HG: Yeah, we can get to that. I’d like to stop just for a second and regain  [End of Track 1- 00:11:37]]  [Beginning of Track 2]  HS: This is a continuation of the interview with Harvey Greig. We are speaking about the federal troops and National Guard in Detroit.  HG: When the federal troops came in, they needed telephone services. They’d set up a command post on the east side  I don’t know where that was. The National Guard command post was at Northwestern Field, on Grand River. The National Guard had their own communication services, and I don’t know if they got telephone lines from Michigan Bell or not. But, the federal troops required massive telephone lines. J.L. Hudson Company had a huge switchboard and a lot of telephone lines, and the Auto Club of Michigan was the second largest telephone system, other than the government, and other than J.L. Hudson’s. Michigan Bell management decided to release all the Auto Club lines and give them to the federal troops. I lost, oh, 154 telephone lines that was assigned from Michigan Bell to AAA, or the Auto Club. They used those lines and put me, telephone-wise, out of business during their stay in Detroit, which was several days.  HS: What was the scope of the impact of that on your company?  HG: That means that employees could stay home because they couldn’t do anything and they didn’t have any telephones. My customers couldn’t call me for road services, insurance services, because I didn’t have any telephone lines. And that was the only, the normal means of communication was telephones, back in the day.  HS: Moving down, you have a note here that says, “After the riots, it became evident that we should hire and supplement our security staff.”  HG: Where am I?  HS: The very last bulletin on the page.  HG: Let’s back up and the bullet before that explains what telephone services besides the normal, residential phone service and the commercial telephone services that were being used by the general public and businesses. That’s when there was very little dial tone available, because everybody’s trying to make a phone call at one time. The only telephone service that Michigan Bell provided that worked during that time was mobile telephone service, which was like a car telephone. You would pick up the car telephone and you would signal a Michigan Bell operator that you wanted to make a telephone call, and she would complete the connection for you. That was the only service that worked, we found out, during the riots. After the riots, our management team said to prepare for any other insurrections that may come in the future, we need to have a communications at least between the emergency team members. So I provided all the team members, the seven or eight team members of our emergency response team, with car telephones. We had those until they were replaced by cell phones in, I think, the 1990s. Anyway, so I’ve had telephone service in my cars since 1967.  HS: Aside from placing cell phones in the cars, how else did the company train staff members to prepare for future insurrections?  HG: Hang on. After the riots, it became really evident that the guard staff that we had in our three different buildings in downtown Detroit, they were not armed. After some consideration, everybody agreed that maybe we should be hiring and supplementing our regular guards with ex-Detroit police officers who were allowed to carry weapons. That was put into effect, and I don’t know about to this day, but for many, many years the Detroit Police Department supplemented our guards. Also, for future issues, the emergency response team decided to train and purchase weapons for the management team, the seven management team, that were responsible for employee security and building security, and customer security, if they were in our facilities. So that happened after the riots.  HS: All right. So why don’t we talk about some of the incidents you remember during the riots, specific things  HG: As I said before, I went to work from Rosedale Park to downtown Detroit via Grand River each and every day, to and from. I passed the bivouac area, if you want to call that, for the Michigan National Guard at Northwestern Field on Grand River, near the old Olympia, which was where the Red Wings played, back in the day. On Wednesday, I was driving from Rosedale Park down Grand River. There wasn’t any traffic that whole entire week. It was rare for me to see another car. The traffic signals, Detroit traffic signals, were all working during the riots, most of them were working unless they were burned by whatever. But most of the traffic lights, so I followed all the rules and stopped at red lights. I got to the intersection of Grand River and Joy Road, and there was a red light. I stopped, and a Michigan National Guard tank was sitting next to me, waiting for the light to change to green. We both sat there until the light went green, and then we both left and proceeded down Grand River with a tank next to me.  HS: And that’s not something you see every day!  HG: That’s not something you see every day. Naturally, I couldn’t see anybody in the tank, but the tank was moving along—certainly I was faster than the tank. I got down to, near downtown, and the Michigan National Guard, the state police, Detroit police, a lot of fire equipment, was very active in a riot environment, closer to downtown, as I was proceeding down Grand River. That kind of really shook me up, and I was kind of apprehensive, but I continued to complete my trip downtown. After that, commuting down Grand River, I was very aware of the dangerous situation I was in. Have I explained why I would take Grand River versus the Lodge Freeway? I could easily take the Lodge Freeway downtown, but there was a lot of reported shooting down the Lodge Freeway. There wasn’t a lot of cars, but I didn’t want to take the chance of me being shot at from high rise buildings. I thought I was safer on surface streets.  HS: I’d imagine, because the Lodge is sunk down, it might be like shooting fish in a barrel.  HG: It is, yeah. That’s exactly what I was concerned about, and that’s why I took Grand River.  HS: Speaking of concerns for your safety, were you worried for your wife at all during this time?  HG: No, not really. We took a walk one night down to—I was probably about two blocks away from Grand River and Southfield, and we took a walk and looked down Grand River, and I don’t remember what day it was, but there was smoke and fire down at Greenfield and Grand River. That’s as far west as I saw anything during the entire riot period. But there was smoke and fire, something was on fire at Greenfield and Grand River. You could see clearly because there was no traffic on Grand River, and it was probably a mile, mile and a half, for me to look down and see that area at Greenfield and Grand River.  HS: So you were further west than there so it didn’t reach your neighborhood?  HG: I was further west. Nothing, no insurrection happened that I know of, although I did hear, at night, I did hear a lot of sirens going on, I heard gunshots going on at night. I slept with a 12-gauge shotgun that I had for hunting next to my bed. I lived near the Southfield freeway, and after eight o’clock at night, nobody could drive because of the curfew and there was dead silence, which was really weird on the freeway. There was no noise, and that was really, really unusual. No noise at all, other than in the middle of the night, I would hear some gun fire and sirens going on. Although I had weapons at home, I never took the weapons to work with me, so I was never armed going to and from work.  HS: Why was that?  HG: It wasn’t legal, first of all. I suppose I could’ve carried it legally with the gun broken down, but I didn’t want to get involved in that.  HS: Just safer not to bother with it?’  HG: Just safer not to bother with that. And as I said, the streets were wide open and I had a car capable of going very fast.  HS: During your travels to and from work, during the curfew, were you ever stopped by the police at all?  HG: No, and that’s kind of unusual. The riots lasted, according to popular theory, they lasted, you know, the five days, but the city was still in an insurrection situation for a lot longer than that. I don’t know how long the curfew was in effect, I’ve forgotten, but what amazes me is that all the times I went to and from work, downtown and to home, I was never stopped by anybody. By the police, state police city police, anybody, to question what I was doing on the road after hours.  HS: Did you see anybody?  HG: Nobody. Now when I got downtown, there was lots of activity, but there was shooting going on, I mean, good heavens. There wasn’t police cars, Detroit police cars, patrolling Grand River. I don’t think I even saw a car. I heard them at night, heard sirens, but I don’t think I ever saw a Detroit police car on Grand River when I was on Grand River.  HS: Do you think that maybe they just had bigger fish to fry?  HG: Oh, absolutely. Yeah. They’re down there in the middle of the riots, heavens. 5,000 Detroit cops probably, back in the day, but I never saw one and nobody ever pulled me over.  HS: Were there any other experiences during the riots that you’d like to tell us about, or can we move on to post-riots?  HG: I’m just reviewing it in my mind here, hold on. No, I think we can go to post-riots.  HS: Okay. At what point did AAA receive their telephone lines back?  HG: Well, I don’t remember what day the federal troops left. I can’t remember if they stayed around for the weekend. I really can’t remember. I think the Michigan National Guard was there for the following week. But I don’t know about the federal troops. When the federal troops were released, and they went home, so to speak, I got my telephone lines back from Michigan Bell really quickly.  HS: Was your telephone traffic just crazy at that point, getting it back?  HG: No, no. Because people were still reacting to, they weren’t driving, their cars weren’t breaking down, they didn’t need road service or the insurance company. Nobody was driving so the auto insurance company, they weren’t really busy. Slowly but surely the systems went back into somewhat normal routines.  HS: At about what point—one week after, two weeks after, three weeks after—would you say it got back to normal?  HG: I think all the employees were back, probably the following Monday. I really don’t remember when I activated—I had 18 switchboard operators that worked for me handling all the communications—and I really can’t remember what day, if I had them that weekend, I don’t remember. Probably, it was probably the following Monday. I don’t remember.  HS: Were you working on the weekends also or was it Monday through Friday?  HG: I can’t remember if I went down for the weekends. I really don’t remember.  HS: Did you normally work weekends?  HG: No.  HS: So had you gone, it would’ve been just because it was a special—  HG: Well, if I would’ve gone down, it would’ve been to support my guards, my maintenance people, and give them a comfort feeling that someone from management wasn’t abandoning them. Again, I do not remember.  HS: All right. Let’s see. What else can you tell me about the aftermath of the riots?  HG: The aftermath. The emergency response team for our management, our seven or eight people, we had several meetings, and it was kind of decided that we needed to provide some kind of assistance, telephone assistance, outside of the city of Detroit, that if they could get to a telephone that was usable, we could provide them with recordings about work schedules, we could provide them with assistance. We put three centers together: One was on the east side north of 8 Mile Road  one was in Birmingham, which was north of 8 Mile Road  and the one on the west side was—I can’t remember if it was Livonia or—we had branch offices scattered throughout the Detroit Metropolitan area. I think it was the Livonia office, but I’m not real sure. It may have been Farmington.  HS: Somewhere in that area.  HG: Yeah, somewhere in that area. We had three centers. Those centers were equipped with recording equipment from Michigan Bell. We would change the recordings or put recordings on based on what the requirements were, if another insurrection were to take place.  HS: So, essentially, those recordings were there if employees needed to know if they needed to come into work, or—  HG: That’s right. Employees were provided with telephone numbers. If they resided on the east side, the north side, the west side and downriver side, it was all handled out of those three centers. Each employee was provided with telephone numbers after the riots.  HS: So they would call their respective branch to get information?  HG: No, they would call one of the three centers. Not the AAA branches, they probably were not operating.  HS: Okay. So they would call one of the three centers to get information on should they come into work?  HG: The people I’m talking about were headquarter employees. Not branch office employees.  HS: Okay. When did you say that you moved out of Rosedale Park?  HG: The mid ‘80s, 1980s.  HS: Where did you move to?  HG: I moved to South Lyon.  HS: Why did you move?  HG: The neighborhood was deteriorating. My wife was a school teacher at Detroit Public Schools. We weren’t comfortable walking in the neighborhood anymore. We had to go to the suburbs, in our minds, for groceries and safety. The last six months that I was in Rosedale Park, I had four cars stolen from my driveway, in six months.  HS: Oh, my god! Four cars in six months?  HG: Four cars in six months, and that convinced me to—the last one was on the day I signed the sales for my house, which was Halloween.  HS: Nail in the coffin, right there.  HG: That was it.  HS: Wow. So now you live in Brighton, so you live pretty far. Do you come into the city frequently? Or did you when you lived in South Lyon?  HG: Oh, sure. Oh, yeah. I worked in downtown Detroit for, like, 25 years, so I’m a Detroit guy. I was born in Detroit, I lived in Detroit for, you know, 50 years or more. We still go to restaurants down here. We have friends that live down in Detroit. We go to ball games, we go to hockey games. We live in the suburbs, but we’re still Detroit people.  HS: In that time, how have you seen the city change?  HG: I personally think that the African American person is worse off today than in July 1st of 1967.  HS: In what ways?  HG: Well, I don’t think they have gained anything. I don’t think they’ve gained education  I don’t think they’ve gained respect, job opportunities  I don’t think the African American in the city of Detroit, I think they’re going downhill. It should be reverse of that, but I don’t know how to turn it around. But that’s my opinion, but I’m sitting out in lily-white Brighton, Michigan. Anyway, I’m almost 80 years old, and I’ve seen a lot of changes in 80 years. Most of it from the city of Detroit.  HS: Looking back at the events of ’67, I’ve heard you refer to it as an “insurrection.” Is that how you perceive the events?  HG: No, that was thrown around by the media. I hate like hell to call it a “riot,” and I think the federal people call it “insurrection.” They call it a lot of different names, and I don’t know if there’s an official name for it other than riots.  HS: Everybody has a different idea. I’ve heard “rebellion,” “uprising,” and “civil disturbance,” which I think is probably the mildest.  HG: “Civil disturbance” and “insurrection” are, I think the accepted media definition, other than “riots.” “Civil disturbance,” “insurrection,” and “riots” are, to me, the three keys, and they’re interchangeable. “Riots” is such a nasty word.  HS: I agree. Final question: If you had any advice for future generations of Detroit, what would it be?  HG: Stay married. There’s very few men that are living in family situations, black men that are living in family situations, and we really, really need to help—and I say “we,” I’m talking about the white population, I guess—need to help educate and I know it’s an easy thing to say  we’ve been trying to do it for fifty years, almost, next year. But I think education is the key to the future success of the African American in the city of Detroit.  HS: Well, thank you so much for sitting down with me today. You have fascinating information, and I’m really glad we got to speak.  [TIME STAMP END OF INTERVIEW 00:21:15]  [End of Track 2]  Original Format audio Duration 32min 42sec  Note: The audio is broken into two tracks Interviewer Hannah Sabal Interviewee Harvey Greig Location Detroit, Mi Files Greig, Harvey.jpg Appendix - H. Greig Notes.pdf Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, AAA Michigan, Business Owners, Curfew, Detroit Workers, Michigan Bell Telephone Company, Michigan National Guard, Michigan State Police Department Citation “Harvey Greig, July 14th, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/319. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Harold Stone;1936;2015;Harold Stone, 1936, 2015 Title Harold Stone, July 25th. 2015 Description In this interview, Harold Stone recalls his memories of living in the city during 1967. He also describes living across the Metro area where he recalls his experiences with integration. In addition, he discussed how race affected his job opportunities and how living in suburbia affected his children Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 11/04/2015 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language eng-US Type Sound Coverage Metropolitan Detroit arson Roseville Canton Novi Conant Gardens Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name J. Harold Stone Brief Biography J. Harold Stone was born on Christmas Eve, 1936. He grew up next to Conant Gardens for nearly thirty years. Following various careers, Harold has lived all around Metro Detroit. Currently lives in Canton. Interviewer's Name Noah Levinson and Lily Wilson Interview Place Detroit Historical Museum, Detroit, Michigan Date 07/25/2015 Interview Length 25:12 Transcriptionist Zach Shapiro Transcription Date 10/20/2015 Transcription NL:  Today is July 25, 2015.  This is the interview of J. Harold Stone by Noah Levinson.  We are at the Detroit Historical Museum in Detroit, Michigan and this interview is for the Detroit historical society and the Detroit 1967 project. Harold, could you first tell me where and when you were born?  HS: I was born December the 24, 1936, Detroit Michigan.  NL: And what neighborhood were you living in when you were first growing up?  HS:  Well, close to Conant Gardens in Detroit. The Mitchel Nevada area, Joseph Campau Nevada, that area, North East Detroit.   NL: How long did you live in that neighborhood?  HS: Oh god, until I was in my late twenties.  NL: Can you describe what the neighborhood was like growing up?   HS: Growing up it was a pretty nice neighborhood.  We had a couple of doctors living on the street, a judge was on the street, and a state representative lived there. It was pretty nice for that time.  NL:  Was it a diverse neighborhood?  HS: Yes it was.  Mostly when I was growing up it was mostly Polish, in fact and in fact one of my oldest friends, a guy by the name of Carl [Skinechiney ?], I still see, I’ve known him since I was about four or five years old.  Every year we meet down in Florida in fact.  And we have dinner and this sort of thing. Yep.   NL:  Were there many African American families in the neighborhood?  HS: Yeah, yeah. It was fifty/fifty.  There were -- the Polish were there, there were Syrians, Greeks, Yugoslavians, Romanians, and there were a lot of people there after the Second World War that were refugees and they had the tattoos on their arms and that sort of thing.   NL: Where did you move after Conant Gardens?  Where did you live?  HS:  I moved. It was still in Detroit a place called Ranier Hamilton. It was a cooperative apartment over on Byron and Web.  NL: How did you make the decision to move?   HS:  Well I got married and I couldn’t stay at home any longer [Laughter] so I had to get out.   NL:  That makes sense [laughter]. Where were you living in Detroit in 1967?  HS:  I was living at the Ranier Hamilton on Byron and Webb.  NL: OK.  Could you describe the diversity in your building or even in your neighborhood there?  HS:  Well the Ranier Hamilton was sort of an experiment and it was a cooperative, one of the few cooperatives built in the city of Detroit, not built, but rehabbed in the city.  And it was diverse in that there were both white and black living there and in fact that was one of the problems that we faced during the '67 riots.  Because we got word that because it was diverse that we were going to be attacked. Okay, so we had to be on guard.  NL: Because it was integrated?  HS: Because it was integrated and what I ended up doing was a lot people came to my door saying “What should we do? What can we do?” and so I had to form a guard duty and we took turns walking around and guarding the place.   It was interesting that few of us had guns because we were protecting ourselves.  One of the guys brought a bow and arrow  that was the best he could do.   And we ended up on the roof of this building. And we’re up there with guns and bow and arrows and all of the sudden a helicopter flies over and they turn the light on us.  That search light is so bright.  It’s just unbelievable.  NL: I’m guessing it was low flying?   HS: Very low flying.  And so we said the best thing we could do is get the hell out of here (Laughter).  And we went back down into the building.   NL: Did you feel safe inside the building?  HS:  Well we felt safe except that you could hear the machine gun fire all night long.  And it got so bad at one point that my wife and I actually had to take the mattress off the bed and get down behind the bricks because we were afraid of the gun fire.   NL:  From your understanding or your personal experience what was the role of the relationship between the police and the community of city of Detroit?  Or maybe the fractured relationship in allowing for such civil unrest to take place?   HS:  You know I really can’t answer that.  I really don’t know.  I never had very much interaction with the police.  I always felt yes we were oppressed that I believed.  I remember one night me and three of my friends were coming home from the show just driving down Davison and the police stopped us, pulled us over made us get out of the car, we’re all standing there with our hands up in the air being searched and this one cop was searching a friend of mine and he felt what he thought was a knife.  And he pulled out the knife and he smiled and he said, “I got you”.  And the knife didn’t have a blade in it.  And the cop said “Damn,” and he let us go.  As we’re standing there I look up and I see my mother and father drive by.  And so I said “Oh my God, what are they going to say?” So I get home that night and they said “Oh, you’ll never guess what we saw: a bunch of hoodlums being searched up on Davison and Goddard.” [laughter]  And I said “Mom that was us.  That was me.”  So that was that story.   NL:  Had you ever felt limited or oppressed in where you could find housing or find work living in Detroit?  HS:  I wasn’t really concerned about housing at that time.  Work was always a problem I felt, but I was always guy that was seen the first black in a position and that was a lot of pressure on me.  In fact, one place I went and I took the test and after the test they checked it and the manager said I’m not going to hire you, because you scored too high on the test.  I couldn’t believe that.  I went home I told my wife and she said “I can’t believe it”.  Two weeks later this manager called me back and he said I need to interview you again.  So when I went down to do the interview he said “Home office said I have to hire you” Okay.  So I was hired, he said “but I don’t think you’re going to stay.”  And he was right, because I stayed there for about three months and I got another job.   NL:  Was the fact that the other job was better?  HS: The other job was better.  One of the things about this job that I scored high on, they offered me a couple of different territories. It was a sales job and they said, “You can have either Highland Park or Gross Pointe.” I picked Gross Pointe and the manager couldn’t figure out why I would pick Gross Pointe.  What I didn’t tell him then was that for five years I was a mail man in Gross Pointe, so I knew the area cold.   Alright and so when he asked I said, “Well, tell you what, if you can tell me the difference in ownership between black and white in Highland Park verses Gross Pointe, then I’ll tell you why I picked Gross Pointe.”   He couldn’t tell me and I never told him that I had been a mail man in Gross Pointe and I knew the area cold.   NL:   Do you have any other specific recollection about that week in July 1967?  HS:   Well other than lying in bed listening to machine gun fire, no that’s about it.  I had a lot of film also that I took and I looked for it today, but I couldn’t find it.  I’ve got about 400 feet of film.   NL:  Wow. Can you talk about what the neighborhood was like, in the aftermath, once the fires had been put out and the looting had stopped and things like that?   HS:  Well, let me put it this way.  We watched an A&P store burn to the ground.   Literally watched it burn to the ground.  So the next day after we watched this, one of my neighbors who happened to be white suggested we go out and buy some food because the grocery store was gone.  So we ended up going out to Taylor Michigan to a Great Scott super market.  So we bought the food and my buddy said, “Well, Harold you needed me to get out to Taylor to get the food,” and I said “Yes but you need me to get back into the city.”   NL:  Did you feel that the police response and the presence of the armed forces and the National Guard was that necessary and was it effective in keeping the damage contained?   HS:  I think it was necessary, but I think it was a bit of overkill, because I could hear -- and I knew -- they were using .50 caliber machine guns in the city of Detroit and there was a house on LaSalle [Street] near the Boulevard that had big pop marks in the brick from the .50 caliber machine gun fire.  I think that was definitely overkill and I lived close to Central High School and they had all of the army vehicles parked there, the tanks, the armed personnel carriers, the jeeps, the trucks, everything was there. So I think it was overkill.   NL:  What do you think possessed citizens, mostly just ordinary citizens, to do all that looting and arson and such?  HS: Can’t answer that. I don’t know. I really don’t know it’s not something that I would have done. Alright, but people take advantage. Everyone takes advantage of a situation like that you know? And Detroit was the one place that they said was an integrated riot.  The looting was integrated.  There were white people looting.  There were black people looting.   NL: Did you know people who partook in that?  HS: No. Not at all.   NL: Was it happening near your building on Webb?  HS: No. No looting. Just that A&P burning down, that’s all.  NL:   Where was the next place that you lived after that building?   HS: Moved out to Roseville, Michigan.  NL: About when?  HS:   Moved out there in 1968.  And I integrated a housing complex out there.  And it was very, very interesting moving in, because as we were moving in, all of the people were looking at us.  The curtains were open, the doors were open, and people were standing out there looking at us.  Actually looking at us move in.  So the last thing that I took in were my guns.  And when my guns came off the truck all the windows closed and the doors closed and that was it, but it turned out pretty good and we lived out there for about five years.  NL: You say they were "looking."  Could you elaborate?  HS: Trying to intimidate.  Because like I said we were integrating that particular place.  Back in 1967, '65, '64 there was a company here called the FCH services, the Foundation for Cooperative Housing.  And they were building co-ops, developing co-ops and building them.  In the suburbs they were developing a lot of them.  None of them were integrated.  Not a one.  They built some rehabs in the city of Detroit, but none of them were new construction except for downtown Detroit. You had Nicolet, Joliet, LaSalle.  These were all co-ops.  God, there’s about eight of them down there.  Let’s see.  Martin Luther King is one.  These were all developed in Section 213 and Section 221 D3 of the National Housing Act of 1968.  In the suburbs, like I said, none of them were integrated and the one we integrated was New England Townhouses which was located in Roseville, Michigan.   NL:   What crossroads did you say?  HS:  That would be Frazho and Gratiot.   NL:  Could you describe your motivation for doing that -- or in other words was integrating that housing, was that a purposeful move on your part or was the reasons for moving there separate?  HS: the reason for moving was that I wanted a better place to live. That’s all.   NL:   Was it closer to work or anything?   HS: No. It wasn’t closer to work.  The company I had worked for managed the place and it was a place that I knew some other people who lived there, so that where I picked to move into.  NL:  Did you encounter a lot of racism and intimidation from your neighbors?  HS: No intimidation.  No one spoke to us at first, but I had a couple of neighbors who came over and actually introduced themselves and they were very nice and very supportive for the period of time we lived there, which was five years. I ended up playing on their baseball team and I was the only black person in the whole Roseville league playing baseball.  And it was fun, it was fun after I got there and did some things.  NL: Were other neighborhoods in Roseville integrated at that time?  HS:   here was one area in Roseville that was integrated and I think it was a small black section of about two blocks that had been there I guess since about the 1940s.   NL:  You said you moved out there in ‘68.  How much of a factor was the riots of ‘67 in choosing to move?  HS: Everything.  NL: Everything?  HS: Everything yes.  NL:  Was that a conclusion that you reached by the end of the summer of ‘67 do you think?  HS:  Well there was two problems the one is that we lived through the riots and we had to go through all the things that were involved in the riots.   Secondarily the unit I was living in, there was some damage to that unit.  Not from the riot or anything, but just construction problems.  And we moved out because we couldn’t get it fixed.   NL: So there was actually a physical force?  HS: A physical force.  We needed to move.  And I picked New England Townhouses.   NL:  Roseville just seemed like a nice community to live in?  HS: Exactly.   NL: And it proved to be ultimately?  HS: Yes.   NL:  Where did you live after that?  HS:  After that we bought a home in the Golf club Subdivision in Detroit.   NL:  Where is that exactly?  HS: Seven Mile and Livernois area.   NL:  I see.  U of D [University of Detroit]?  HS: U of D.  That’s it.   NL:  Could you tell me about living in that neighborhood?  HS:  I picked that are because it was integrated and there were people of all races moving into that area at that time. So that’s why I picked it. I felt that Detroit was going to come back and that was one of the reason why I picked that area.  I also sat on a committee for New Detroit.  And that was another reason why I picked that area. Because I thought it would be interesting.  NL:   I see.  Can you talk a little bit more about your involvement with New Detroit?  HS:   I really don’t remember that much about it except that we helped develop a program for Wayne County Community College dealing with apartment maintenance.   NL:  Could you share with me your thoughts on Detroit Public Schools over the years?  Did you go to Detroit Public Schools?   HS: Yes I did.    NL:  I’m curious especially to hear about your experience as a student there, but then also if you were a parent.  I don’t know exactly when your kids were growing up if they would have been in Roseville or Detroit.  But could you talk about the school system in your experience?   HS:  My experience in the Detroit Public School system was good.  I went to Courville Elementary School and I went to Pershing.  And when I went to Pershing it was mostly white. My mother also graduated from Pershing High School back in the thirties. I thought it was good. When we moved back to Detroit, my son was five years old just getting ready to start school and my daughter was two, I think it was okay. So they both went to Hampton Elementary School and my son went to Mumford. From there I moved to Novi, Michigan.  NL: So your kids spent some time in Detroit Schools and some in Novi?  HS:  My daughter spent time in Novi.  NL: Okay and refresh, what years are we talking about now when they were I guess in high school or I guess in middle school?  HS: Well, we moved back to Detroit in 1973 we were there until about 1985. From there we went to Bellville and my daughter went to Bellville High School. And then from there we went to Novi.  NK:  What were your opinions as the parents in the seventies and eighties on the style of schooling and the quality of education at that point?  HS:  Where we were at Hampton, it was still very good.  Had a lot of community involvement.  The parents were involved, so it was good.   NL: So the neighborhood in general was a pretty close knit?  HS: Exactly. Exactly.   NK:  But other parts of the city, other school districts within the city had already started to fall into [unintelligible] education at that point?  HS: I think so. Yes.   NL: Or it's what the state of the schools are like today. Do you still live in Novi?  HS: No we live in Canton now.  I’m in Canton.   NL: That’s right. You guys have moved around a lot.   HS: [Laughter] No. Not really.  NL: No?  HS: Well there’s one thing I didn’t mention.  There was a divorce involved in there, so that’s one of the reasons.  NL: Okay. Sure. I’m going to back track a little bit first.  Do you have any recollections  you would have been pretty young, but of the 1943 Riots in the city?  HS:  I really don’t have any recollection, but I do remember that one day, when I was going to Courville, the riots were going on and I went to school and there were only three people in my class who showed up to my class that showed up to school that day.   NL: Wow.  HS: Three. Now that’s my only recollection of the riots.  NL: The teachers were there? But you just had nearly empty classrooms?  HS:   The teachers were there, but the students weren’t. Right.   NL:  Do you remember anything that you parents or friends and relatives were talking about what was going on at that point?  HS: Yeah, but I don’t have any clear memories of it. None.  NL: Got you.  What is your recollection of Downtown Detroit as you were growing up and through the fiftie and sixties?  HS: Oh it was great. Great. J.L Hudson’s, the tweflth story at Christmas time.  All the toys and everything. It was great.  Fantastic. I loved it.   NL: And do you today here in the last couple decades. Do you spend much time downtown in the city?  HS: No. Not that much.  NL: Okay.  How would you characterize that this time on your more recent visits to the city?   HS:  I think it’s coming back you can see a lot of activity in downtown Detroit, a lot of activity, especially Greektown.  It’s full and I have to say it  mostly white folk are down there.  NL: (Laughter)   HS: (Laughter) And it’s interesting seeing it coming back.  And I enjoy that.   NL: I do too.  It’s nice to be a part of that. Hopefully to be a part of that.   HS: There is one thing I would like to add.  NL: Please.  HS:  When we lived in Novi, my daughter and I.  She came home after about two days in school.  She came home and said, “Dad I can’t take it,” because there was only eight black kids maybe four in the whole school.  Okay.  Only four in the whole school and she was having a real hard time with that.  And I said “Well, Dayna, you got to do it. You got to do it, because this is part of my job.”  So she went through it, but she caught a lot of hell at Novi for a long, long time, but she also developed some lifelong friends while she was there, and some that she still deals with today.  And she graduated in 1990.   NL: So the Novi community was overwhelmingly white then?  HS: Oh yeah.  When I went to vote everyone sort of stopped.  Like the clock stopped, time stopped, and they watched me as I walked through.    NL: Was that the same in Bellville and Canton as well?   HS:  Not so much in Bellville, and not really in Canton, because Canton really is diverse, really diverse.  Not like Novi was in 1987.   NL:  Have you ever with the different areas that you have lived in, have you ever considered moving back into the city from the suburbs?  HS:  No. No, because I’ve done that. I was born in Detroit. I moved to the suburbs, I’ve lived in a couple of the suburbs, I’ve moved back to Detroit and I’m in Canton.   NL:  Do you think that the events of July 1967, can those effects be seen in the city still today? Not just the city, but the surroundings  the Metro.  HS:  I don’t see it.  NL: No?  HS: No. I really don’t except for white flight, okay but you also have black flight, because so many black people moved out of the city also.   NL: Right. Was that happening at the same time do you think, or was that later?   HS:  That was later. I mean I was one of the more likely some of the first people to move out in 1968. Okay, so that when I think it started.   NL: Do you have any other memories of 1967 that you want to share with us today.   HS: No not really.  NL: Okay. Well thank you so much for coming in today and sharing your stories with us.  HS:  No problem. You’re welcome. Take care.  ** Search Terms arson, Roseville, Detroit Police Department, Novi, Canton Files Stone, J. Harold photo.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Arson, Business Owners, Canton, Conant Gardens, Detroit Police Department, Detroit Workers, Novi, Roseville, University of Detroit Citation “Harold Stone, July 25th. 2015,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/101. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Greg Smigielski;1945;2016;Greg Smigielski, 1945, 2016 Title Greg Smigielski Description Greg Smigeilski was a manager at the A&P on West Grand Boulevard and Linwood the summer of 1967. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 08/19/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society Format Text Language en-US Type Written Story Text The following are the answers to the questions that were sent to me: 1. I was born at the Dearborn Hospital on February 11, 1945, which was Sunday, the 7th Day of the week. 11th day of the month, born at 7:11 a.m, weighed 7 lbs 11 oz., and the seventh child of eleven born to Pelagia & Stephen Smigielski. When the doctor that delivered me found out that I was the 7th child, he followed my Dad home, for the delivery charge of $75.00 (my Mother's regular doctor was on vacation).  2. I grew up at 8682 Smart which was an ethnic Polish neighborhood, three blocks from the Desoto plant, which was at McGraw & Wyoming. It was a five bedroom home, and in an all white Polish neighborhood. i graduated from St. Vincent High School in 1963, went into the military in May of 1964 came home in May of 1966, lived there at 8682 Smart until August of 1967 when i got married on August 5, 1967.  3. I was transferred to the A&P supermarket in September of 1966 and promoted to produce manager, to clean up that store, which was in terrible shape.It took me a couple of weeks, and the customers really enjoyed the job that I did for that store. It was clean, had fresh vegetables and fruit, and I increased sales 100%. I also enjoyed great relationship with the African-American neighborhood. they knew me by my first name, "Greg". 4. On July 23, 1967, I attended the 2:30 a.m. Mass at Holy Trinity (6th & Michigan) before going into work at 4:00 a.m. at the A&P Store at W.Grand Blvd. & Linwood. I had keys to the store, and always opened up at 4:00a.m., locked myself in, set up the store, and let the rest of the employees in at 8:00 a.m, store opened for business at 9:00 a.m, the Store Manager came in at noon to relieve me.  5. After the store closed at 6:00 pm., it was vandalized, windows were broken out, and the looting began. 15,000 businesses and homes were vandalized, looted, and set on fire. Governor George Romney had called in the National Guard to help the Detroit Police Dept., and the State Police patrol the streets.  6. The city of Detroit has never recovered from that fateful day in July. There are still 40,000 homes that have to demolished, which has been going downhill ever since. The population is only one-third of what it was 50 years ago, with an 80% African-American population, yet a white write-in candidate was elected Mayor, and who has been doing an outstanding job, but will never reach the population that it was in 1967. Original Format Email Submitter's Name Greg Smigielski Submission Date 07/21/2016 Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Detroit Workers, Governor George Romney, Looting Citation “Greg Smigielski,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/366. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml 
DetroitWorker;George Ramsey;1938;2015;George Ramsey, 1938,  2015 Title George Ramsey, October 10th, 2015 Description In this interview, George discusses his early memories of the 1943 Detroit riots and his memories of growing up along Hastings Street and then Twelfth Street. After discussing his experiences during the unrest, George chronicles his experiences as a tour manager for Motown and his subsequent work in television. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 11/16/2015 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/MP3 Language en-US Type Sound Video Narrator/Interviewee's Name George Ramsey Brief Biography George Ramsey was born in Detroit on April 8, 1938. George grew up along Hastings Street and then off of Twelfth Street. After serving in the Air Force, George returned home to work as a mail man. After the tumultuous week in July 1967, George left the USPS to work for Motown. After crisscrossing the country with Motown, George returned to Detroit and began working in television. Interviewer's Name Tobi Voigt Interview Place Detroit Historical Museum, Detroit, MI Date 10/10/2015 Interview Length 33:21 Transcriptionist Zach Shapiro Transcription Date 11/05/2015 Transcription TV:  Okay here we go. Hello my name is Tobi Voigt. I’m the chief curator at the Detroit Historical Society.  Today is Saturday, October 10, 2015 and this is the oral history interview of George D. Ramsay Senior.  So welcome, and can we start by why don’t you tell us a little bit about where and when were you born and where did you grow up? GR:  Well I was born ironically about a mile from here on Warren Avenue between Hastings and Rivard Street and it’s now Chrysler, but anyway I was born in 1938, April 8, 1938.  I lived there for the first eighteen years of my life.  My first memories of growing up there ironically were the riot in 1943.  I remember that distinctly because I was about five years old and at that time Detroit had a lot of fruit trees in our back yard we had a lot of fruit trees, so I was playing in my backyard and I heard the noise around front and I ran around front and my mother was standing on the porch and I saw this crowd of black men on the other side of Warren Avenue and they were throwing bricks at cars that you know had white folks driving in them and so I stood there in shock and then my mother let me go and so she ran down to the side walk and a white guy had been hit and his car had been hit and he came out of his car bleeding  and my mother directed him to behind our house.  That was the juvenile detention home, still some of it is still there in existence, but she directed him to that to get away from the crowd and the crowd ran up to my mother and I distinctly remember this, they saying something to my mother but she said something back to them and they turned and left.  But I mean at five years old, it was embedded in my life so that was my first memory. TV:  What were you feeling during that?  When that was all going on? GR:   I was kind of fearful of it at that instance — and I don’t remember too much more I think right after that instance,  my mother might have made me go inside in the house, but I remember after the riot had subsided she and I took a walk along Hastings and because we had lived there for 10, 15 years so my mother was known along the strip there and my dad was working in the post office, which was you know a pretty good job, obviously, at that time, but he had died in 1940.  So like I said, we walked along Hasting Street and then I came on back, but anyway that was my first memories of growing up in the city of Detroit as a kid. TV: Wow. GR:  And like I said I was only less than a mile from the [Detroit Public] Library, the Art Institute so my friends now, this is what we did, we spent a lot of time in the Institute of Arts you know we would walk, we’d stand there and watch the mummies  of course a very big exhibit and the knights, they had the horse and they had the I guess that that’s still in existence at the museum, I haven’t been over there in years, but it was so fascinating to me as a kid growing up and I think that it impacted my life because culturally I think I’m tuned to that because of how I grew up in the Art Institute and the library. TV:  I’m going to put you alright we’re rolling. GR:  Do you want me to continue just talking. TV:  Absolutely. GR: Okay.  So growing up here, like I said,  me having been born and I lived in this community, so my friends and I and I have a dear friend now he’s deceased his name was Ron Milner, he was a local playwright, a black playwright, probably Detroit’s most popular playwright, such and such, but we grew up as kids went to high school and elementary school together and we often talked about how important this community was because he became a great writer and we used to talk how much time we spent in the library and in the Institute I mean the Institute of Arts I mean we used to call it – what did we used to call it?  Anyway, but Detroit at that time had almost two million people there so it was quite busy and we had a lot of activity going on in the neighborhood unlike like the situation might be now, but I was a paper boy and when I turned 12 I became a paper boy and I delivered papers along Hastings Street you know which again the popular street in Detroit for the black community. And I had two blocks on Hastings Street with my paper route and I often talked about the businesses that are black businesses and how important it was to us culturally and it wasn’t a lot of robbery we had a lot of ways to make money we called ourselves hustlers not in the negative sense because we were always hustling things.  That was during the time when we could sell newspapers to the fish markets, this what they wrapped the fish in, we could sell coat hangers to the cleaners, you didn’t find a lot of glass and materials in the street you know iron, steel, things were still being recycled shortly after the war ended so we had a lot of ways to make moneys, and growing up as a kid, shoe shined, we had a little portable shoe shinning stand, we’d walk up and down Woodward Avenue primarily or one of your major thoroughfares trying to shine shoes, but it was just a lot of activity that was all positive growing up because it stemmed from I think the cultural  awareness that we had as people growing up then it was a lot of dancing a lot of singing a lot of festivities.  Every week there was a reason to celebrate for some reason so Detroit was a very, very stimulating city during those years and for myself like I said I just loved being – having said that I was born in Detroit when I ended up in the military. We often talked about how important Detroit was during the war years this was the Arsenal of Democracy and Defense, so I personally took a lot of pride in the fact that I came out of Detroit especially like I said when I went to the military because prior to that during the school years we celebrated after the war, after the Second World War.  On our bikes we had flags, people had decorated their cars with flags as a matter of fact there was a lot of businesses selling flags.  You know you would drive down the street and there was a person that had a stand on the street and they were selling flags.  It was a very, very enriching time in the history of Detroit, so I’m happy that I [was] able to experience that like I said I’m 77 now. I see Detroit, the growth, I see the newness of it I enjoy it, I relish it, and I welcome the change that’s happening.  Some people seem to say that it’s replacing the old, and that’s how life is you know.  The new replaces the old, the young takes the place of the seniors and this is what’s –  our generation is come and gone and Detroit will be a city that is gonna be driven by technology it’s not going to be a city that was driven by just muscles and labor as it was when I was a kid again during my formative years up until the seventies and eighties you could still get jobs in Detroit  there was a lot of industry, but now the technology is taking over so that’s what Detroit is of the future it’s a town with technical design and people that can understand the importance of education.  So again I guess we’re talking about how Detroit was and like I said I experienced the one riot in ‘43, but when I came out of the service in 1960, I started working at the post office. TV: Let me ask one quick question going back because you had mentioned you were born around Warren and Hasting Street, which we all know now is the Chrysler Freeway, so how did that, was your family still living there when that came in? How did that impact your family? GR: Oh no, well I went in the service in 1956 and they had just started demolition  starting the whole process of demolishing that community, so my mother and them, they moved over to the west side near Henry Ford Hospital in 1956, so that’s when the Chrysler freeways was built during that time, but when they moved over on Kipling Street about two blocks from Henry Ford Hospital off West Grand Boulevard and Twelfth, so when I came back in 1967 we would call it a riot, but really it was a rebellion , because in ‘43 it was a race riot, but in ‘67 it wasn’t a racial riot. It became racial  in the sense that the black community was attacked by the police and you had National Guard men came in and they did some things that was uncharacteristic you know for law and order people. But anyways the riot in ’67 I remember that, and the irony of that was I was on my porch in ’67 with my mother when it first happened, because it happened – it began on Twelfth street  which I was only living two blocks from Twelfth street and it was a neighborhood  a grocery store that one of the Chaldeans owned it at that time, it was on the corner of Poe and Pallister and that was one of the first stores that was hit  that Sunday morning , because that’s where, you know they started doing some milling around that Saturday night, from my understanding was that Sunday was when it really broke and like I said the grocery store around the corner from us was one of the first ones that the alarms went off, and then it was a party store on Delaware and Woodrow Wilson — which again is only a couple blocks from where we were standing, that alarm went and we noticed it was ringing and the police were not responding to it so myself I went up on Twelfth street and I was sitting in front of  St. Agnes church which still sits there on the boulevard – I mean on, where it’s Rosa Parks now but it was Twelfth and Pallister and I was sitting there that Sunday morning and I was watching the crowd, they were milling, they was coming down, this was – I noticed black and white guys carrying – distinctly saw them carrying couches down the street because it was – you know this community was integrated, you still had whites and blacks that were living in that community all around that Twellfth Street. So it was not racial in the sense that blacks and whites were attacking one another, they just took over the town, you know, I think it was one of the situations where most the police department was off enjoying the summer and it just happened at that time when they could not respond and then it became racial that Monday, I remember distinctly because like I said I was a mail man. I delivered mail out of a north end post office which still stands on Milwaukee and Woodward and my route was down on Leicester, Kenilworth, and Owen.  I delivered from Woodward to Oakland, but my friend, another friend of mine, his route was on Virginia Park and that was where they had the infamous Algiers Motel. This is where the police officers killed these three black men in the motel there, and that Monday — I think they shot these boys that Sunday they said they found them in a room with some white girls from Toledo, Ohio. I think it was, but anyways the police officers August, Prieve [Paille], and Sincy [Senak] I believe that was their names.  I remember Officer August distinctly because on my route there was a school down on Leicester. I think that was that school, Algiers school and the National Guard had their equipment down on the school grounds and these police officers was there protecting them from that standpoint, but August —these guys were police officers— and I remember that Monday when I saw him, no it was a Tuesday because we didn’t deliver mail that Monday after the riots, that Tuesday, when I went in to deliver mail I saw that, and I remembered his face because they publicized him all doing the town investigative of the killing, but it was horrendous the way they did these guys because one of the boys’ body was on my route at the funeral home the Wilson Funeral Home on Owens and Brush, I think it was. But, the undertaker there he told me that the boy’s body – I mean he said they shot down – he said the boy was on his knees in the begging position because they shot through his arms through his groin to his, you know to his private areas, but anyways it was just terrible, that was the worst thing about the riot from my standpoint. But another thing that I had on my route was a fellow named J. Edward Bailey. I think that was his name he was a black photographer and he worked for Detroit News and a friend of mine who was a coworker that Monday after the riot we didn’t have to work that day. We came to the post office and they told us to go home, etcetera, so this friend of mine he had a car, I think he had a Ford, he had a convertible and so we got in his car and we decided to ride down Twelfth Street  you know because everything had subsided you know they came in and the police — and so we were riding down the Twelfth Street and I saw Mr. Bailey walking and I knew that he was a photographer so I called him and he came and got in in this friend of mine’s car and what we did, he had the convertible and so Bailey was able to sit in the back seat and take shots until some guy saw us and he told us to stop because he said it would be kind of dangerous. But,  anyway so Bailey got out the car and we left and we went and drove around the city just looking at some of the scenes, but anyway Mr. Bailey ended up winning some award he had some of the only or some of the best pictures that was taken of the riot and I quit shortly thereafter the riot I resigned from the post office , but prior to me resigning when he found out he won that award I jokingly told him that he needed to give me some of that money that he made. But so those were some of the major memories I have of the riot again that Algiers Motel Incident and having one of the boys’ bodies was on my route. I didn’t view it, you know, but again it was not a race riot it was a rebellion it definitely was a rebellion and a lot of the instances that happened from my understanding is that a lot of the store owners set those building on fire because it was an insurance factor. As an example, I had on my route it was a pawn shop that was on the corner of Owens and Oakland and as a mail man often times I needed some money, so I had a little diamond ring and I would pawn my little ring and I’d get it out, and just then I had pawned my ring prior to the riot and when I went back there to get it the pawn guy he said that I lost my ring in the riot so I mean, that happened and I couldn’t tell him – because he had insurance that would cover the losses and a lot of the things that people supposedly lost they kept themselves in a lot of the pawn shops. TV: Really? GR: Oh yeah. TV: But his store was still standing he just said he was looted. GR:  Right, right, he said that when he came in and it might have happened, I don’t know but I’m saying I know I lost my little diamond ring, I didn’t do any looting, I got looted you know?  But I mean I knew people that supposedly got a lot of loot out of it and some guys, a good friend of mine said that they were driving down Grand River around Oakland, I think Oakland Boulevard, and when they got at that corner some people broke into – it was a jewelry store, Meyers I think it was and so they said they parked their car went in there and looted also, so it was a lot of that happened like that. There was a lot of looting done in the early parts of the day but I know that they talked about snipers. I know the only snipers, actual snipers that they took out of there were some guys – some white guys that was on the corner they had a house it was over on Euclid and La Salle Boulevard. It was a nice, stately home. They had tanks in front of this house because these guys had some weapons and they didn’t have shotguns, I  mean these guys had rifles at that time and it was unusual, but it was not a lot of black snipers. I mean you hear people talk about the snipers, but I don’t think that they  could convince me that there was black snipers  it might have been someone up there trying – but I know that that was one group of – and these were some white guys that were radicalized you know because in Detroit at that time you had a group called the White Panthers who were similar to the Black Panthers, they would challenge the community— I’m not saying that these folks were but what I’m saying is there were a lot of radical white guys and John Sinclair, these guys came out of the same struggles that blacks came out and they had a lot of philosophies.  Yeah but that was one incident, you know what I mean, one thing about the riots is characterized by the sniping and it was not a race riot. TV:  And it’s interesting – I’d like to know a little bit more about – you mentioned it was not a race riot but you mentioned a couple times that it was a rebellion, could you talk a little bit about what made it a rebellion?   GR:  Yeah it was true because, again, they had a group of police officers called STRESS, Stop The Robberies Enjoy Safe Streets, and the concept was good you know, they need something [unintelligible] but anyway and these guys, their primary job – I think one of the police officers’ name was Peterson, I think he ended up shooting three, four, five people. But, what they would do is the police would take advantage of us in many ways and STRESS was one way they would try to set you up – if you stopped to ask them for a cigarette they would – you could be accused  of attempted robbery and you could get shot dead, I mean these things happened and it wasn’t like every day some people you know but it certainly happened and police you know were doing the same kind of thing then that you here about police officers doing now with the exception of they’re killing more blacks now shooting black but you know they took advantage of us if you were a black male and we didn’t have a lot of black police officers at that time. And because at one time, we had an incident over on the east side in Detroit the police station over on Jefferson, this is after the riot when some black police officers challenged some white police officers with how they were brutalized the prisoners and so that was one of the things that came out of the riots because we ended up getting more blacks on the police force because I know –  I was working at the post office three guys that I worked with the resigned from the post office and got on the police force. TV: Really? GR: Oh yeah, because it was very important, our generation would go around and police ourselves, you know, and right now it seem like you don’t have that same kind of attitude about your police department. You have some complaints about your police departments and you should want to police your own community and that was what was  and because again  because we came out of the revolutionary mindset supposedly and that was one of the things  the self-governance: who you wanted to police you and so that was one of the facts that led to the riots because folks were working, there were jobs, there plenty of them you know you could get a job.  The brutality they inflicted on us and the lack of movement  and we was restricted in a lot of ways to certain areas only but you know it never was a race riot it was it definitely was a rebellion because folks were upset, very much so.  TV: So you were so you had mentioned that you went in the service in ‘56 and you got out in ‘60 then you came back and started working for the post office? GR: Exactly. TV:  Were you living with your mother? GR: Yeah right because I didn’t get married until I was 60 years old you know. I had kids out of wedlock. So I stayed with mom because we had a two family flat and it had an attic apartment so, which it was great for me because I was single and I didn’t want the expense of the house, and when I stopped working at the post office and I started working at Motown you know, I left the post office in ‘67. I went  to school when I went to Fleetwood and got injured then I started at working at Wayne County Community College and when I graduated I moved out to California I worked at Motown you know for— TV: Motown when it was in California? GR:  No I started here yeah. TV: Oh what did you do for Motown? GR:  I was just the road manager for some recording artists.  TV: You were just the road manager? GR: Yeah right, but which was great because like I said having grown up having been around so much music culture that was what I gravitated towards. You know I was always singing and I played in my high school band and sung in its choir and I came out of Northeastern High School that I refer to as Motown University simply because so many artists from Motown went to Northeastern. Barry Gordy had attended, I don’t think he graduated, but so yeah and it was always — and like I said this fellow Ron Milner who I spoke of earlier today we talked of  that even he was a writer and he wrote for Motown but Barry Gordy – Motown started right around the corner from my house on St. Antoine, it ended up moving to the Boulevard, but Barry Gordy’s fist business was right in this neighborhood here but this is where it all started, it’s all about the culture Motown came out of the cultural community of Detroit. See it didn’t just spring out of nowhere it was a reason in my opinion that Motown because there was a theater called, the Warfield Theater.  It was comparable to the Apollo. Barry Gordy, I thought, I think Barry played piano there on one of the empty shows and Hastings Street and his father his family were business folk, so it was a lot of reasons that I think Motown developed in this community because again it was part of the — because right now they call it the cultural center back then it was just the neighborhood but yeah. TV: So you started with Motown after ‘67? GR: Yeah right I started with because a fellow a friend of mine at the post office his name was Freddie Gorman and Freddie was a mailman he and I was in a high school band together and he was one of the writers on the song “Please Mr. Postman”.  He wrote that while we were carrying mail. TV: Really? GR:  And so he started singing in the group The Originals and there was some songs that were  moderate successes and so he asked me to come work with them after I quit the post office and I said well ok and I thought about it and I went there with the guys and I loved it and I fell in love with it because it kept me close to the music and I enjoyed that role that I played  and then I did that for like two or three years with them. Then my son was born and I went back that’s when I went back to school was when my son was born and I stayed there for a couple years and when they moved out to California they asked me to come move out there with them and I went out there with them and I started working with Lamont Dozier , Holland- Dozier-Holland fame, you know. I worked with Lamont and worked as his road manger so it was just great, but it all started from that day on the cultural center, where we are now. TV: That’s amazing.  Any really good road stories of being on the road with them? GR:  Oh yeah, some things.  One story I like to tell, first time we went to New York with these guys, we were playing at a— No, this was in Newark, New Jersey. And we were playing with this guy, he had a bar and my job as the road manager, normally I just  sit in the dressing room, but this guy had an office  he didn’t have a dressing room and so the guys had to change clothes there and one door in one door out. And so they went out there and when they were getting ready to perform and they had a shake dancer on the show— you know a female shake dancer— and so when she finished that you know the guys went out there and they did there show. And so we’re sitting there and I’m sitting there and she walked and disrobed and started drying her clothes with a towel! Well I had never been around nothing like this before, so I found champagne bottle and so I picked up the champagne bottle and poured her a shot  and threw it down to drink, but it was champagne cologne, so they started calling me “Champagne  Ram” after that.  You know?  But, I mean there are a lot of different things some things that I won’t, I can’t talk about, but yeah it was a lot of fun I really, really enjoyed it and like I said I lived out there it was Lamont , Holland-Dozier-Holland fame and he exposed me to a lot the activity that I normally wouldn’t have seen got a chance to go to Hugh Hefner’s house. Aretha Franklin cooked a dinner for us, met Boz Scaggs, Henry Mancini  it’s just so many folks that I was able to say I was in their company. Have Henry Mancini say, “It was nice meeting you, George.” [laughs] “Come on Hank.” So yeah, have a lot of good memories of my life at this stage and I’m writing about these things you know that I’m sharing with you. So that’s why I’m so enthused about what you’re doing here I think that it’s so great for you to encourage folks to talk about the riot and other aspects about their lives and such you know. TV:  Okay, so you were in California, so how did you get back? I mean you’re here. GR: Well, I got, you know, like I said my youngest son, you know I had two boys, but my youngest son — I had him out in California with me when he was five. I thought that his mom was going to let him stay with me, but she wouldn’t she wanted me to bring him back and I brought him back and I really didn’t want to, because I enjoyed being a father. My dad died when I was two, you know. So I really missed that aspect. So, I was out there, I stayed out there for him until he turned seven, no, six or seven. So I just had to come on back. I came on back to be with my son. And then you know I’m happy that I did, but I you know, I was disappointed in the guys because I didn’t move out to California just, you know just – I mean you enjoy the sights, back then during the seventies it was a much different community, a much different world even, but I always wanted to do something that was a little more satisfying to me.  Once they stopped traveling, they didn’t want to travel, they didn’t want to sing, so I said let me come back to Detroit.  A friend of mine had a television show and I started working with him and I started working with some folks developing television WGPR television. Yeah, it was just getting started then, so I had an opportunity I had just gotten a very fast a broadcast license. I had a license, so it kind of fit right in there and then with the entertainment background I had I always wanted to do something with television. And when I was in California, I was in the minority writers’ workshop, when I was in California, Warner Brothers sponsored it and Lamont Dozier he ended up marrying a woman named Barbara and she had been a secretary at Warner Brothers and one of her jobs was reviewing the scripts. And so she and I she knew that I had been writing for a little bit, so she convinced me for us to sit down and do a movie to try and write a movie. So we did that and we got registered with the Writers Guild, but we never did anything with that.  I enjoyed that you know I enjoyed that writing and I enjoyed things of that nature you know I enjoyed what you’re doing and enjoyed, so I just had a great life. TV:  How long were you at WGPR? GR:  Well, I wasn’t with them I worked with another fellow that I worked with Jim Ingram. He worked with a television show that aired on WGPR years ago which was great because we interviewed Rosa Parks, we interviewed a lot of— because Jim was a very articulate guy very community oriented. He had been deputy chief of police. He was one of Coleman Young’s earlier supporters, so I mean I was on his coat tail, so we had a great show, I mean a great television show. And then Jim died unexpectedly in 1994, but yeah, so I came back to get involved in what was happening here in Detroit.  Like I said love it that’s why I love what you’re doing and what’s happening here with the city of Detroit you know the future looks good. TV:  Good. Anything else you want to share any thoughts about today, lessons learned if any from 1967?  GR: Well, again the thing that I hoped would come out of that even with these turbulent times that we’re going through now that still you know Detroit is still a great city you know America is still a great place to be, you know. And when I joined the military, in the interview I was doing through the Library of Congress, I told them I didn’t join the Air Force which I did for four years, I didn’t join it because I was black I joined it because I was an American and that’s how I view myself and that’s how I view everybody that’s a part of Detroit or anywhere else is being American.  I’m just pulling for America. TV: That’s great.  Well I don’t have any more questions for you. GR: Okay, yeah I appreciate it. ** People Dozier, Lamont Sinclair, John Bailey, Jay Edward Ingram, Jim Parks, Rosa Young, Coleman Scaggs, Boz Mancini, Henry Franklin, Aretha Hefner, Hugh Files IMG_4900.JPG Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Algiers Motel, Business Owners, Detroit Workers, Hastings Street, Jay Edward Bailey, Jim Ingram, John Sinclair, Lamont Dozier, Motown, Northeastern High School, Post Office, STRESS, United States Air Force, WGPR, White Panther Party Citation “George Ramsey, October 10th, 2015,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/104. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Frank DiMaria;1942;2016;Frank DiMaria, 1942, 2016 Title Frank DiMaria, August 11, 2016 Description In this interview, DiMaria discusses his childhood growing up on the east side of Detroit and his memories from the week of July 23, 1967. His brother was a musician who played at a bar on July 22 and later in the week the two drove downtown to retrieve his keyboard equipment from the bar on Grand River Avenue. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 12/02/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video  Narrator/Interviewee's Name Frank DiMaria Brief Biography Frank DiMaria was born in Detroit, Michigan in 1942 and grew up on the east side of the city. He and his father owned a business together in the city and eventually relocated to Grosse Pointe Woods. He and his wife live in Sterling Heights and he enjoys coming into the city for events. Interviewer's Name Hannah Sabal Interview Place Clinton Township, MI Date 12/02/2016 Interview Length 00:26:03 Transcriptionist Julia Westblade Transcription Date 12/02/2016 Transcription HS: Hello, this is Hannah Sabal. I am in Clinton Township, MI. The date is August 11, 2016 and I am here for the Detroit Historical Society’s Detroit 67 Oral History Project with Mr. Frank DiMaria. Thank you for sitting down with me today.  FD: Well, thank you for asking me. I appreciate that.  HS: Can you start by telling me where and when you were born?  FD: I was born in 1942 in Detroit, MI. At the time there was a Women’s Hospital downtown. I was born here. Lived here til ‘74.  HS: So you grew up in Detroit?  FD: I grew up in Detroit.  HS: What part of Detroit?  FD: Well, my parents had a place on Lake Point near Outer Drive for a little while then they bought a new home on Kelly and Redmond area somewhere in that northeast suburb of Detroit.  HS: Okay, so east side.  FD: East side, oh yeah. Always an east sider.             HS: What did your parents do for a living?  FD: Well, my mother had various jobs. She always worked  she was one of the first ones I knew that worked in the neighborhood and she various jobs. McKessons & Robbins which was a drug store at the time. My dad worked for a furniture company. He was a salesman manager when there were furniture stores in Detroit. Then later on when I got older, we decided to go into business together. We started out on Kelly Road. Our first building was on Kelly Road. Then now we moved to Morang and eventually Grosse Pointe Woods. We worked together for 35 years, I think.  HS: Awesome. What was your neighborhood like growing up?  FD: Very pleasant. It was, I guess, what you would call a typical neighborhood. It was quiet and it was all families that work. Firemen, policemen, all working families. They were small bungalows, typical of Detroit east side subdivision, and dirt roads, when I was growing up, believe it or not. They used to oil them and it was messy but they eventually got it all paved all around us as progress went. We got more and more shops around and supermarkets. It was very pleasant because as a child, I remember that we were pretty free to go anywhere we wanted. In fact, I often talk about it with my peers that if we wanted to go downtown or a local park or anywhere we were free to do it. There were no concerns with my parents that we went anywhere.  HS: Was your neighborhood integrated?  FD: No.  HS: I’m going by your last name, is your family Italian?  FD: Yes.  HS: So was it a lot of Italians or a mixture?  FS: This neighborhood was a mixture, I would say. It was a pretty good mixture. There was – I don’t know what percentage – I would say it’s safe to say that it was a mixture. Some of my friends were Polish decent. We had my friend, Gary Barnes, and that. We had a pretty diversified, except, like you mentioned, there was no integration. As a matter of fact, that’s unfortunate because I do remember that, too, when the first family moved in.  HS: When did that first family move in?  FD: You know, I can’t tell you the year but it was before the riots.  HS: Was it in the 1960s?  FD: Yes, it had to be in the 1960s. The exact time, it was on Moross Road. There were duplexes on Moross Road and they bought one half of the duplex and this lead to, unfortunately, confrontation. They were the first ones in our area and it lead to strong confrontation and eventually, as I recall it, they did move out. They did move out. They did not stay.  HS: So your neighborhood did not react very well to a black family moving in?  FD: No, absolutely not. It wasn’t until – I went to Denby High School and I graduated in '60 and maybe ‘65, ‘64 or ‘65, students were coming up to Denby. Then things were starting to get more integrated, but even that was a situation and even though I wasn’t going to school anymore, my brother was going to school at the time and it was a problem. But it eventually it didn’t lead to anything, luckily. But that was what we felt changed and I still lived in the neighborhood myself after I got married and we lived there until ‘74.  HS: So in the 1960s, did you sense any tension in the city or did you anticipate any violence?  FD: No.  HS: Not at all?  FD: The east side, again, was quiet. It seemed like the west side was a different situation. But we were sort of a secure little area of Detroit. At least, that’s the way I felt and actually, I didn’t contemplate moving. Only after the circumstances that, like a lot of Detroiters  unfortunately, decided to move for the sake of the children and that. So, right or wrong, that was the case after. But before we were just a neighborhood of kids and just very, very typical, good American east side.  HS: We’re going to touch on you moving out in a little bit but for now, how did you first hear about the events in July in ‘67?  FD: My brother was a musician–my younger brother was a musician, and at the time, let’s see, you asked how did I find – it was a mixture of – it was the news of course. Probably I would have to say the news was the first thing. The second one was my brother because he played at a bar on Grand River, The Barbary Coast, and he played each weekend and we went to see him and, as a loyal brother, my wife and I used to go and see him. He was nervous because he played that Saturday and he left at the normal bar closing time at 2:00 or something like that not knowing what was going on down the block a ways. And the next morning, of course, when we all heard the news, he called and he was all upset and that because he was a keyboard player and at the time there wasn’t these electronic keyboards that were small and mobile. He had this fabulous organ that was a Hammond B3 that weighed 300 pounds if it weighed an ounce and two big Leslie speakers that weigh a couple hundred pounds each. They were huge. And that’s the way the top performers at the time were using keyboard people and he had this outfit with the amplifiers and everything else and he was really concerned because of course on TV and I think Mayor Cavanagh that Sunday declared curfew that Sunday, if I remember right. And he was concerned because he had so much invested in this on Grand River in a bar that wasn’t – it was a gay bar and it wasn’t known for the best spot anyway so he was a little nervous and we were watching the news but there was nothing we could do about it at that time on Sunday. But that’s when I first heard about it. I didn’t know nothing Saturday night. It wasn’t until Sunday that we heard that there was these problems. But before that moment, everything was, as far as I was concerned, everything was fine. There was no change in anything. Like I said, we were down there almost every weekend listening to him play in and out of the city. In fact, we did a lot downtown. We were Detroiters and we spent a lot of time down there, you know. We were members at the DIA [Detroit Institute of Arts] and all that kind of good stuff. So we were good citizens downtown.  HS: Did you witness or experience anything during that week from the riots?  FD: Yes. Nothing – I don’t know how you’re asking – nothing threatening.  HS: We just – whatever stories you have, just go for it.  FD: That’s the one I think Megan – we were at a meeting and I just happened to – the thing was, Monday was bad. It was another bad day and between the National Guard coming in and finally President Johnson sending in the federal troops, it was very bad but my brother had continued concern about his stuff being down at the bar and of course Sunday they didn’t play. There was a curfew and the leader of the group, it was a pick-up group. They played at bars all around. Said that was it, he wasn’t going to go back again. And all he did was play the trumpet so he’d have no problems. But all the equipment was down at Grand River so my brother called. It got a little quiet. By Wednesday it was pretty quiet and it was like a little break. So my brother called and I had a truck because we were in business and I had a big truck. He said, "Can I borrow the truck?" and I used to help him on a lot of his jobs. I was like the roadie for him. I says, “You’re kidding, we’re going to go down there?” [laughs] I couldn’t believe it. So I says, “How are we going to get down there?” because I figure there’s no way you’re going to get downtown. But anyway, we go over to the business, pick up the truck, and I’m going to say we’re at Kelly and Morang. East side. Far east side. We’re leaving with the truck and all of a sudden this tank comes by. Oh, this is a good start. We’re on a roll now. And a couple of jeeps with guys with rifles and machine guns. I says, “You sure you want to go downtown?” He says, “I gotta get that stuff!” [laughs] So we went down there. I thought we would be stopped every two minutes and I had something I’d imagine going through a security point. Maybe movies  or whatever the case may be. But it wasn’t that way. But it was empty. I mean there was nobody. Doing nothing. And that was very unusual for downtown at that time because downtown was a very vibrant area downtown. There was still a lot of stores and everything else. And it was empty. But needless to say, we got on Grand River. Made a left and got onto Grand River and the bar was on the right. Here in front of the bar as we pull up in the owner of the bar. He’s sitting on the chair leaning back like this with a shotgun.  HS: Oh, geeze.  FD: With a shotgun in his lap and he saw us and so we stopped and he said, he’s probably was talking to my brother because he knew my brother more than he did me. He says, “You didn’t have to worry about anything, Doug. I’m protecting my business and nobody is going to get in my business.” And even though it was a gay bar, the owner was a rough son of a gun. He was a rough guy, but he was staunchly there and he was upset about the fact that we were going to pick up and the group didn’t have any intentions of coming back. So we lug all of that stuff out of the bar, got it in without any – I didn’t hear no shooting, no fires were in that general area. In fact, that was the problem. We saw on TV that the city was burning but when we really got out there, it was down at Twelfth Street and that. We weren’t by there.  HS: Remind me once again where this bar was, cross street wise?  FD: Oh my god, cross street —  HS: Closest approximation that you can.  FD: I would say you’re within the sight of Penobscot Building. Maybe the Penobscot Building was a half a mile away?  HS: So, like, really, really downtown?  FD: Yeah, and going north, Grand River I believe goes northwest? I think the Lodge [Freeway] was there. Yeah, the Lodge was there. We took the Lodge. I think the Lodge was there at that time. We took the Lodge and we made a left onto Grand River and we were there. So in that general area. Even at that time I don’t think I could tell you what the cross streets were let alone 50 years later.  HS: Oh that’s fine.  FD: It was the downtown area. It was right downtown. And the National Guard was given the assignment of protecting the west side and the federal government was protecting the east side, our side. And what made us nervous, the problems were on the west side with the National Guard. But, like I said, thankfully, nobody in the family could believe it. I said nobody stopped us I once. In fact, we went by the troops and things like that it was strange because, again, downtown was empty and that was unusual at that time to see nobody on the road. But we went in and got his equipment and got it out safely and we were safe. We were never in any situation that I would say was any problem.  Later on I had another, it wasn’t an incident. After the fires and after the riot was over, there was an import business down on Michigan Avenue and I was in interior design and this building was burned but one part wasn’t and he imported raw furniture frames. Very carved, very ornate furniture frames. We bought out the stock and he was going up so we bought up the stock and again I found myself going on Michigan Avenue but we got all that out and after that, that was no problem either. We got that out without any situation. The only other thing I have any connection with is my cousin was in the National Guard and he served in downtown Detroit and that’s a whole different story for him because that was an experience, he said. It was a terrible experience for him. Very bad. But he’d have to talk to that.  HS: So looking back on the events, would you classify them as a riot or would you call it a rebellion or an uprising?  FD: I would only go, being a young man at the time, I would have to go with what they were calling it: a riot. They were comparing it to the ‘43 Riots and some compared it that it was worse and some said, no the ‘43 at Belle Isle was worse than that and I thought about. I was alive for both of them even though a lot people [unintelligible]. I was eleven months old when the ‘43 one [laughs]. So I got two of them but I would say, my opinion it was a riot. I don’t think it was insurrection. I don’t think so. It’s just like, unfortunately, some circumstances today, I always contribute it to unfortunately when three young men were killed at the motel –  HS: Algiers  FD: I think that really, things just escalated. Then, yes, was there tension? From then on, up to that point there was none but, unfortunately, I hate to say, but from them on there has been.  HS: Have you seen the city change at all since then?  FD: Oh yeah. Why sure, after the riots the downtown area started deteriorating fast and the retail businesses like Crawley’s, where I got my first job, Hudson’s, Lane Bryant which I worked for for a while, all closed. And the retail just fell apart. If it wasn’t for the cultural area I don’t think anybody would be down there. That’s as far as they went, probably, I don’t know. There was nothing. My memory, because the Ren Cen [Renaissance Center] was built. That was supposed to bring us back in the Seventies?  HS: I believe so.  FD: I don’t know either.  HS: It was definitely after the riots.  FD: Oh yeah, no, it was after the riots. They weren’t down there. Because that was supposed to be the catalyst to get downtown going again but it didn’t. It failed. But yes, we went through that whole process and of course there was back and forth for everybody about why or when or whatever the case may be about how downtown deteriorated. And of course they blamed the shopping malls, too, that opened up in the suburbs so now the people in the suburbs didn’t have to go downtown to get anything unusual for a gift or anything. When the necessity of going downtown became, outside of the Fisher Theater there was really no reason to go down there.  HS: Are you optimistic about the future of Detroit?  FD: The last few years, yes. I think under Mayor Duggan things have progressed tremendously. I think the last three years have outdone the last three decades because things are looking real good. In fact my grandson, one goes to U of D [University of Detroit] and the other goes to Wayne State University and they live downtown. Downtown is their playground so that’s a very good sign because that’s exactly what you need is young people. The neighborhoods, I don’t know. Every city, even where I live now in Sterling Heights, we need young families moving in and that’s one of our problems. Our population is getting older. More and more retirees are staying there, which is wonderful. We need young families to be your base. A strong base.  HS: To repopulate the city.  FD: Exactly. I think the future is good. I think they’re trying to solve the neighborhood problems. Every day you hear about some organization trying to help the neighborhoods. I think it’s a tall project to do but I don’t know. I hope they can build, I don’t know what it would be. Some professionals are moving down there and I wouldn’t be surprised if after my grandsons graduate saying that they’re moving. But they would be moving into an apartment. They won’t be moving probably into a home. And who knows about family, you never know about that. I don’t know, there’s these new areas where families can get their education and everything. Typically family. That’s my only problem where they’ve still got a little ways to go but the last three years have been phenomenal but unfortunately for our age group, remembering, talking about ‘67, my peers still have a heck of a time trying to go downtown. And some I’m surprised say absolutely not. Yet, I’ve been down there for the jazz festival myself and I think it’s great, but I even have to drag my wife. She don’t want to go down there. It’s unfortunate because I think of it as nice and when we went down there last year for the jazz festival, we had a very good time. It was really nice and everything was clean and fine and I thought it was a nice place to be. I was really impressed. The buildings were clean. It looked like they cleaned up a few of the other older buildings. I was very impressed so I hope it continues. And I hope for my grandchildren that Detroit will be a place to maybe come back to and, if they have a family, raise a family there like I did. Because I was there until ‘74. I tried to stay. But it wasn’t the riots that sent me out of Detroit. That wasn’t the catalyst that sent me. There was another matter that sent me out of Detroit. A whole different problem that came up. And same with the business at that very time, too, that’s when we went into Grosse Pointe Woods and I felt bad about giving up on Detroit. And I give a lot of the business people that are trying to have businesses in Detroit a lot of credit because I couldn’t put up with it. I just couldn’t put up with it. It was just too much for me. Raising a family and that, I just couldn’t do it.  HS: Is there anything else you wanted to share today?  FD: No, I think that’s it as far as that subject is concerned. That was my couple of little incidents down there so that was the completion of that. And it’s funny how you read the history afterwards like any situation, it comes out the mistakes that were made, but everybody could figure that out ten or fifteen years later. I wish they would have figured it out then. It didn’t have to happen that way. It did not have to happen that way at all. It could have been a whole different story, but that’s true with every historical thing. We look back and say, we should have done that.  HS: Well, Frank, thank you so much for coming in today.  FD: Well thank you for having me. I hope I helped.  Original Format Audio Duration 26min 03sec Interviewer Hannah Sabal Interviewee Frank DiMaria Location Clinton Township, MI Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Curfew, Detroit Workers, Grand River Avenue, Michigan National Guard, Music Citation “Frank DiMaria, August 11, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/457. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Frank Boscarino;1929;2016;Frank Boscarino, 1929, 2016 Title Frank Boscarino, August 2nd, 2016 Description In this interview, Boscarino describes how he came to own his business in Detroit and his relationships with his (primarily black) customers. He tells of how his customers called him when the unrest started and assured him that they were protecting his building from looting—which they successfully did. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 08/05/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format audio/WAV Language en-US Type Oral History Video Narrator/Interviewee's Name Frank Boscarino Brief Biography Frank Boscarino was born in 1929 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and moved to Detroit with his parents at the age of one. After leaving the army in 1954, Frank purchased a general store on 18th Street in Detroit and ran that store for twenty-five years. Interviewer's Name Hannah Sabal Interview Place Clinton Township, MI Date 08/02/2016 Interview Length 00:23:04 Transcriptionist Hannah Sabal Transcription Date 08/05/2016 Transcription HS: Hello, this is Hannah Sabal. I am in Clinton Township, Michigan. The date is August 2nd, 2016 and I am here for the Detroit Historical Society’s Detroit 67 Oral History Project with Frank Boscarino. Thank you for sitting down with me today. FB: You’re welcome. HS: Frank, can you start by telling me where and when you were born? FB: I was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, September 21st, 1929. HS: Did you live in Philadelphia growing up? Pittsburgh, sorry. FB: No, I did not. I came here as a one-year-old boy, and my father and mother moved in various parts of Detroit. By the time I was 3 years old, they had moved to Moran and Alexandrine. Moran and Alexandrine is where I spent my life until I was 10 years old. HS: What was your neighborhood like? FB: It was an ethnic neighborhood. Lot of Polish and Italians, African Americans, some of them. Little community there. HS: So it was integrated? FB: It was integrated, yeah. It was very nice. Very good neighborhood. It was an old neighborhood, but it was nice. Everybody was clean. All Europeans and stuff like that. We had a good time, growing up. It was really nice. We didn’t have much money because we were all pretty poor in that area. There was no welfare, don’t forget, at that time. There was no aid. Like my dad, I believe my father made $15 a week, and he was working for the garbage company, DPW. He was lifting garbage, that’s what he was, because he was an immigrant. That’s what he did for a long, long time. HS: What did your mother do? FB: She was a housewife at home. She raised, I had four sisters, but when we lived on Moran, at that time, I only had two sisters, the first two were born, besides myself. HS: So are you the oldest? FB: I’m the oldest, yeah. The oldest of five children. HS: Just out of curiosity, do you remember anything about the race riots that occurred in ’43 in Detroit? FB: Yes, just very vaguely. I was 12 years old then, going on 13. I do remember there was a lot of bloodshed by Belle Isle, a lot of the race riots on Jefferson happened, on the Boulevard by Belle Isle, and on Mack Avenue, there was a lot of troubles. My aunt and uncle lived off of Mack Avenue, so we had a little difficult time going to see them. I can just remember it, but nothing affected us in our neighborhoods. There was very little that I remember from the ’43 riots. HS: Okay. We’re going to fast-forward to the 1960s. What were you doing in the ‘60s? FB: I had my business. I had purchased my business when I came out of the army. HS: What year was that? FB: I came out of the army in 1954. July of ’54. When I got out, I worked with my father in his store temporarily until I could find my business. I think around July or August I found this place on 18th Street. I kept going back and back. I put a deposit on it in September of 1954. I took purchase of it, I bought it and took over the business because they had a SDM license, which is a beer and wine license. At that time, you can’t take it over for ninety days. Even though we made our agreement in October—I think it was October that we made the agreement—I didn’t take over until January 3rd of 1955. January 3rd of 1955, I went on my way. I had my own business. HS: Was it a liquor store or like a general store? FB: No, no, it was just a general store. I didn’t have any liquor  I just had beer and wine. It wasn’t a SDD license, it was an SDM. Also, I got my start there. My customers were just beautiful customers. We had a good relationship in the neighborhood. It was a strange thing, every time my wife would have a baby, one of my customers would have a baby. We wound up with eight children, my wife and I. So this one lady would say, “Frank, your wife’s pregnant again? So am I!” I said, “Oh, my god! Here we go again!” Then another lady would come by, and she’d say the same thing. Before you know it, there are three or four women, they’re all pregnant and so is my wife, and we’d all have kids at the same time. It was crazy. HS: Your customers, were they primarily of European descent or black or a mixture? FB: In the beginning, there were some European descents, about 20%. And 80% were African American. As it went on, it got more and more African American. I had a very good business there, very good people. I was very happy there. HS: In the ‘60s, did you notice any tension in the city? FB: No. my customers, they didn’t like those hoodlums, you know, those people who would try to make trouble and Black Panthers and stuff like that. They didn’t like that. They were just honest, hard-working people. They worked in the factories, and they were just good Christians. They belonged to that Baptist church on the corner. They didn’t believe in all that stuff. They didn’t like that. They used to tell me, “You guys are crazy, they would do this stuff.” That’s all I can say. They were good people and I didn’t have any trouble with them. Except, sometimes you’d have a young teenager who was on either drugs, and his parents were beautiful, but all of a sudden he breaks into my store. They used to break in quite a bit. But we got along, and I fixed it all up. We did that. HS: How did you first hear about the events in July of 1967? FB: Well it was a Sunday. I used to open on Sundays from nine in the morning until two in the afternoon, ten in the morning until two. I was home, we were all home, relaxing, had the TV on, and all of a sudden, they said there’s a riot in the city. The city’s burning! I was shocked! I said, “Geez, it was all right when I left the store this morning! I left at two o’clock, I came home. We lived on Mott in East Detroit. I said, I can’t believe it. I wonder how my place is. I called all my customers and they said, “Frank, your building’s still there.” I said, “What’s going on?” They said, “It’s crazy. We’re having a lot of problems here. I’ll tell you what, Frank, if we hear anything, we’ll call you.” Next thing you know, phone starts ringing, couple hours later, and they were saying, “Frank, it don’t look good, but we’re protecting your building,” they told me. They said, “We’re protecting your building.” So far, everything as good. Then they call me the next day and say the same thing, “We’re protecting your building, we’ve got ‘soul brother’ written all over the building.” They had “Soul brothers written all over my building. It was a white frame building. I didn’t have a brick building. Even though they had that, they had chains, still people would try to come and put chains on it and try to destroy it. My customers would run out there, some of them had guns and they were armed and they said, “You can’t touch this store, this is a soul brother store.” They called me a soul brother, and that’s what happened. That’s how we left it. I got it written down if you want to read it. HS: I know that later on in the week sometimes they still attacked the stores that had “soul brother” on it, they disregarded it. Did that happen to your store? FB: Yes, they came to my store to try to do it, and my customers went out there with their guns and stopped them. HS: So nobody successfully robbed your store? FB: Nobody damaged my store, not one bit. HS: After the riots, did your business change at all? Like, your level of business? FB: Well, it got busier, because you know why? There were a lot of stores that were demolished. I was the only one standing in quite a ways. They needed food, so they came to me. Unless those who could drive went to supermarkets a little further, you know. But they did good. My business was really, really, very good. I did quite a bit of business. I used to open at nine on the morning until seven at night. That was my hours. Then after the riot, I opened at ten in the morning and I closed at six at night because I wanted to get out quick in case they started any trouble. I always tried to work during the day. My customers, they adjusted to my hours. I told them, “I’m going to make these hours, and that’s what I’m going to do.” They went along with it, and that’s the way it was. I did just as much business in the shorter hours as I did in the longer hours. I was busy, it was a very nice store, and I was happy. I raised all my family with that store, too. HS: After the riots, did you ever feel uncomfortable going to or from work? FB: Never. Never. Never felt uncomfortable. I was always anxious to get to work, because the people loved me  we had a good relationship. We had a very good relationship. “Hey, frank! How you doing?” “Hey, how you doing, Joe?” “How’s your wife, she any better?” “Yeah, she’s all right.” We used to talk like that all day long. Then my neighbor next door, Mr. Goldman, he had a garage in the back, and he used to repair cars. He repaired my cars all the time. He was quite a guy. Everybody would come around to see him. He’s say, “Hey, don’t mess with Frank.” Everything was all right. I always had very good relationships. HS: Did you see the city change at all after the riots? FB: Well, the only thing I’ve seen is there was less houses. They kept tearing all the houses down, there was nothing. The houses kept disappearing. I’ll give you an example: When I bought that business in 1955, when I took over in January of ’55, there were 72 houses in the two-block area from Buchanan to Seldon, which is two blocks. There were 72 houses. When I left my business in 1979, when I sold it—and I sold it to some Chaldean people, they bought it and they put bars up, they put protective glass around—and when I left that building, my business then when I sold it out, there were only nine houses left on that street. HS: And where were you living at this point? FB: I was living in East Detroit, near 8 Mile and Beaconsfield. HS: Why did you sell your business in ’79? FB: I wanted to retire. I was 25 years in the business and I didn’t like it that all the houses were disappearing. I was used to houses. Now all of a sudden, all the houses are gone, but the Chaldean, he saw that I was still doing good business, he bought my place and he did pretty good. They stayed there for three, four, five years, something like that. The first Chaldean that took it over, the first week he was there, one of my black young customers took a bottle of wine and busted it over his head. Poor guy, I felt sorry for him. So he sold it right away to his cousin. His cousin stayed there a long time. He used to rent from me, because that was my property. He rented from me. All I can say is that all I’ve got is good memories over there. I don’t have any bad memories. HS: How long did you continue to live in Detroit? FB: My wife and I lived in Detroit until—when did we move out of Detroit? From Montclair and Mack, from the time I got out of the army in 1954 until 1957. About three years, three years I lived in Detroit. Then I moved to East Detroit, the 8 Mile and Kelly. HS: So that’s not technically within Detroit’s borders? FB: No. HS: Do you still visit the city at all or did you continue to visit the city? FB: I haven’t been down to the city since I sold my other business in the Eastern Market, and that was in 2005. I haven’t been down there since. I’m a little handicapped too, I’m in a wheelchair, so I don’t get around much anymore. If I had good legs, I’d probably be down there all the time. HS: Do you have an opinion on where you see the city headed? FB: I’ve got a positive opinion. This new mayor is doing fantastic. He’s doing a great job. The city’s going forward. I think it’s going to be great. HS: So you’re optimistic? FB: Oh, very. Very optimistic. I’m proud of the way they’re working things out over there. I wish I was a young man. I’d be down there doing it. I’m 87 almost, now. HS: When you look back on the events, would you describe them as a riot? FB: Well, it might have been a riot, but I didn’t see the anguish. I didn’t see it. I knew there was rioting  I’d see it on TV. But in my neighborhood I’d see everything torn down when I got there, but I wasn’t there to see it. They would probably do it when I wasn’t around. They really tore the city up. HS: But would you call it a riot or would you call it a rebellion or uprising? FB: I’d call it a riot. It was a riot. HS: All right. One last question: What advice would you leave for future generations with regards to Detroit? FB: Well, the only thing I’d tell you is you’ve gotta work hard if you want something. You really have to work hard. I use to put in, when I first bought my store, 84 hours a week. 84 hours is a lot of time, especially when you’ve got a family. After three years, I finally whittled the hours down a little bit to about 70 hours. 72. I used to put in a lot of hours. But still managed to have a family of eight children. Four sons and four daughters. HS: Oh, I can’t imagine! FB: We were busy night and day. FB’s granddaughter: He had the store in Eastern Market, too. FB: Oh, that was a warehouse. After I retired in 1979, I sold cars briefly for Mitchell Buick. I did that for about nine or ten, no it was about a year. It was about a year, wasn’t it? Then I bought this business in Eastern Market. The one in Eastern Market was a wholesale food butter-egg business, butter-egg-and-cheese business. I bought it from Harold & Glave’s, and I left the name Harold & Glave’s. When I first got in Eastern Market, I got a house, I got a little building there with 300 square feet. Then after a couple years, I bought this building and it was 13,000 square feet. It was a pretty good-sized building. I brought three of my sons to work for me. Three of my sons came to work for me, and I had seven other employees besides my sons. Besides myself, we were about ten or eleven. I did that for twenty-five years. That was in Eastern Market. There was no riot or nothing then. HS: Okay, Frank, was there anything else you wanted to share from the week of the riots? FB: The National Guard was on my street. They were all around, all up and down all the streets in that area. They were there with the police. The police were with the National Guard. The people were very nice, they weren’t rioting because the National Guard and the police were there every day. They did a good job. I don’t know who the mayor was at that time, I don’t remember— HS: Jerome Cavanagh. FB: Jerome Cavanagh? He was doing a good job then. I mean, as far as I can see, as far as keeping the police there, you know. It was good. I don’t know what else I can add to that. My recollection of the city riot was horrible. The city was burning, property demolished, people without food  it was terrible. I tried immediately to go to my market, Frank’s Market at 4005 18th Street, corner of Poplar. My family were worried and were against me going for fear that—because of what they saw on TV, it might be dangerous. But on the second day, they worried about me getting hurt. The second day, I wanted to go as far as Grand River and Buchanan, and the National Guard turned me away and the police turned me away, they wouldn’t let me go. My customers were calling, asking me to come in. They had no food, no milk, no bread, no groceries. I was so desperate to get to my friends and customers because we had a good relationship and they loved me and respected me and I did them. So I was anxious to get there. The police and National Guard would not let me in. They had blockades everywhere. I went there more than once. I went there a second time, and they still wouldn’t let me in. I told them my customers are anxious. HS: So you couldn’t get to your store? FB: I couldn’t get to my store, but they followed me in there. They had the police follow me in there and made sure that I got there. The National Guard were there, too. The National Guard were already at my store. They were already there. The police followed me in there and I got in. That’s how I got in. After that, it was no problem going in and out because my customers knew I was there for them. The food that we couldn’t get, I would call my suppliers: the milk companies, the bread companies, Wonder bread, [unintelligible] Creamery, my meat suppliers, and my groceries. I would bring the groceries in before I came. I would get them at a warehouse and bring the food in. when I got there, my customers would help me get all that food, and they would go out with their cars, on the corner of Buchanan. You would give them meat, you would give them bread, you would give them milk, so we eventually got everything. That was for about five days, it was chaotic, about six days, until we started getting deliveries again. The big companies started sending their drivers out again. HS: Instead of getting your supplies or your food delivered, you had to go out and get them? FB: Yeah, I had to go get them right there. That was only for five days. After that, everything was normal. Because the first five days, who would want to come in there? Things burning, things all gone. You’d see a house, then it was gone the next day. It was terrible. I think that’s terrible. We already went through that. My building stayed standing, and “soul brother” was written all over my building, which I told you about. They put chains on the building to tear it apart, but my customers wouldn’t let them. Forty-nine years later, which is now, I never, ever forgot the humbling experiences and I said, “God bless us all,” because we made it through that riot. My father used to accompany me. After the third day, my dad came with me all the time. They loved him. They just loved my dad, too. That’s about all I can say. I don’t have much more to say, to tell you. HS: That’s great, though. FB: I just hope, you know, everything goes okay, helped you out. HS: Definitely. Well, thank you so much for sitting down with me. FB: You’re welcome. God bless you.  [TIME STAMP END OF INTERVIEW 23:04] [End of Track 1]   Original Format audio Duration 23min 4sec Interviewer Hannah Sabal Interviewee Frank Boscarino Location Clinton Township, MI Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward Tags 1943 Detroit Race Riots, 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Business Owners, Detroit Workers, Italian-American Community Citation “Frank Boscarino, August 2nd, 2016,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/343. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml 
DetroitWorker;Esther Middlewood;xxxx;2016;Esther Middlewood, xxxx, 2016 Title Esther Middlewood Description Esther Middlewood worked as a communication specialist for the US Army Tank Command in Warren. She and her parents lived in Detroit and she remembers seeing the destruction in her neighborhood in July of 1967. Publisher Detroit Historical Society Date 08/09/2016 Rights Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI Format Text Language en-US Type Written Story Text “This can’t be real,” I thought as I looked down Livernois at a US Army tank coming towards me on the opposite side of the road. Uniformed soldiers patrolled the sidewalks passed boarded up widows. The scene looked more like a city in Europe during World War II, but I lived in the United States. How could this be happening? It was July 1967 and race riots had broken out in Detroit. Violence and destruction ruled the day and night. Let’s go back in time to provide some background for my experience. I began life in Livonia, attended public school, and had no contact with anyone from another culture (let alone a different color). I had no knowledge of racial issues except for those I studied in history classes—like the Civil War. Of course, that had ended years ago—or so I thought. Everything changed in 1959, when Dad took a job with the Fred Wood Funeral Home in Detroit. The funeral home stood 8450 at Plymouth Road, just west of the junction of Grand River Avenue and Oakman Blvd. Although both black and white people lived in the neighborhood, the two groups didn’t mix. They might greet one another on the street, but no social interaction occurred. Nevertheless, it presented an entirely new life experience for me since my social world had no diversity. I graduated from high school in Livonia in 1960 and moved into the funeral home with my parents. I began working as a teletype operator in the catalog department of Sears, Roebuck, and Co. where I walked a couple of short blocks to work. Dad made some rules for my behavior in the neighborhood. I could not carry a purse to the nearby A & P market. I stowed my money in my shoe. We actually witnessed a woman being knocked down and robbed from the window of our apartment in the funeral home. The thief, a young black man, ran through a nearby store and got away. The incident certainly raised my awareness of potential danger and I became more cautious. Dad also insisted that I not be out alone after dark. In 1964 I purchased my first automobile and subsequently applied for a job at the US Army Tank Command in Warren. I also began volunteering at the USO in downtown Detroit. Since I worked second shift as a communications specialist, I drove home alone around midnight—from Warren to the funeral home. Eventually, Dad asked me to stop volunteering at the USO on weekends because he didn’t like me driving home from downtown at night. The roads coming home from work were safer--in his opinion. Yet I continued at the USO for several months, getting to know many of the regular visitors and even visiting some of the nearby military installations. I especially enjoyed meeting the guys from the Coast Guard station on Belle Isle. Since I worked for the Federal government, the work environment was biracial. I liked my coworkers and we got along without conflict. Then came the onset of increased racial tension in the city and everyone became edgy. The summer heat added to the irritation and frustration of everyone concerned. I, like many others, didn’t understand why I was being blamed for something over which I had no control—just because of the color of my skin. Then, the night came when my supervisor announced that it would not be safe for me to go home. I made arrangements to spend the night with a coworker and drove home in the morning. I couldn’t believe my eyes! Senseless destruction littered the streets closer to home. When I drove into the funeral home parking lot, I noticed military personnel on the roof of the Michigan Bell Telephone building on the other side of the street. I later discovered that they were guarding a communication center and watching for snipers. Over the next few days I had the opportunity to talk to some of the soldiers (I can’t remember if they were from the 82nd or 101st Airborne units). When I resumed coming home at midnight, they watched out for me each night and, in exchange, I brought them snacks from the A & P market. Their watchful eyes certainly gave me an increased sense of security. During the height of riot activity, I observed people walking down the sidewalk carrying television sets and other boxed appliances. I concluded that they had been looting nearby stores. Since my parents and I lived on the second floor of the funeral home, we were left alone. Perhaps superstition can be useful in some circumstances??? I do not honestly believe that the riots solved anything! Of course, that’s a matter of opinion. Perhaps someday people will learn that hatred and violence achieve only destruction and more hatred. We are all part of the human race and not one of us is perfect. As a side note, I relocated to the Washington, D.C. area at the end of 1967 and got settled just in time to witness the 1968 race riots in that city. Gratefully, I lived in Arlington, Virginia, and could view the destruction from a safer distance. Original Format Email Submitter's Name Esther Middlewood Submission Date 08/08/2016 Files !Twitter_Profile_2.jpg Collection Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward  Tags 1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Detroit Workers, Michigan Bell Telephone Company, Warren Citation “Esther Middlewood,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/348. Output Formats atom dcmes-xml json omeka-xml
DetroitWorker;Donna Palmer;1942;2015;Donna Palmer, 1942, 2015  Title  Donna Palmer, August 11th, 2015  Description  In this interview Donna Palmer discusses her experiences living in Detroit over the past sixty years. From her childhood in Corktown to her apartment on Clairmount, Donna discusses her ups and downs in the city. Living only blocks away from Twelfth and Clairmount during the unrest in July 1967, she lends insight into the anxiety and fear that gripped the city.  Publisher  Detroit Historical Society  Date  11/18/2015  Rights  Detroit Historical Society, Detroit, MI  Format  audio/MP3  Language  en-US  Type  Sound  Video    Narrator/Interviewee's Name  Donna Palmer  Brief Biography  Donna Palmer was born November 5, 1942 in Pittsburg Pennsylvania she moved to Detroit at the age of nine. Growing up she lived in the south of the city near Michigan Central Station and attended the schools in that area such as Jefferson Junior High along with some well-known Motown artists. When she was married she moved into the inner-city where she and her husband were caretakers for their apartment building where she and her family lived during the summer of 1967.  Interviewer's Name  Noah Levinson  Interview Place  Detroit Historical Museum  Date  8/11/15  Interview Length  50:28  Transcriptionist  Melissa King  Transcription Date  11/17/2015  Transcription  NL: Today is August the 11, 2015. This is the interview of Donna Palmer by Noah Levinson. We are in Detroit, Michigan at the Detroit Historical Museum and this interview is for the Detroit Historical Society and the Detroit 1967 Oral History Project. Donna could you first tell me where and when you were born?    DP: I was born in Pittsburg, Pennsylvania in 1942. November 5, 1942.    NL: And how long did you live in Pittsburg for?    DP: Until I was nine years old, then I moved to Detroit.    NL: Okay. First off, what part of Detroit did you move to?    DP: Actually it’s sort of south west around Myrtle, Temple, that area, Sixteenth, Seventeenth, Eighteenth Street in that area close to the train station, the old train station off of Michigan Avenue. That’s where I spent a lot of my life there.    NL: How long did you live in that neighborhood for?    DP: Probably until I got married at twenty-one, so I was there at least till I was twenty-one, twenty-two years old.    NL: What do you remember about the train station when you first saw it and when you were first living in the neighborhood?    DP: Oh it was a beautiful place. It was a lovely place just to go and visit and to walk through it.    NL: Even without needing to go somewhere on the train?    DP: Right, they had lots of stores. Oh, it’s so sad the way it is now as compared to before. I think it should be preserved and saved.    NL: I’ve heard they actually just, I forget whoever owns it – has paid to put a thousand or so new windows on the building so hopefully that’s a first step in refurbishing it finally.    DP: The inside is beautiful the architecture is so beautiful it really should be preserved.    NL: Is there anything specific you remember about how it looks or how it looked?    DP: How it looked back then? It was huge inside big area  large area inside lots of sculptures inside of it was a lot of sculptures. My uncle traveled a lot so we were back and forth at the train station a lot either dropping him off or picking him up. We use to go down there just to go down there as kids and run around the station until they would run us out. On one side of Michigan Avenue was the black neighborhood and on the other side of Michigan Avenue was the Hispanic neighborhood so Michigan Avenue actually separated the blacks from the Hispanics back then.    NL: Was there any sort of tension or animosity?    DP: There was animosity and tension between the Hispanics and Blacks, so we knew to stay on our side of Michigan Avenue and they knew to stay on their side of Michigan Avenue.    NL: Did you ever have any first hand experiences related to that tension?    DP: Well growing up as a teenager, I had boyfriends that were in gangs that would fight. They would have what they call rumbles, and back then they fought with their fists, and they would have fights back and forth.      NL: With other Hispanic gangs then?    DP: Yeah.    NL: Interesting.    DP: So you know it’s funny cause that is the way it is today, Hispanics are on one side of Michigan Avenue, and the rest of the people are on the other side of Michigan Avenue. So, we call it Mexicantown now  all of that area over there is Mexicantown.    NL: Right. So you could walk to the train station from your house?    DP: Mhmm. From my house. They use to have an eastern market over there. There was a – we have a eastern market now but they use to have a eastern market – I mean a western market just like the one on the east side here, we had the same thing one was on the west side and one was on the east side, eastern market.    NL: Was that open every day or on the weekends?    DP: On the weekends, mostly on the weekends.    NL: Okay, for farmers?    DP: Mhmm, for farmers to come in and bring their stuff. And there was lots of what they call meat markets down in through there, a lot of factories that sold a lot of whole sale stuff in through that area so it was [a] pretty industrial area right along there. The train came through there so there was a train – from the train station, trains would come through there and there were also trains that would deliver stuff goods in that area so there was train tracks. That was sort of like a mark for us too, not to go on the other side because we didn’t cross the tracks. When you crossed the tracks you were in the Mexican, Hispanic area and on this side was the black area.    NL: What do you remember about the part of your neighborhood that was right where you lived, the several blocks around where you lived?    DP: We had lots of churches, there were a lot of big churches there, I went to Jefferson Junior High school. Also, we weren’t too far from the projects so I sort of grew up with the people like the Motown people. So we went to school with the Temptations, the Supremes, one of my best friends sang with Martha Reeves and the Vandellas. And we were there with Smokey and all the others in that area. Back then, we had—where they used to have talent shows and a lot of the talent shows would be held in the church, the one big church, I can’t remember the name of it but the one big church where they had the talent shows and we would have the non-famous people at that time such as the Temptations and Smokey Robinson and the Miracles. They weren’t really big hits back then and they would sing, David Ruffin and the Temptations, so there was a lot. We had a lot of night clubs, we had a couple of night clubs in that area not too far over on Woodward, the Greystone Ballroom, we had different – the 20 Grand, which were sort of like night clubs in that area. I wasn’t old enough at the time to get in but we use to sneak in, me and my girlfriend use to sneak in we would actually take her sister’s ID and show it to the man at the door and then we would put it behind our backs and slip it to the next person. And we got away with that for a long time until one day the guy said “Hey wait a minute how many of the same people am I seeing here?” So we would do that to get in to see those guys singing. And it was just like – it was really good. It was a good time in the city of Detroit, we had a good time. We didn’t have to worry about our doors, we could leave our doors open, everybody knew everybody in the neighborhood, so if anything happened everyone was involved in the neighborhood. So it was a good time. Old Tiger Stadium was still there, it was off of Trumbull there. One of the places I lived was right down from Tiger Stadium on Spruce Street so we would go to the Tiger Stadium, walk down there so all that was in the area,  Tiger Stadium, the Train Station, right around in that area.    NL: What do you remember about Downtown?    DP: You know we really didn’t go too much Downtown  oh Hudson’s was still there, I have a picture of Hudson’s building before they tore it down. Crowley's was Downtown. So, by us being sort of poor, we really didn’t get a chance to shop Downtown. The well off people, the well to do people shopped mostly Downtown. There was Kresge’s Dime Store, Five and Dime, there was Sanders. Sanders – they would have ice cream (what do you call sundaes), cream puffs so every once in a while when mom would get paid she had a little extra money she would take us downtown go to Sanders and get some ice cream or either we’d go to – one of the joys was to go to Hudson’s and ride the elevator up and down all the way to the top floor and then back down again or Crowley’s. So, they had another building down there, Kline’s they had down there, I think B. Siegel’s, those were some of the stores that were Downtown now all that is gone now. I remember they blew Hudson’s up and demolished it and I got pictures of it before they did that but yeah —    NL: What kind of work did your parents do?    DP: My mother she was a single mom, she did domestic work. So most of her work was in the suburbs, so she would have to ride the bus to places such as Oak Park and Southfield and that area where it was all white, there was not black. Especially Northwest Detroit, it was all Jewish area. So she would go out there and do domestic work and she was a nanny. She worked for two or three members of one family. So it was like she worked for the mother and she worked for the daughters and maybe the son, she would do certain days for them so she worked for like one family. They were really, they were nice to her. They would give her a lot of stuff and I remember her coming home with a lot of left over stuff from the refrigerator and it was like take this home to your kids and feed it to your kids and she would say, she would take it but she would say, “Why would I have to feed my kids leftover food from your refrigerator?” so she would bring it home anyway, they would give her cloths for me and stuff like that so they were very nice in that way they just felt like she needed the food from their refrigerator. [laughter]    NL: Did you have siblings growing up?    DP: I had a brother, one brother.    NL: Older or Younger?    DP: Younger, he was a couple years younger than I.    NL: Can you tell me about the schools that you went to in Detroit?    DP: We went to public school. It was pretty—the schools were pretty good back then  they cared about you learning. You might have some teachers that really believe in discipline. So we were disciplined. When we did something in school, we were disciplined for it.    NL: When you say that do you mean physical or do you mean —    DP: Paddles, sometimes we would get our hands paddled sometimes standing in the corner sometimes, in a coat closet, we would stand in there so. Of course I never really did anything to be disciplined.    NL: You were good?    DP: I was a goody. And I went to Jefferson Junior High School which is right across the freeway there, the Lodge Freeway, and that’s where most of everyone in that neighborhood went in junior high. The projects was there, so you would have to go through the projects to get to school. The school was pretty good, it was – mostly all black students went there. The projects was pretty rough, so it was a rough ordeal just to go through the projects to get to the school, you had to almost think about fighting for your life in order to make it to the other side because you might get beat up, jumped on and beat up for no reason at all, they might not like the way you look.    NL: Every day you had to worry about that?    DP: Um, not every day but when you see groups of kids together, they like to fight, fight, fight, so it was a lot of tension there a lot of ground standing, standing their ground the fact that you come from outside of the projects and you come through their area.    NL: You said you moved when you got married, where was that to?    DP: I moved in the area and I moved all over the area we were on Collingwood we lived on Blaine, Gladstone. All those areas we moved. What happened is that the man that owns — I don’t know if he still does but he use to own the St. Regis Hotel on the Boulevard — they considered him as a slum landlord back then. He owned a lot of apartment buildings in that area if you’re talking Dexter, Martin Luther King Boulevard, Rosa Park, all that area he owned apartment buildings and when I got married - well actually, I moved there before I got married - my mother moved us there so I was in my mother’s house just for a short period of time before I got married in fact I still lived there after I got married and then we soon moved out, got an apartment of our own. And so the landlord, the guy that owned the buildings, thought we were such a nice couple so he decided to make us caretakers of one of his buildings so our job was we got a free apartment and our job was to collect the rent and my husband was to do the general maintenance if it was anything like heavy maintenance, then they had people to come and do that so that is what we did.    NL: Which building was that and on what street?    DP: I can’t remember whether it was Seward or whether it was Blaine it was one of those building on Seward or Blaine.    NL: Was your husband working then too?    DP: Yeah, he was working at Chrysler, so he would do the maintenance work, he worked nights. In fact, he was working General Motors and Chrysler, because he was trying to make enough money to get us out of that neighborhood. So that was really — We had one kid then another one on the way so he was like “I really got to get us out of this neighborhood before the oldest one is old enough to go to school. I don’t want him to go to school in this area.”    NL: Gotcha.    DP: So I stayed at home and I would do the— ‘scuse me [turning off her ringing phone]. I would do the general maintenance like if someone moved out of the apartment building, I would go and clean it, the empty apartment and get it ready for another tenant to show. I would show the apartments in the day time and he would do the heavy work. Mostly all of his buildings, the heat was coal heat so he had coal furnaces there. So what happens is that someone has to fill up the coal bin, I don’t know if you remember the old coal furnaces where you feed the coal into the furnace, well someone would have to fill it up, and if you fill it up for one night, it will last the whole day. My husband would have to do that, and he would usually do that before he goes to work so that it’s done. But, if there is heavy maintenance they always had someone to come in and do the heavy stuff. I think the man’s name was Mr. Goodman. He owned a lot of the apartment buildings in that area but then years later I heard that he took the money from the slums buildings and built that St. Regis Hotel down on the Boulevard, Woodward and the Boulevard. So we stayed there until he got my sister-in-law and her husband (my husband’s brother and his wife) to manage one of the buildings, it was getting kind of dangerous, because she went to show an apartment and the guy raped her. So from that point on we were really ready to move out. So we moved out of that area, but we were over there during the riots.    NL: Backtracking just a little bit before we go on to that, how would you compare what you remember about – sort of comparing and contrasting – growing up in Pittsburg and then your first few years growing up in Detroit? Did you think of them as different cities or similar?    DP: Different cities because in Pittsburg, we grew up in an all Italian neighborhood. And you know there was none of this being aware — I would tell my cousins when they come up to visit just watch yourself.    NL: Here in Detroit.    DP: Here in Detroit, yeah. I mean, back then I mean things were getting kind of bad, and we had police forces – special police forces: we had the Big Four, we had technical units, we had gang squads, we had all kinds of police units that were out to curtail the gang and the fighting in the streets. So I told my cousins when they came, I said, “If you get stopped just throw your hands up, don’t resist”. Back then it was getting that way when I grew up in the old neighborhood off of Michigan Avenue over by the train station it wasn’t. When I started moving in closer to the area where the riots started it started getting worse I mean, you know, it was people breaking into your house and stuff like that. Over there it wasn’t as bad. And see I came up here when I was nine or ten years old. It was – I lived next door to a Philippine couple and everybody knew each other on the block, it was like family. But when we started moving outward more it was like – you would really have to start watching your back.    NL: Do you remember what building you were living in, in 1967 in the summer?    DP: I don’t remember the street, I know it was directly in back of Herman Kiefer Hospital.    NL: Kiefer Hospital you said?    DP: Herman Kiefer Hospital, there on the Lodge. I think they’re shutting it down, I came by there the other day it looks like they’re closing Herman Kiefer Hospital. It was very, very active back then, people used it a lot. It’s on the Lodge and Clairmount.    NL: How do you remember first hearing about or first noticing the violence and the unrest in the July 1967?    DP: Actually, you know some people might remember but I remember that special groups such as the Black Panthers and other militant groups came into that area about the year before trying to incite, have you heard that?     NL: A little bit.    DP: Trying to incite riots, so we were actually really getting into black power, more power for the people and that is when you had student unrest and a lot of the universities around the nation, and rumors, you know you hear of rumors of war and things that are going to happen. I actually personally witnessed the Black Panthers coming into the city and coming into that area, different militant groups, and we were all asked to participate if anything happens. We were asked to participate and it was laid out like a plan: We’re going to come in and we are going to do this and we want you to do this and then back off.    NL: What was it that they wanted people to do?    DP: They wanted people—what they were gonna do was to actually break open the store, you go in and get everything you want out, and as soon as you get out everything you want, they were going to torch it and burn it down.       NL: And this a year before, this is 1966 that they first came in?    DP: Yeah, it might not have been quite a year    NL: Okay, but sometime before that happened.    DP: Sometime before that happened. It was – you know they were having problems out in California in other cities, where they were having little riots, you know it was like they were just looking for something, it’s kind of strange that the way this started it happened to start just around the time they came in. Now, it was said to me – I mean, I’ve always heard that three or four o’clock in the morning before the riots the state police noticed heavy traffic on the highways coming in and these people coming in, they actually turned around and went back, and it holds some kind of truth because in areas where there is unrest you find outsiders to come in and incite it and get it going and then they leave after they’ve gotten it going. So that’s what I heard that had happened is they were coming in and going. I remember me and my husband and the kids listening to speeches from different radical groups. I don’t know exactly whether it was the Black Panthers but lots of radical groups would come in and stand on top of buildings and make a speech to the people about more power and black power and, "We gotta get rid of whitey" and all this kind of rhetoric and I remember that.    NL: What did you think about those speeches and demonstrations at that time you were hearing them?    DP: Actually they, because I was running an apartment building in that area, they actually asked to have a meeting in my building and of course I didn’t let them, but they were asking permission, could they hold meetings in the building, get with the people and talk to the people, kind of incite the people. All I cared about at that time was getting out of that neighborhood and getting my children to safety.    NL: What else do you remember about that last week in July? What were the sights and the sounds that you remember?     DP: Oh it was terrible. We were actually, where that happened on the corner of Clairmount - I think it was Clairmount and Twelfth Street - it was supposed to have happened on top of a printing shop, there was a blind pig there. Of course I never frequented, but of course my husband and his brothers did so they knew it was there. It would run after hours and I think that’s where it happened. In fact, I had a girlfriend that was in there not too long before and they had raided it. But, the thing that I heard is that the police department was being paid money not to raid them. They knew it was – it was like they turned their head to the fact that it was there and let it run and I think that people were kind of upset because of the fact that they were raided. They shouldn’t have been operating anyway after hours, it was illegal to operate after hours and so it started there and that gave people reason to spill it out into the streets. So it happened in the wee hours in the morning, I was asleep. When I woke up all I could hear was disturbance in the street, Molotov cocktails being thrown in buildings because we were like, probably maybe two or three blocks off of twelfth, and we could hear them running through the neighborhood, people getting out and getting involved in it.    NL: Did your building stay safe throughout this?    DP: No, actually it didn’t get burned down, but we were never safe from police raids.    NL: Can you tell me more about that?    DP: Constantly they would raid the building. They were looking for snipers, they were looking on top of the roof for snipers, they were looking in people’s apartment for snipers. I remember they, after the riots started and got going really heavy, how they would they would not only knock on your door, one particular night we were all asleep, they’d take their gun and they would hit the door, and break it in. So they had me, my husband, and the two little ones standing up alongside the wall with our hands up like this [gestures] while they searched the apartment. They were looking for anything like stolen goods, rifles — I mean, people were breaking into the Light Guard Armory, they took machine guns, they took one of those big ones on tripods – they took one of those, because we know a guy that had one and he actually had it sitting up in his window and he was shooting down on the street from his window, his window faced the street, his bay window faced the street so he would just open the window and he would shoot down there at them.    NL: Was he, in effect, a sniper?    DP: Yeah he was a sniper. There were snipers on top of our building.    NL: Do you have any idea what they were looking for?    DP: What, the snipers?    NL: Yeah, for police or?    DP: Right across the street from my house was a grade school. After the Detroit Police couldn’t handle it anymore, and it really got out of control, we only had one person in the area that was like a representative that actually they thought had some influence over blacks and that was John Conyers. Conyers had a car dealer right there on the Boulevard. I think at Twelfth or Fourteenth Street, I think he had a car dealership there. So they sent John Conyers out to talk to the people. [Police talking] “To your people and see if you can get them to calm down.” They threw bricks and everything at him, they didn’t want to hear nothing he had to say. Right across the street from where we lived, the apartment building we lived in, was the grade school. Once the Detroit Police lost control and they could not handle the people, they asked "Please could you send in — what do you call these — National Guards?" So they sent in these National Guards from way up north. A bunch of white boys. You know how the blacks are going to feel about white boys coming in to calm down their area. That’s what they were shooting at, back and forth. The white boys had no ammunition  they were ordered not to shoot even if they did have them. They set up their camp right across in the school playground lot, right across from us. So, they had pitched their tents, tanks, everything over there, but they weren’t allowed to use them yet, so that went on and on and on and on for days. The looting, the burning, the skies in the daytime was black. You could not see anything, you could not go out of your house, you were afraid to go out. I went out to hang up some clothes or had the kids out in the yard, something like that, and the troops came though the yard and told me real quick to hurry up get my kids and take them back in the house. They were shooting off the roof and that’s what they were trying to find whoever it was on the roof, there was other people in the apartment building, because this was like a three story apartment building. There were other people in the apartment building that were on the roof that was shooting off the roof. One of the girls came to me knocked on the door and said she hadn’t seen her brother in about a couple days. She didn’t know where he was. She finally found him on Belle Isle. They had turned Belle Isle into a camp to hold them. They used all the garages, police garages. All the police stations, all the jails were filled up because they started arresting people one right after another. Sometimes you don’t even have to be doing anything, just walking down the street, they had a curfew so you couldn’t be out after a certain time, you had to be in. I got pictures of showing where you would stand in line to get food, because everything was burnt down you had nothing. You had no food, you had no milk, you had no diapers  there was nothing. We had to go across Eight Mile Street out Woodward to Eight Mile. All up and down Eight Mile Road were National Guard troops because Oakland County said, “We don’t want that and you are not gonna bring it across Eight Mile road.” So they were keeping you on this side. If they let you in on that side they escorted you in, you went to the store you bought what you had to get, and they escorted you right back out.    NL: Was that a fairly civil process going in with them and out the store?    DP: Uh, yeah.    NL: Nobody gave you a hard time about wanting to go shopping there?      DP: No, but, the prices.    NL: Oh, they gouged?    DP: Oh god, did they gouge! [laughter] But you needed it.    NL: Right, that’s what it is, what are you going to do? [talking over each other]    DP: What are you gonna do? I know. You can imagine what a loaf of bread cost and a thing of milk for the babies.    NL: How were your kids through all this? How old were they at that time?    DP: They were three and four.    NL: Okay. So they might remember a little bit, but they were real small.    DP: They were too young, yeah, real small.    NL: Do you remember anything particular about them and how they responded to this? Could they tell that this was weird that something unusual was happening?    DP: They were traumatized, they couldn’t sleep at night. They ended up sleeping with us because they were afraid of the men with the black mask on. And see these guys you couldn’t see their face because they had, what do you call, helmets with the thing on.    NL: With the whole front face guard and everything?    DP: Yeah, it was all black.    NL: Riot gear.    DP: Riot gear. That’s what it was and when they finally gave them permission to start shooting, they started shooting at everything that moved. So you better not go out after a certain time at night, I forget what the curfew was, but my husband happened to be working nights, but he had to show his badge so that he can go across Twelfth Street that he had to go to work. Where there was a command post he had to show it.    NL: It was just his work papers from Chrysler that said, "I’m an employee here?"    DP: Yeah, so he had to do that to go to work and to come back home.    NL: And the plant never closed during the whole time? He worked every day?    DP: Some of the days he didn’t go in. He couldn’t get in but the plants were open.    NL: He couldn’t get in because they wouldn’t let him cross Twelfth Street?    DP: Right.    NL: Even though he had the work papers?    DP: Right, all depends on what command post he was going through.    NL: So it all depended by the day exactly what was happening then? Somebody from up top says, "Let people through," somebody from up top says, "Nobody."    DP: So sometimes he would have to turn around and come back because they wouldn’t let him through to go into work. I think like towards the end, he didn’t go in at all but at the beginning of it he was able to go in. When Detroit Police was handling it you were more freely to move around, but once the National Guards came in and took over you weren’t allowed to move as freely. People were writing on the side of their buildings "Black only", "Black owned" you know so that you could skip theirs and not burn theirs down. But it was organized, it was – they knew exactly what they wanted to do, they knew exactly where they wanted to hit.    NL: When you say “they” who do you mean?    DP: I don’t know which groups were involved, I don’t know exactly which ones were involved in this, but it was — I mean—    NL: The type of people who were preaching what you were saying before? Similar to the Black Panthers if not maybe necessarily that group.    DP: Right.    NL: Okay.    DP: Any group that got really militant. See I was actually more a Martin Luther King type person, I was not a Huey Newton and H. Rap Brown, and all of the—    NL: Peaceful nonviolent resistance.    DP: Nonviolent resistance type person. I was not the violent type you know, but I listened to some of their doctrine, some of the things they were saying, but they were saying it in a way — you know just like the other day I read where the Black Panther actually was responsible for WIC, the program that we have now to feed the women, the infants, and the children, but—no they did some good in the area. They could see some areas that needed — in the black area most especially. And I would drive around the city and to me, it really hasn’t changed. The buildings are still burned down and crumbling and the ones they did tear down, there’s empty lots. I mean, right over a block over from me a whole block burned. Fire department couldn’t get in to put the fires out because they were happening too fast, and then they would turn the fire department trucks over and beat them up and wouldn’t let them put out the fires. And it’s a good thing my building didn’t get torched, but a lot of buildings around me got torched and I stood in my doorway with the kids on my hip watching buildings after buildings burn around us.        NL: You said even before all of this chaos from that week in July, it was a goal of yours to move out of that neighborhood to get somewhere else, when did you ultimately move out of the west side?    DP: Probably about a year after that. See that was in ’67 that riot. I think we were out of there and I got into my house in northwest — where I’m at now — probably about ’68 or ’69.    NL: And where is that?    DP: Over in the college district, U of D [University of Detroit] college district. I’m over in that area.    NL: Okay, what street?    DP: Prairie.    NL: So that is near Livernois.    DP: Near U of D.    NL: Okay, so Livernois and like Seven Mile, Six Mile?    DP: Yeah, Seven.    NL: Can you tell me about that neighborhood, your impressions right when you moved in there?    DP: When we moved in there it was all – let’s see – my block I was probably the third black family to move in. It was mostly all Jewish area but then soon after that they started moving out. So they started going out more to Oak Park instead of in that area. So we moved in over there, the schools were so much better, and the whole area was so much better, and it was a relief to get away from over there.    NL: Is that the Mumford area?    DP: Yeah.    NL: That is where your kids went to school?    DP: No, my kids went to Cass Tech. All four of mine went to Cass Tech. Yeah it was so much better and I was so relieved to get them out there. I was glad my kids weren’t teenagers or young people back then that would be out there and get shot. Because I’ve heard and seen lots of people that were injured and still are injured from the riots where they got shot, paralyzed, in wheel chairs, stuff like that. One of the ladies out here said that her father took pictures, I think it was her father took pictures, just got out there with his camera and started taking pictures of everything.    NL: Where there any tensions in the neighborhood between the black families and the Jewish families?    DP: Over in the northwest area?    NL: Yeah when you were moving in there?    DP: No.    NL: Everybody got along?    DP: Everybody got along.    NL: Kids played with each other in the neighborhood.    DP: Mhm. Doctors office on the corner and he lived in – his office was in the front, he lived in the back. His little kids – we were over there with, what’s his name, [US Senator] Carl Levin? Carl Levin in that area. What’s this congressmen now that’s – oh god the black guy that’s always in trouble um, [laughter] Cushingberry? That area was like doctors and lawyers and people like that. My kids went to school with Levin’s kids. There was also a—    NL: Professional, educated parents for the most part?    DP: Yeah, Lieberman his little daughter Amy, I remember her, because all of them would play with my kids.    NL: And you’re still in that house on Prairie you said?    DP: Mhmm.    NL: Can you talk about that neighborhood now and the changes that you have seen since you moved in?    DP: You know there are some changes in that neighborhood but not really bad changes. We have our share of B and E’s [breaking and entering], there’s drugs but the neighborhood in all is basically a pretty solid neighborhood because the houses are built solid and they’re not these houses they’re building now, so that’s a good sound neighborhood.  If they're going to, you know, bring back Detroit, these areas like the Boston-Edison, Chicago area where you have these good solid homes—    NL: The brick instead of the frame houses—    DP: Yeah, they’re brick instead of frame houses and that’s the way mine is, is a brick house. It’s a nice solid house, they don’t make houses like this anymore, they don’t make neighborhoods like these anymore, and so we know that because we see a lot of people that are coming in trying to buy up all of these houses and most of these houses in the neighborhood people have lost because of foreclosure. They really didn’t want to give up their house, they just couldn’t afford to keep it anymore. But these houses in that neighborhood is pretty solid houses, you find some companies coming in and will buy up maybe a whole slew of houses in that particular area, management company. We see people coming from out of state buying up houses and they’ll flip them: fix them up, turn them around, and sell them you know for a higher price, but yeah it’s a pretty good neighborhood.    NL: Is that good for the neighborhood you think that people are doing that?    DP: Flipping houses?    NL: Yeah.    DP: I just wish it wasn’t people from out of state. I wish it wasn’t these management companies that’s taking advantage of the fact that these houses are here.    NL: Gotcha, more individuals—    DP: More individuals and I think with families that we know, families that need housing I think those people should have a good shot at it. I know at one time they had a drive to try and get more of our public officials to come back into the city Detroit to live. And they were offering them these houses over in the Boston-Edison area to come back and they would get them pretty cheap you would have to put money in them. Like, you could get a house over there maybe eight, ten thousand dollars but you would end up putting seventy or eighty thousand dollars in the house to bring it back up to the way it was. They had some big beautiful houses over there, because we looked into that when my daughter was looking for a house and the people told her, she had people come in to look at the house how much it would cost her to bring up she said you would have to put at least seventy thousand in this house to bring it up to par. So I wish that more people were allowed to do that. Then you wouldn’t see so many people leaving the city of Detroit because I thought about it quite often. I've thought about going to Sterling Heights, Macomb here lately.    NL: Yeah?    DP: Yeah.    NL: What has kept you from making a move like that?    DP: All the ties to that house but I have to let them go, sometimes you have to let them go. I have so much stuff in that house that are old memories, and I have to start getting rid of it and it would be nice to move to that area because my girlfriend just moved out there and I have been looking that way. Out Eighteen and a half, Twenty-something mile road, Romeo area, and just get out of Detroit but I wouldn’t give up what I have in Detroit. I would keep my house in Detroit. I have two houses, but I would keep the house in Detroit and maybe just rent them out. I think Detroit – I have a feeling it’s going to turn around, but I don’t think that I’ll probably live long enough to see that happen. I hope that it happens soon, but I don’t think I’ll be around when it turns around. I ride around in the city of Detroit and I see that there is so much work that has to be done. There is a lot of work that has to be done. We need to start tearing down all these ones that was burnt down during ‘67.    NL: Start fresh.    DP: Start fresh, just level them to the ground. There are so many houses and you can count them in one neighborhood that’s all boarded up. Drug dealers are using them as what they call trap houses. Young kids are afraid to go down the street to school because they might get snatched pulled into these empty houses. People are getting killed for nothing, over nothing. People are afraid to leave their homes, especially older people. Older people are being encouraged to take classes to get their CPL [concealed pistol license].    NL: What’s the most important thing or the first thing the city can do to get this moving in the right direction so that these things aren’t happening anymore?     DP: You know what I used to say all the time: there’s people making decisions and they’re bringing in all of these – what do you call these — this one guy they brought in from another city to try and turn the city around, his background —    NL: The city manager, emergency manager.    DP: Emergency manager they are bringing in these people that’s talking from an expert point of view for economics and —    NL: Urban Development.     DP: Urban Development, see I thought about doing that because I got three degrees, masters degrees, and one of them is from Wayne State and when I started at Wayne State I started in a program called Urban Development. They phased it out and I asked them why and they said that, "Well, we find that there is no need for this program." Well you do need people from the city of Detroit who is knowledgeable about the city of Detroit and what they need to work in that area and I used to always say, "Why don’t you just go ask the people?” You want to know what we can put into this neighborhood to make this a better neighborhood? Ask the neighborhood!     NL: That seems simple enough.    DP: That’s simple enough, just ask the people! “What do you want for your neighborhood, what can we do, what can we give you to make your neighborhood a better neighborhood?” And listen to the people, listen to them, because they’re the one that’s going to make it happen. So you go in and think you know what they need and you put it in there, if that’s not what they need they’re going to rebel against it, or either tear it down, or either not cooperate with what’s going on. They used to have in each neighborhood, neighborhood city halls which I thought was a good idea. But how much power does the neighborhood city halls have if you go to them with problems? Now in my neighborhood, it’s the Northwest Activities Center. And they have meetings there at Northwest Activities Center, but what good is that, I mean, are you taking this information that we’re giving you? We used to have them come to our churches, some of the city officials, and they would ask questions. Benny Napoleon, which I know too, Benny Napoleon, all them guys, sit up at the front with your questions everyone would get up, stand there, talk on the mic. “There’s a house next door to me and there’s drug activity and I have been calling and calling and calling and calling and nobody seems to come out.” “Okay write that down, is you writing that down? What is the address? We’re going to do something about it.” Nothing is done about it. Talk to the people, find out what it is they want, talk to the young people, they’re the ones that got to live here.    NL: Well hopefully more people will hear that message and start doing that soon. Is there anything else you’d like to share today?    DP: That’s it. Other than that I love the city of Detroit. I grew up in the Colman Young era, I worked with him and worked with his team. I think that Colman Young was the best mayor that we’ve ever had. Some people didn’t like him because of his mouth and the way he told people just the way it was, and that’s the way it was, Colman Young.    NL: Alright, thanks for sharing with us today, Donna.    DP: Okay [laughter].    **  Files  Palmer.Donna photo.jpg  Collection  Detroit 67: Looking Back to Move Forward    Tags  1967 riot—Detroit—Michigan, Black Panther Party, Business Owners, Corktown, Curfew, Detroit Police Department, Detroit Workers, Herman Kiefer Hospital, Jefferson Junior High School, Looting, Mexicantown, Michigan Avenue, Michigan National Guard, Motown, Snipers, Tiger Stadium  Citation  “Donna Palmer, August 11th, 2015,” Detroit 1967 Online Archive, accessed February 28, 2020, http://detroit1967.detroithistorical.org/items/show/105.  Output Formats  atom  dcmes-xml  json  omeka-xml