Name;Country;Text
Santina Merrusi Losso;Italy;: Okay. Let's start here by my introducing Santina Merrusi . : Now, married, yeah. : , right. And you came from Italy in 1913 when you were eleven years old. And today, at the time of this interview, you're ninety-four years of age. : Yes. : And I'm here in Highland Park in Mrs. 's home. : Yeah. : And this is Janet  for the National Park Service. Okay, if you would start, Mrs. , by saying where you were born in Italy. : Oh, I was born in a small town. Well, it wasn't small. It's a providence of Genoa. Well, that, and there's a small town in between that. I don't know if you, well, it could be Cavari[ph], they used to call it. But we most, Genoa, I think, is a big city.  : Well, you said Borzonasca. : Borzonasca. That's the town where I came from. : Right. And that's spelled B-O-R-Z . . . : O. : N-A-S-C-A. : Yeah. : Right? Okay. So that's where you were born. Now, when you were you born? : Where? : When? : Oh, when? 1902. : And the date? : Wait a minute. ( she laughs ) I was, yeah, it was in November . . . : That's right. : Wait a minute. Now I got all fouled up with this. 1902, November the 2nd. : Right, okay. Okay. ( they laugh ) Now, when you think about Borzonasca. : Yeah. : Borzonasca, however you say it, what are the things that you remember about that town? : We had a business over there. We had a big store. : What did you sell? : Oh, everything. Everything. It was a big store. It was the only big one we had in the town. Oh, we were well-known over there. And, uh, my father used to work, he was a manager in a factory. And my mother raised ten kids. No, five girls and four boys. : Well, now, the store, your father didn't work in the store? : No. He was out on business in a factory. He was like a manager in a big building over there. He was good at that.  : And what was his name? : Lino, Lionel, they called him. L-I-N-O. Merrusi. : And, uh, what do you remember about your father from when you were a little girl in Italy? What do you remember him doing, and . . . : Oh, he was a good man. : Did he ever do things with you? Now, be careful, because you're hooked up here. ( referring to the microphone wire ) : I know. Here's his picture. ( she laughs ) He was a nice man. He was like a manager in the factory. He was good. And she had five girls and four boys, my mother. And then, besides, she raised a, yeah, she raised another one outside. : How did that happen that she raised . . . : No, because the woman didn't have no milk, you know what I mean? They don't do it here, with the bottles and everything. They used to raise, help each other that way. See? : So she nursed someone else's baby who couldn't nurse . . . : Also, yeah, yeah. Oh, we all, you know, in the town you're all like that. You help one another. It's not small, because it's got two big churches in there, but I mean we're all known, like. It's not here. Here we only know, I don't even know who lives in here. ( she lowers her voice ) They're all Jewish people. They all moved in here because they don't have to pay nothing. All Highland Park moved in here. We're about five of us from the beginning, since it was built. It's about twenty-two years old.  : Well, now, let's talk more about, uh, about your life in Italy. Did you go to school there? : I went to a Catholic school over there. They only had that. My daughter, she's got the pictures, we take it, yeah, with the sisters and all this, the religious, you know. Very strict over there. : And tell me about the school and about the church. : Well, as I can remember, he had a picture taken, too. Take everything away from me. She loves to have antiques like that. We used to go in the Catholic school. We didn't have, what you call it? : Like a public school. : Yeah, a public school. That's only in the religion over there. Yeah, she's got my picture there. It was taken with the sisters. : What do you remember about the sisters over there? : Oh, they're nice girls, very strict over there. : What would they be strict about? : The religion more, too, because there's only one thing over there, the religion. We're all Italian, and we're all the same nationality, and everything the same. So we didn't really, they were all good. We had a good, we had a big department store over there, a big store. We used to sell everything that you can remember. : Did you sell food? : Everything! Clothes and material. It was like one store had everything in it. We used to pay rent over there, because these people lived in the next town. Well, that's more like, uh, would be like Highland Park. And they had business down there. They used to go back and forth. And we rented the place there. Oh, what a beautiful place it is! They got big stairs like that, all marbled. Even in a small town! Compared to here.  : Now, where the marble stairs were, was that where you lived? Or where . . . : That's where we, we lived in there. We lived on the first floor, like. We'd pay rent. They had four flights. The stairs were that big, all marble. And then we had, like, the department store. They carry everything. We left so many bills over there. We used to pay by the, by the month or by the week, you know? And all of a sudden they decided to send us, they'd come here because she had five girls and four boys, and the boys were over here, and one sister. Then they sent for my father to come over from over there, to be here with them, and then they won't let him come back. So we had to decide to sell, we came over, five of us. : Well, now, your brothers went over first? : Yeah. : But did you have, like, aunts and uncles, or did you have any other family over here? : No, only brothers. : So your brothers were, how was it that your first brothers decided to come? Do you remember? : Not that I know. Well, I guess they wanted to make a different way of living, probably, and things like that, because over there, in a small town, what can you do? There's not much business or anything. So they came out, the two of them came out, and we came out in five of us on the boat. I was eleven years then. : Now, how come your father couldn't go back?  : They won't let him. : Your brothers? : Yeah. He had four boys. But three of them was here. And they all work, and one had, like, a house, and he had a saloon business, restaurant, like that. And, uh, that's when they send my father, and he's, he was here, my mother was over there, we were five over there yet. So they decided then we all should come over. We sold everything over there, and then we came over. : Okay. What was your mother's name? : Louise, Louisa. : Louisa. And what was her maiden name? Do you remember? : Oh, I couldn't remember that now. If my daughters were here, probably. I could think of that name. : That's all right. Whatever you, if you happen to think of it you can say it. : Yeah. : Okay. And did you have Grandmother and Grandfather over in Italy? No. : No? No. : How about aunts and uncles? : No. We were all in the, just . . . : Just the immediate family. : Yeah, just the family. We didn't have nobody there. : Now, were you closest to any particular family member? : Over there? : Yeah. When you were . . . : Oh, you know how it is over there. Everybody knows each other, like here. Not like here, because here they changed. I mean, uh, you know, over there, the people, they're all like in one family. They all know each other, and you live a different life altogether.  : Tell me about the church and what kind of holidays did you celebrate in the church? : Did you see that picture I showed you? : Yeah. : Yeah. Oh, they're religious over there. We had two churches. That was the big one, then when we used to call the little church, and we were, like, from here to there on the town. They were up for it, and this was down here. It was a small church. It was nice over there. : Could you describe your first Holy Communion? : Huh? : What was it like when you received your first Holy . . . : What they do here, mostly it's the same thing. Oh, yeah. They were strict over there. Too bad they got all those, I never thought of asking for those pictures. I had all the pictures taken with them. I got that one up there. That's when we came over, the five of us. : Oh, great. Now, were you, um, was that a big day for you, when you received your first Holy Communion? : What? : Was it a big day when you got your First . . . : Oh, in Europe, yeah, they celebrated. : What did you wear? Do you remember what you had on? : Oh, yeah. I had a veil, just like here. Oh, yeah. The religion goes that way, from the pope on, there's everything, the same way. Yeah. Oh, it was nice over there. I had pictures taken there with the sisters and the whole class, because there's only religion.  : How big a class was it? Was it a lot of children, or . . . : Oh, yeah. It was about twenty-five of us in there. Oh, yeah. See, she got all those pictures. That one up there, she loves the antiques and things, like to remember. This, the other one up here, she works for my son, he's in the (?). She don't give a thing what goes on. She don't like what she does. : It's a difference, a difference in personalities. : Oh, she's just a, and then any little thing everywhere, she's altogether this. And you won't even think she belongs two sisters. They hardly even talk to each other. : Okay. Now, how about what did you do when you were little? Did you help the, did you help your mother or father do certain things? : Well, we had a store there. : And what did you do? Did you do anything in the store? : Well, I used to go to school. I used to go to school and then, you know, because I was young yet. Boy. : Do you remember what you did? Did you have a girlfriend, or did you . . . : Over there, a small town, you know, we all know each other, you know, together. Oh, that's the beauty of it, yeah. Oh, we had a lot of . . . : What do you remember about it that makes you feel like it was a really nice place to be a girl? : Well, compared to this, you know, a big city, country, whatever it is, it's altogether different over there.  : Yeah, tell about it. : We did different, the whole town know each other. We, like one family. I mean, we all get together, holidays or anything like that. It's all, it's altogether different, like, well, here's got a lot of denominations, you know, that you can't expect that, but over there we were like that. We knew everybody who lived in town, because it wasn't that big. : And everybody was the same as far as being Catholic . . . : Oh, yeah, we all respect each other. They're all nice people, really. Oh, I could get used to over there. ( she laughs ) : Tell me about . . . : I came over here, I had to go to school. I, yeah, I went up to the sixth grade that time. That was a graduation, like, those years here. Well, I came in New York, and I lived there ever since. I came here in 1929. I got married here. : Can you remember the kinds of food that your mother made when you were a little girl in Italy? : Oh, Jesus, compared to here. And I do my own, yet, like I'm used to it. I got all the utensils here. And, you know, my mother thought, she never, oh, yeah. But she used to work down in a big city and, uh, and she used to be the cook there for the priest, for the church. And one time she took me down there, I was about nine years old. And me, I wasn't used to being among those, you know, the priest and all that, you know? And I got, well, we were respected, though. We know how to be with them, they'll tell you, you know. And then when, oh, no. Then she, my mother was a very good cook. So she went to another city, it's a bigger city, Menelia[ph], they call it, and there used to be the church, and the priests where they used to live. She used to be the cook there. So she invited me down there one week.  : What was it like? : Oh, it was beautiful. Because we were never out of town, you know what I mean? We had no cars or nothing. We always lived there, and all the people. We went over there, and me, I was about nine years old. ( she laughs ) I wasn't used to being among priests and all those things, you know? Well, she had her own, she used to work there, though, she'd help out. Then one day they took me, I was nine years old, they took me to the big city because it's got the waterfront and, you know, the ocean and everything. Oh, it's beautiful. But the priests don't go among the other people. They go all away from there, and there are all rocks. Me, I was young, I never saw the ocean before in my life. They took me down there. I went down there for a week, like a vacation, you know? And they took me by the arm, they took me there. Oh, I was afraid to see all that water, we never saw it. He took me by the arm over here, and he dunked me up and down to get used to the water. : Oh! : But they were nice, though. They, they're more strict than they are here, though. You know, they respect you. Well, I stayed there about a week, like a vacation, you know, something like that. And I used to like it because it was a big city. We used to go here and there. She used to cook, and then my mother was a good cook. : What kind of meals did she make? Can you remember anything that she cooked when you were little?  : I make it here, the same thing. I got all the, you know what my mother thought of it when she left Europe? She thought she was going to the end of the world. She brought five mattress. I got one in there. A wool. She brought everything, we had the store there, too. But we left so much money there. They used to pay by the week, or the month, you know? We didn't care. We had to come, and we just lived in this beautiful building. It was, the stairs were that big, all marble stairways. They had balconies, they had, too. But these people, they were well-known. They just had business in the city. Camarin[ph], they used to call it, see? And they used to go back and forth, you know. They used to rent where we lived. There was a beautiful. And, uh, what else can I tell you? : Well, tell me what your mother cooked? : Oh, God, I can remember everything. She could cook anything. But this, then they're here. Here they got more seasoning, more, I still do my own cooking my own way. : Can you tell me something you cook that you learned in Italy? : Well, we make ravioli. You know about that? : Uh-huh. : I got the rolling pin here yet. : You mean you make it from scratch? : Oh, yeah! Like the dough. I see sometime on Sunday there there's a lot of Italian people, but they make, they got everything extra that they need. We used to make it with what we had, see? She had, my second brother, he opened a place up in Woodcliff Lake. Oh, it was a beautiful, it took the whole square block, and it had columns like this. It was a, what you call that, like rich people, millionaires. He had the whole square block. Gates that high, you know? He used to go up there on Saturday and Sunday, you know, to pass the weekend, because we always work, and, uh, she has a grand opening, my brother, the people that they know you. And she made these ravioli.  : Do you remember how she made them? : Oh, sure. I got the rolling pin in there, all cut out, the way they stamped them and the way they make them. I made them for my daughter, what was it, a couple of weeks ago, somebody's birthday or something. : Could you describe how you make them? : What you put in? : Yeah. : Oh, um, now, wait a minute. Well, it's like, Bessie here, there's an Italian woman, she cooks the same way we do. On Sunday that's all it is, cooks. The flour, and eggs, a little salt, you know, we make the dough. Then, you know, you make, softened it, you work it and make it nice and smooth. Then when it's about that big you put flour on the board. My daughter's got the board. And, uh, and you make, not long ago I made it, but I can't do it no more, because I can't stand so much on my feet. And my, uh, her son helped me out, because I get a backache when I work, and as much as I try to do it, I can't do it. And, uh, oh, yeah, well, it's regular dough. It's not anything special that you make a pie or something, eggs and, you know, and things like that. And then we roll it out. We got the long rolling pin, it's about that big, the straight one. Then we make the dough and make it big. Wait till I show you the other one! Then we make the filling. : What do you make for the filling? : Oh, Jesus. What the hell do you put in there? Spinach, eggs, cheese, and sausage. Yeah. And meat, beef we put in. We cook all that stuff, you know? And then when it's cooked, we make the dough first, we make a big one, and we divide it in half, just turn it. Then we spread it all over, you know? And this piece, you put it over, and you put the rolling pin. Oh, well, you put the filling in it. Then we put it over, then you go over. I'll show it to you before you go. They go with this rolling pin in squares, it makes the squares, with the filling popping up. And there's a line there where the rolling pin goes, you know? And then they puffed it. It's got, made purposely for that. And then you roll it with a cutter, you know. And they cut it all like this. Oh, she made it for me open, I don't know how many she made. She got sick up there. We got a big, it was up on the hill, like, and they had the Woodcliff Lake. They got the lake in the front there, and these people was a millionaire that had it. They had all the homes for the waiters and the people that worked there. Then he had another little house in the front. Too bad I never took those pictures. I knew I had them someplace. And, oh, it was, it had big columns like that in the front. Oh, it was a beautiful place. He was a millionaire. And on the side there they had all houses, little houses, for the people that worked there.  : I see. Before we talk about this country, is there anything else about Italy that you remember, when you think back to that time, and . . . : Well, see, we never were now, really, to go out in different cities and different, I was small then. My father worked, and then we had the store there, and, uh . . . : Remember other things that your mother packed when she was coming here? : Oh, she thought she was coming to the end of the, she thought she was coming to the end of the world. I never saw, I got a mattress in there. It's all wool. I had it remade. It came, it was about that high. She brought five. She thought she was coming to the end of the world. Oh, my God! All the stuff that she brought over, all the utensils and everything. We had a store there, too, but most of it we left there, the money, you know, they used to pay by the month there, you know, write it out? And, uh, oh, she brought so much. I don't know what she thought. I got all of her stuff here. : Oh. : That she used to use, and then some of them, my daughter has it up there, because I had them in the house and I saw, I came, I couldn't bring everything in here, so she's got half of my stuff up there. ( she laughs ) All copper. : Copper pots? : Oh, over there is everything copper. Yeah. Oh, she, she used to be a good cook. So she had it, and my brother had the grand opening.  : Well, uh, tell me, then, when you were leaving, do you remember saying goodbye to people in the town? : Oh, yeah. We left all the money over there. They had, you know, pay by the month . . . : People owed you from the store. : What were we missing, though? Because we were never out. We were brought up in there, and that's where you lived, like. It was like Highland Park, the same thing. You're used to it, and that's it. : You remember traveling to Genoa, when you left your little town? : Yeah, in there, a carriage, then, with the horses to ride. In those days we had no automobiles. Yeah. We went there. : And did you stay . . . : And I got scared because I never saw, I never saw the water, the ocean, and then, uh, the ship besides, oh, Jesus, what a ship we had. : Tell me about the ship. : You know, they had sections, like they would have here, first, and then there's four in the cabin. That goes like this, back and forth. The ocean was so rough! And we had the trunks under there, came in through the window, the round window there. Oh, Jesus. Oh! : So you were in a cabin? : Yeah. Oh, they had their own, you know. You buy whatever, yeah, we're on the second class. : Oh, you were . . . : The first class is rich people, like here. They got everything modern, you know? But we came over, it was on the second class. We were five of us.  : Do you remember if there was a steerage on your ship? Were the people in the bottom, like, living in like a dormitory? : Yeah, there are two, three floors there. Oh, yeah. It was pretty big at that time, that ship. Not like they made them lately. Yeah. Oh, we were, we had, the water came in and out, was going like that. The following week it sank, that ship. : Really! : We came here on St. Patrick's Day. : That's when you arrived. Do you remember coming into the New York Harbor? : Oh, yeah. Now my daughter's telling me she brings stuff down there on display and all that, and, you know, she doesn't realize. She goes for things like that. My other daughter's not interested in those things. She doesn't, but her, she loves it. : So when you first came into the Harbor, did you see the Statue of Liberty? : Oh, yeah. Oh . . . : Did you know what it was? : Well, not those days, because I don't even remember if we were taught in school, because it was a religious, you know, everything more likely that way, too. And, uh . . . : And did you have to, do you remember going to Ellis Island? : Oh, and we docked here, sure. This is the one I got. : Well, that's when you became a citizen. : Yeah. : But before that, when you first came over, do you remember like, um . . .  : Oh, Jesus, it was like a stable over here. It was all little, like a room. Everybody went one room or the other. Oh, my God, the way we came in, when we saw that, we were like animals. Put us up in those. ( she laughs ) : Now, it was you and your mother and one brother . . . : No, yeah, the youngest one, my older sister. There's a picture up here. : Oh, okay. : And, uh, we were five of us coming over. Yeah. Wait a minute, my youngest brother, me, and two sisters, and my mother, yeah, we were five of us. : Uh-huh. And, uh, do you remember if there was any problem at Ellis Island? Was there any problem with anybody being sick, or . . . : No, no, we did. Oh, we came in there like animals at that time. All little . . . ( she laughs ) Little boxes to put separate people, all those people coming in, you know, at that day. : Did you have to stay overnight at Ellis Island? : No. Then my brothers got me. They came. They took us, and he had a home, and we went in there at the beginning. : Do you remember being examined at Ellis Island? : Oh, yeah. They make you through. : Your hair, looking at your eyes? : No, they don't go for that. They just, where you come from and things like that, more. They don't . . . : Questions.  : Yeah. They don't, as far as I remember anyways. : What was it like when you went there? Was it crowded? : Oh, the whole boat. Oh, my God, there's three, three flights in there, in the boat. So many people. We were like, to me it looked like animals, like a bathroom. All boxes, like that, we called them boxes. Ellis Island, those days. And now she tells me she bought things, this and that. "Gee," I says, "I would love to see the difference it is now." What they remodeled it again now. Oh, God. Everything was new to us, because we were never out of the town, you know? And everything seemed so, my brother, not the young, the youngest one was with us and, uh, the second one. Oh, he was crazy after me. He had a house, and he had a saloon in New York. : Where in New York? Do you remember? : In 26th Street, between Eighth and Ninth. : Between Eighth and Ninth, on the west side. Uh-huh. : He had a saloon, and he had a big room in the back. He used to make a restaurant out of it. And he had a house with two floors, so we lived in one of them. The other one was rent, oh, no, my sister, yeah, was there. We were five girls and four boys, my mother. : Do you remember, who picked you up at Ellis Island? : My brother. : Which one was that? : He was a second one. The older one, he had four children, he couldn't make it, but he took it. Oh, he was crazy after me. When he saw me, oh, boy, in New York he took me all over to see this and see that, you know? Oh, he was crazy.  : And what struck you in particular when you saw this new city? : Well, we weren't used to those things, and everything seemed so, it's a big city anyway, New York, no question about it. And everything, oh, God, I couldn believe it either. Oh, well, I was about eleven years old. I mean, you know. I have a picture there. Yeah. Then we, uh, we used to live in that house, and he used to own it, and my other sister used to live upstairs. We stayed there for a long time. And, uh . . . : What was it like seeing your father again after all that time? : Oh, yeah. Well, that's why. They didn't want to send him back to us. So they decided, all together, that we should come over here, because they liked it here, sure, better than over there. But it was sad over there. We knew all these people. The whole town know each other. And then you got to leave, you know. It was, and we didn't know where the hell we were going. ( she laughs ) To come in this country too, you know, all the things, we're going to go with a boat, the following week it went down. It sunk, that boat. Oh, dear. There were, it was all right. Me, I was young yet. I got the picture up there. I was sitting on my mother's lap. I was a baby. Oh, that was years before. But, uh . . . : So did you go to school when you stayed with your brother on 26th Street? : Oh, sure. Then we got our own apartment after.  : Right in that neighborhood? : Yeah. We went to Chelsea School. : And what was that like? : Wait a minute. Ninth, Eighth or Ninth Avenue. It's a big school, it was. And I went up to the sixth grade there. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO : What was it like learning English when you first went to school? : Oh, that was tough. ( she laughs ) That was really, but they got a lot of patience, a lot of, like it would be like today. They try to learn different languages and all that, you know? It takes time, you know. But I, and it wasn't far from there either. The school was on 28th Street. I went up to sixth grade there. : Did the children tease you at first when you first came over? : No, over there they're different. No, even here they were, they weren't like, oh, God, I said, Jesus, what is she today? I says, my kids, even when I was up here that I bought a house, they used to go from one block to the other, on that same block. They never moved out of that place there. They go here, what they do, I can't stand it. Did you look on TV, the way they get dressed and all this? Oh, Jesus. : So were your teachers nice to you? : Huh? : Were your teachers nice? : Oh, we were in Catholic school. : Oh, you went to Catholic school in Chelsea?  : Oh, yeah. Oh, not here. Oh, no. Over there. : Over there. Uh-huh. : No, over here, it's still there, that school. It's on Ninth Avenue and 29th Street. It's still there, that school. No, I went to public school there, yeah. And finished the sixth grade. Yeah. : And then what did you do after you finished? : Then we worked. : Where did you work? : I used to work for Lord & Taylor. : Were you selling things in the store? : No. I sew. I even sew today. Everybody in the building come here, do this and do that for me. The heck with these people. You learn something, but here they're different. They don't teach those things. Even in school, they don't. I don't know. : What did you, what did you sew for Lord & Taylor? : Well, I used to go in the factory, and come home for lunch. They used to make the Eighth Avenue subway, up and down the stairs there, the wooden stairs that you have to, we used to walk all the time, back and forth for lunch, four times a day. So first I used to work in the skirts, the Jewish people and, uh, well, I was there quite a while. Everything by hand. They used to charge snaps, one penny. We used to hand in . . . : You got one penny when you put on a snap? : That's what they paid you. I used to hand my env-, there, never open the envelope. They give you the little envelope, whatever you make, you had it in. If they give you something, all right. If you don't, that's it. Of course, they pay board, you . . .  : You mean, you gave the envelope . . . : To my mother. : To your mother. : Yeah. You know, they had to live, too, and they use it a different way. When we were, well, I was working. Then the four girls, five girls, we had a, we rented a place, it was a doctor's place. It was a beautiful house. And we lived on the first floor, and they had eight rooms in there. We had a big dining room there, my God. She . . . : Where was that? : In New York. : In Manhattan? In the west side, by, uh . . . : 26th Street. : Uh-huh. : So we . . . ( she laughs ) See what they do those days? We had a big, uh, apartment, and we were all four boys, and all the girls and one boy there at that time. And we needed all the rooms we could get. And, uh, it was a doctor's place there. I used to babysit for them. He was a nice Irish guy. And we used to live in their house and pay rent. I don't even remember how much we paid. It was easy to take care, though. It was eight rooms. And what we used to do, when we used to work, my, we had a big dining room table. See, they don't do like that they do today. All the boys sat over there, the girls went out with, and we sat on this side. And you used to talk and work at the same time. We didn't waste no time. We did our work. : You mean, you did the homework, what they call home work?  : No, crocheting or whatever you had to do by hand. : You mean for the family? : No, no. : For yourself. : Yeah, yeah. I mean for us, like. You'd be surprised all the stuff I got here yet that we made from over there. : Well, how did you learn how to sew and how to crochet? : Oh, over there that's the main thing in Europe. That's the first thing the kids learn when they get older, old enough to hold a needle. Oh, they teach them early. No, I gave there in the saloon. : Well, who taught you? Who taught you how? : Oh, well, my sisters were older than me, you know. And we used to work, the three sisters used to go. One of them had to go in a different section, and you used to work for Jewish people, way up in those big buildings. And, uh, we used to come home for lunch, go back, four times a day. We never eat outside. We used to go out, lunch hour, go in the Woolworth in the big stores, just to get out a little bit. I mean, we were all the way up there, the big buildings there, even then, in New York, it was a lot. : How long was the work day? Did you start at nine o'clock? : Yeah. : You broke for lunch . . . : Yeah, nine o'clock, and come home about four or five. It depends how much work we had to finish. We used to work for all the people, they used to go to, in Florida. We used to make the woolen coats, the white flannel coats. We used to make the facing all by hand. I worked . . .  : So you did the handwork? : Oh, I worked for Lord & Taylor. Oh, that was a beautiful store. Oh! All the rich people used to go there. Then my daughter, my sister, the older one, she worked in the corset, to make them. And I still have one in there. It's got all bones in it, to keep your shape. Here they go for exercise. ( she laughs ) : Well, people, a lot of people wore corsets. : Yeah. I still got mine in there. I feel good when I wear that. Your body stays straight, you know what I mean? And you can work better, gives you more strength, like, to hold you. Here they're so sloppy, some of them. Oh, like even the Jews, oh, Jesus. The way they are again. They all like me, everything. Everybody comes to me, do this for me. I gave it up. I says, "I'm not going to do nothing for nobody." Because I'm a good nature. If I can help, I'll help. I don't ask for nothing, for no money or nothing. But lately, you know, the Jews, oh, sure, I says, "Oh, no." I have that machine. I says, "No, no." I says, "I can't do it any more." Why should I do it? They wanted to pay me. I says, I don't want to be bothered like that. I mean now, since I fell, I'm in here over a year that I haven't been out. : Right, right. : So, uh, I can't do it. I do, I'm waiting to open that machine. : So were you . . . : I got a lot of sewing to do.  : Were you working for Lord & Taylor when you met your husband? : No. We worked for him. He used to make the corsets and different dresses and things like that. We used to go for alteration there, too, to fix it. : Well, where was your husband? Was he in Manhattan, and he was working? : Well, no. We didn't let him work then. We were so many in the family, the girls and the boy. We didn't allow them to go to work. He was older, you know. And he used to stay home. Then my brother had a house on 26th Street. He had two floors, and he had a saloon and the restaurant in the back. And he used to stay with them and help them out, do different things, you know. : Do you remember the name of the saloon or the restaurant? : The name? : Yeah. : Oh, Jesus. I don't think it even had a name. ( they laugh ) Out of all . . . : Now, how about your husband, the man you married? When did you meet him? : Oh, I met him up here in Summerville. : Oh, okay. Well, how long did you stay in Manhattan before you came to New Jersey? : Oh, I came here, I got married. '29. : Did you know your husband before you moved to New Jersey? : He died in '52. : Uh-huh. But before you moved to New Jersey, had you met your husband in New York?  : No. I met him here. : Well, how come you came here? How come you came to New Jersey? : Because I, he lived here on Fifth Avenue, he had a house here. And he comes from Venice. And, uh, he used to come down on a Sunday. He wasn't that natured to go here, go there. He was quiet. And I met him up here in Summerville. My brother had a boarding house, a big house, he used to rent it, you know? And then on Sundays we didn't know where to go, we always went up there with the bus. And I met him up here. : Did you like him right away? : Well, no, I didn't meet him. He came in New York a couple of times. But he wasn't the type that likes to go here or go there. He's a home type. And me, I was the opposite. I was a lively, oh, I enjoyed myself. He used to come home, come down once a week, on a Sunday. But where can you go? He didn't want to go anywheres. He used to live up here on Fifth Avenue. The house is still there that his uncle made it, and he used to boarder there. And I met him up my brother's place. Then we fell for each other. First thing you know he wanted to, he was thirty-six. He was old already, yeah. Well, he went through the war, and he went, he traveled a lot when he was young. Oh, he had his time. That's when you get a certain age, then you, then you sit down, you cool off. : And how old were you when you met him? : Well, I married him in '29.  : Uh-huh. Okay. So you were, uh, twenty-seven. : Yeah. And he went up on my brother's place. We used to take the bus to go up there on the weekend with my older sister, you know? Because the others got married, too, but they were all down there, in New York. I got one sister there, there's a picture over there, that one there. She's going to be a hundred and two years old. : Wow. And is she in good shape? : Oh, yeah. She lives in New York. She lives in the apartment, they got an elevator. And my nephew has a big butcher sale, butcher. He carries the first grade meat. When you eat his meat and eat the kind of meat they got here. So we used to live, all of us together, when we were younger yet, I wasn't married, the others were married, on 29th Street on the west side, yeah, no, not 29th, that's when we were younger, but when they got married, on 44th Street. First we lived on one end of the town there, the block, and then we moved down there when my sister got sick and we took care of her, you know. Then she passed away. It has elevator and everything. : What did your sister have? : Oh, I couldn even tell you, I tell you the truth. I was, I was working. I was the youngest one. The others didn't, they didn't do anything. I was more lively, like, take care of her, call the doctor for this or for that, you know? Things that you have to know. And, uh, her husband, he died before she did, too. He had a wholesale butcher store, and he left it to the son. First grade meat. You taste that meat, oh. Then I go down there, buy stuff, and . . .  : Oh, that's good. : Oh, they, and now my sister was there once, near Eighth Avenue, and there there was a more modern apartment with an elevator. They had a lobby like here, but it was small. And we lived on the other end. There we had to walk six flights of stairs, two flights on each stairs. You know, the marbles like this from holding onto the railing and woke up in the same. : Did your mother and father, were your mother and father happy they had come to this country? : Well, it was hard for them to get used to it, from a small town to here, they don't know anybody. You know, like . . . : Did they become citizens, your mother and your father? : No, no. : But you became a citizen. Tell me about that. When did you become one? : Now, wait a minute. Where did I have that paper? : Yeah, it's right there. Did you . . . : Oh, that time there were so many people down there. Well, now . . . : Did you go to classes? : Huh? : Did you go to classes? : No. No, we learned in school, though. I mean, I had to go to school, you know. We learned everything in there. That's the whole story, welcome to the U.S.A. And, uh, we were shocked. We didn't know, we never saw anything. And to come here, there was all those people coming in, what a jam. It was all like little boxes going in the room, like, you know? And we stood there before they got all organized. My, God. Now they rebuilt the whole thing.  : Right. : My daughter told me that. "Oh," I says. "I want to go down there." Even, even the Statue of Liberty. : Do you . . . : She bought something in there, too. : Do you remember any things that your mother or father tried to teach you, things that they wanted you to, ways they wanted you to be, or how they wanted you to act, or . . . : Well, over there they stay after us, you know. It's not like here. They do whatever they want. We went to school, well, I was nine . . . : Did you try to teach your children some of the same things that your mother and father tried to teach you? : Here they don't want to learn here. That's the whole problem. ( she laughs ) Maybe some of the cooking, yeah. But they go with the books here. They do everything different. It wasn't like we were over there, you know, they train, and you got to stay under. We were, well, the town was nice and big enough. Never had a fellow over there. And there were two girls, two of us. We were jealous, one for the other. ( she laughs ) I was lively when I was young. Oh, I had my, the only thing, he wasn't. He traveled the world, before he got married, and he went to the service. He died in '52. And, uh, he used to know more a lot about everything, you know? I'll go, and me, we weren't brought up that way, see? And, especially in the small town, we all know each other. And, well, we had our good times, though. You know, family get together. We all know each other, see? That's the part of it.  : That's what I was going to ask you. Did you, was there a community of people from Italy in this country that your family associated with, or spent time with? : Not that, we didn't know anybody, because we had my brothers here before. One of them was married, and he had four boys, and they were small. The second one, he never had children. He couldn't have any. Maybe she was, I don't know. That's when he built the house up in Summerville, he turned it into a boarding house during the summer. He never had children. Then my brother, he got married. Yeah, he has one boy. I never know what he looks like. I never saw him. Since we lived in the city, here and there they all went, you know what I mean? We weren't brought up that way. We were more close together, you know? But, uh, they were all nice people, though. : Tell me what it was like for you, since you came here, you were eleven years old, and then you kind of started over again. Do you think that made a . . . : That's because everything was different than we were brought up over there, you know? ( she laughs ) Oh, my God. : Did you like it at first? : Well, I was young. It was hard for me to get along with the language. : Yeah. : You know? But I made it. I finished up to the sixth grade, those years, we finished. No, I didn't mind it. Oh, then you always find people in New York that can talk the same as you do, you know, friends. Oh, I had, my sister just wrote to me. We were very close friends. She lived on one block, I lived on the other. And she's in the hospital. She's very bad. And her sister keeps writing to me that she's bad, that she can't, she always thinks. We always used to be two girls, and that's it. We all were, well, the other one, too. Only my brother, he, uh, that had the business, he had that big house, that colonial house up on the hill, the big columns, they must have been a millionaire, German. He told that place. It was about a block square, beautiful. And, uh, we used to go there on a Saturday and stay overnight, you know, for Sunday. We didn't know where to go in the city. I mean, you worked there during the week, where can you go, places? We were friendly, yes, but we didn't know too much about it, anyway.  : Did your mother and father learn to speak English? : Oh, I went to school. : Your mother and father? : Oh, no, they didn't. : But they could speak . . . : Well, they could make out, though. I mean, we did everything for them, you know? Like my mother, when my brother had the grand opening up there, that big house, he was a millionaire that sold it. It was up on the hill, and they called it Woodcliff Lake, and the lake is right in front there. It was a beautiful place. It was a German millionaire, he sold it. So my brother bought it, it has big columns. He had a grand opening. : Well, tell me about, tell me about you. What do you feel that you've done in your life that makes you feel good, that you feel satisfied that you were able to do? : Oh, yeah, well, I started work early. Oh, no, first I started work in the button shop up in Connecticut, Waterbury. : You, what did you do, move up there? : Well, I had a sister up there. She was married, and she had twins, and she had a husband and everything. They, that's where they, just about a block away. We made the silver, the sterling silver. : For buttons? : No, not the button. The knives and forks. : Oh, oh. : I moved to Waterbury. I used to go seven o'clock in the morning to go to work and drill buttons, the holes, fourteen years old. I used to get up, I walked. We had no cars, we had nothing those days. I used to get up at five and I walked to this, until about four or five o'clock at night.  : So you worked on a machine that drilled the holes in the buttons. And then, then you left your sister's house and came back to Manhattan? : Uh, well, how did that happen? Her husband, she had twins, and I always wondered, because we got twins, you know? I never knew, it didn't dawn on me that she had two girls, they were twins, it runs in the family, you know? And, uh, well, I stood up there. I was raised more up there to go to work and make something while the mothers, they were in New York, and I lived with her. She had a house there, you know? And then she had the twins. I was there when they were born. And her husband didn't live long. He was a good singer. He used to sing in the church choir. Oh, God, what a voice he had. He lived up there, and then she moved, then, too. The girls grew up and got married, and she moved back to New York. : Well, then you moved back to New York, too? Uh-huh. : We used to get up so early in the morning and go to work. Oh, Jesus. Like here? Seven o'clock I was working already till four or five o'clock at night, and no transportation, in Waterbury, Connecticut. That's where they came. The others all worked in the city, I mean, my younger sisters and my brother, too. My brother died young. I don't know what, I was young then. I didn't know why he, he died. It's so odd. Because we used to live up here, and I used to, he had a house up here, and my, my husband was a mason up here, and they got a lot of construction. He's a good man. Oh, God, he was away when he passed away. I read the letter the other day. He didn't even know about it. Oh, he felt so bad. He says, they were like brothers.  : Who? : My husband and this guy here that has the business. He always used to come up there to my brother, you know, in the summer. That's where I met him, in the boarding house up there. And . . . : When you say . . . : You know, down, when you're in the city and you're new, you're afraid of people. You don't know who they are, what they, the family, you know? This way they used to go up there every Sunday, you know? We used to go and get the bus and go up there. That's the only place we used to go. All right, in the summer we used to go down the shore, on the beach, with my girlfriends. I had my time that time. : Did you go to dances? : Oh, the clothes, oh, I had such a beautiful gown. It was all beaded, all in scalloped on the bottom. : Well, where would you go? : Huh? : Where would the dances be? Where did you go? : Oh, that was in a big hotel in New York. It was all in beads. Oh, God, oh, I used to have good clothes. I got so darn many clothes in there that I don't know what the hell I'm ever going to do with them. I'd start to take all the other stuff out, and here there's only two closets you can put them in. : When you think of yourself now, do you think of yourself, how do you think about Italian and American? Do you think of yourself as some of each, or how do you think about that?  : Well, I have nothing again. I mean, what can you say? I mean, after all, we, from over there, we just came here, and I lived part of my life in New York. : Right. : They . . . ( she laughs ) But most is dead over there in the section and all that. And I have a nephew. He's got a wholesale butcher store. He's got two boys, and he works with them. In that picture over there, she's going to be a hundred and two years old, there. Yeah, she's going to be, if it ain't three now, probably. : Well, what is it like for you now in this time in your life? I mean, you're ninety-four years old, and your children are grown. How is life for you now? : Oh, I don't, I don't, no, I don't, since I fell up here with the bus on the, used to be before. We were waiting for the bus at the Food Town, I had my bags on the floor there, and, you know, the plastic. And everybody was running to get the bus. I tripped, and I fell right like this up there on this Food Town, and here they heard me yet. Every time the weather changes . . . : Right on your ribs, huh? : Yeah, my ribs, oh, God. And, uh, and ever since then I've been going a while. Now she won't even let me go on the bus to go. They go up there, they take you back and everything. But what's the use of me going when I can't only carry one bag, because I walk with a cane since then now. : So you stay in the house?  : Oh, I'm always, it's over a year I'm in here. The only time I go, my daughter picks me up up there on a Sunday. The kids are there, it passes your time. Here I get so boring now, my age. : Well, what do you do when you're here in the house, like . . . : Oh, I work, five o'clock I'm up in the morning, and nine o'clock is the latest that I go, but I'm on my feet all day. Oh, yeah. : What do you do during the day? : Well, I sew. I did a lot of sewing. And I never buy a box. I cook my own food. Oh, no. I'm not, I can't. A lot of times they want to take me to dinner. I don't want to go. The way I see them, they cook, I don't like it, because you're not allowed to have, like, we were brought up on wine. Now I can't drink alcohol. My son gives me heck. He says, "You were raised up on wine." That was true. We never had milk on the table. And I says, "Well," I says, "you get to the age that you can't do. Your body changes. Now you got to go ask the doctor what he tells you to do." ( she laughs ) And I miss it. That one over there, she drinks. She's going to be a hundred and two or a hundred and three, and she drinks a little alcohol every day, a little Schnapps. And she still drinks, and she's not alone. Now, I think, because last year. No, it wasn't last year. It was at the end, at the beginning of this year. She went out shopping. She always did. She got, my sister's apartment there, she loved the way it was. They got an elevator in it. It's a good apartment. So that one day she came home, and she goes in. They have a little, a lobby that size, with three marble stairs, they go up, and then they got the buttons, like here. And she goes, my sister used to live there, but she passed away, so she moved in there. Her furniture's all there, yet, the way it was. And, uh, so she used to go out and do all the shopping. But the world it turns today, now I see her with all these college kids. Some of them, they had the graduation, they got a place to go. But a lot of these younger ones, they go through, they're hanging. So she came home from shopping and has her purse like that, like ours, it's got the buttons. And her husband died a long time ago. And she came in, she was fooling around with her bag trying to get her key there, oh, she was trying to say, "I'm going to call my husband." There was a big guy standing in back of her, a colored guy. Oh, down there it's worse. She was held up twice already. So she says, uh, he says to her, she says, "Oh, I'll get my husband," this and that. When he heard that, he says, "Give me everything you got in your bag." She gave him fifty dollars. "My life is worth more," she says.  : Absolutely. : I won't live down there now. Oh, God. Not in New York. Oh! : Okay. We're just about finished with the tape. Is there anything you would like to say before we finish about coming to this country and living here. : Oh, yeah. I was glad to get here. See, everything, it's a new world for us from over there to here. Everything is, the only thing, it was the language, because we were brought up with one language over there, and it was kind of hard, even to go to school. But I made out pretty good, though, there, you know? Everything was, it came out the way we really expected it to. : Okay. I think that's a perfect place to end. I want to thank you very much. ( Mrs.  laughs ) I've been speaking with Santina  who came from Italy when she was eleven years old in 1913, and at the time of this interview you are ninety-four years of age, and it's May 7, 1997, and this is Janet  for the National Park Service, and I'm signing off. : Okay, thank you. : Thank you. : Thank you.
Frances Pizzotti Polletta;Italy;: This is Janet  for the National Park Service, and I'm here today with Frances Pizzotti , who came from Italy in 1920 when she was twenty years old. Today is June 24th, 1992 and I'm here in Mrs. 's home in Webster, Massachusetts. : Right. : I'm very happy to be here, and I want to first start out by asking you your birth date. : My birthday is April 14th. : April 14th. And the year you were born. : Nineteen. : 1900. : That's right. : Uh-huh. Okay. And the name of the town where you were born in Italy? : Ferrandino. : Ferrandino, okay. And you lived in the same town, Ferrandino, until you were twenty. : Yes. : Now, could you tell me about the town? What's that town like? : Nothing special. It was a nice town.  : Was it big? : A very good size. : Yeah. And what did people do there? : Oh, any kind of work. : Was it a farming place? : Well, my sister, one of my sisters, she go to my mother and father's place to work. And I stay in Ferrandino, had two families that had no water in the house. So I fetch the water every day long, carry the pan. : Where did you get the water? : They had to open fountain in the city, the town. : So did lots of people go to the fountain? : Sure. : To get the water. : To get the water, the water run all time. : And how did you carry it? : By hand, the pan. : And how often would you go? : Well, I go three times a day, each two family, and the rest I clean the house, my house. My mother go to work, and I take care of home. The next day I do the same thing again. And there was one lady, she was a widow, she had two grown-up daughters, but she was afraid to let them go to school all alone. And she hired me to go along. One was almost older than I was. But she no trust that, you know. : To go to school? : No, to go, to take the girl to the school, just walk together. She want to make sure that she went to school safe and everything goes fine.  : So that was a job you had? : They paid me for that. She was a widow. She was really nice, a good family. : Now, did you go to school? : Yes. : And do you remember the school that you went to? : This, no. There was, they used to call the Familial School for Girl, and boy, Musket for the boy. : They were separate? : There was a name, that's all. I went until the sixth grade. : And was it a Catholic school? : Yeah. No, it was a public school. : Public school. Uh-huh. What do you remember about school that you liked? : Well, I liked it. There was no law at that time to push to go to school where I come from. But I did it. My two sisters, they don't want to go to school, and nobody bothered. But I told my mother, I says, "I want to go to school," so she let me go. : Uh-huh. You're the only one of the children who went? : Yeah, that's right. : Do you know why you wanted to go? : Because I liked to be writing and read. : Now, in your family there was your mother, father. : No, just my mother. : Just your mother. : My father was here in the United States.  : Your father came first. : Yes. : And what was your mother's maiden name? : Francesca. : Francesca was her first name? : Yeah. : And her second name before she . . . : Francesca Pase Pizzotti. : Uh-huh. And how do you spell her maiden name? Do you know? : My name? : No. Your mother's maiden name, before she was married. : Pase. : P-A . . . : S, give me the pen. ( she writes ) ( she pauses ) ( voices speak off mike ) : After a little break. So you spell it P-A-C-E? : P-A-S-E. : S-E, P-A-S-E. Okay. And Francesca. : That's it. Francesca Pase Pizzotti. : Okay. And your father, what was his first name? : Antonio Pizzotti. : And your brothers and sisters. What were their names? : My sisters? : Brothers and sisters. : I don't got no brother. : No brother. : I had two sisters, three sisters. One in Italy, she's dead, and two that came over here after. I come one my older sister, the oldest one. She was twenty-six, I was twenty. And that make me understand, see, if I don't come, without her she could not come, because she didn't know how to write or read. So when I reach on a Battery there, everybody got in, they make me read for her and for me. That's it.  : Okay. So what were your two sisters' names? : Susan. : Susan. : Yes, Sunta. That's the Italian way. : And how about the other one? : Uh, Josephine. Josephine. : And do you remember the house you lived in? : Over here? In Italy? Oh, yeah. : What was it like? : Rotten. : What? : Rotten. : Rotten? ( they laugh ) Was it big or small or . . . : Oh, it was big enough, but old-fashioned. : Old-fashioned. Uh-huh. And how was it different from this house, say. What's the difference? : Over here? : Yeah. : Everything. : Like what? : Everything around. The way you see it, that's the way I got it. I rented it for vacation there for a couple of week, but I died to come home. : Oh, really. : I mean, how much I love, I like Rome, but no, I says oh, I not go back, back home. : Because it's a lot more primitive than your house here, right? : Oh, yeah. : Well, you didn't have running water. Is that right? You had to go get the water. : On my farm. Yes. But not in Rome.  : Not Rome, no. : Over there they had hot water in the house. : So you had to get water. : Help with the labor, (?), used to call one lire. : And what did your mother do? Did your mother have to work when your father was here? : She worked like a man. : Yeah. What kind of work did she do? : She would dig and plant and pack, everything, work on the garden. : And what kind of, was it a farm town? : It was too close and not too far. I have to walk in the morning and night. : What kind of things did people grow in and around? : Like over here. Everything they plant they pick it up. See, my brother, when I went to Italy, that's not my brother, my nephew, and he had a big farm. He had everything. Over here you have to buy everything. : Did you grow things to eat for your family there when you lived there? Did you . . . : I never went. Far away to go. : Did you grow what you ate? Did you grow vegetables that you also ate? : Yeah, they do that. Yeah, like over here, broccoli, beans and peas, corn. In fact, when we come back say goodbye to my sister that time, my natural sister. He had a big bed of corn grown, already clean. And he had wheat, oh, yeah, grain. He says, you see, the miller pick it up and take out the (?). Molido, they call over here. They grind to make the flour. They had a (?) flour and add white flour with the grain. They enjoyed it. I mean, I like to say all that, because I forget it. But still I wanted to come back over here because it was my family or whatever. I was dying to come back.  : Well, did you remember your father? : Oh, yeah. : When did your father leave? How old were you? : Oh, that's a big guess. I don't remember my father at all. I think I was maybe six, seven years old. I mean, I lost his age completely. I don't remember. But now we're going to go, I remember when I reach over here. : Well first tell me, before you left, before you left your town. How did it get decided that you would go? : My father called the family. : He called? : I mean, he requested to move over here. : He wrote to you to come. : Yes. He sent enough money for four people. But the war broke and they shut up the port and everything else, and my mother remembered we used to go to Rome to refresh the passport, to stamp again, to wait. So the war was over and we go on, there was a leader there. He said you have to wait for five months before you travel because they were afraid that the bomb was underwater yet. They had to make sure. So when he called my mother says, "All right." But the money my mother had for the trip was gone, and it wasn't enough. : How long was it from the time you were supposed to leave until you did leave? : To take the boat? Oh, maybe pretty good one hour and a half, or more than that. From my place to Naples, that's where we get out on the boat, in Naples, Italy. And we travelled fifteen days.  : Do you remember leaving your town to go to Naples? : Huh? : Do you remember when you left your town? : Oh, yes. : Did, was it a sad time because you were leaving? : For me it was. : What did you, why didn't you want to go? : Just because I was feeling like I didn't want to come, and I let my father know that. I write a letter to him. I says, "You're going to push me," I says, "you're going to be sorry." And I wrote that because I was mad. : You really came for your sister's sake. Is that why you came? : That's right. For my sister's sake, that's God's truth. : So you didn't really want to come. : Because if I don't come, she can't come. My mother was disappointed. Everybody else in the family home. : So you were the only one in the family who would read and write. : That's right. : So you came with your mother? : No. My mother come 1921. : And you came in 1920. And so it was just you and your sister? : My younger sister came with my mother. : So you came with your older sister? : The older sister. : And was there a big farewell when you and your sister left?  : Oh, yes. We had kind of a good night the night before. : What did you do? : Well, I came through, I see a lady, just about like that. Nothing else (?). She came and she ( adjusts her position ), my arm. She came and she brought me a little package like this, two package. One Vincenzo and another one was Candido. ( a telephone rings ) Two sons she had, Maria. : Can somebody else get that? ( discussion off mike ) : So she had two son over here, (?). And they says, you please, she (?). I hope to God they want you, (?) old lady. I hope to God (?) cemetery (?) marry my son, which I did. ( they laugh ) : Now, what did she give you? I didn't understand. : She give me a package of cigarette, a pack of cigarette. One was Marcitonia, I remember the name. The other one was Virginia. I never forgot that. : And she gave you that to give to her son? : Right. That's the gift that she sent to the son. She can't do anything any more, was an old lady, that way. : Did you know her son from before? : Well, I used to like that, because if I want to say yes, was too far away. I never, but, you know one another, but not to be friendly. Come a (?), when I reach, my cousin, we went to the house. I says, "I got this my cousin Dominick." He says, "Dominick, you know this two party?" "Oh, yeah." He said, "I work down at Betts."  : Down where? : Betts, a shoe shop, Betts. I says, "Yeah." He says, "Who give you this?" I says, "Your mother." He says, "Well, we're going to arrange that we're going to go some night to the house." So they took me down to the house. She turned out to be my sister-in-law and my brother-in-law. And the other brother, the one I married, he was there, too. So it was, I'm shocked because my (?) was too strange for him, but we see it like that. And I says, "Oh, shake hands." I was so happy. I says, "Your mother sent this." I says, "And to Candido." He says, "That's me." I says, "I know which one is Vincenzo." I said, "That's for you." He shook hands. I says, "Thanks so much." He start to cry. He likes his mother very much. He was the younger one in the family. So that's it. So then we started to be friends. Today, tomorrow, next week. One wrote a little letter, and they ask to my father, later on, say you could let her to get married. So (?). I was working at Steven's. : What's Stephen's? : Steven, tha's a big mill there. VOICE OFF MIKE: It's the largest woolen in the world, a smoking mill. : So I was working there. : You were working there. Well, what did your father say when . . . : Well, my father had (?). We get out of the train, and there, on the station over here, and he motion to me. He look at his clock, watch, he says, "You wait. Eight o'clock." Never say that. The (?) says, "Your father going to come pick you up." So we went. Nobody was inside there, just the man in the window for ticket. So I heard a little noise outside, talking. And I get up, and I just say to them, my sister says, "Where are you going?" I say, "Shh." So I just opened the door a little bit, I see all the men that were working on a railroad truck, the one that carry the fork or the shovel, all working men. And my sister says, "Shut the door there." And I (?). She call out my name, "Kikina." It was a nickname. My father heard that, he was in that group. He say, "Gee, that's my daughters!" He knew we was going to come but he didn't know the day. Because of the boat, they're locked on the water. They all was scared. So when he come, and my sister recognize a little bit, because (?). But definitely (?). So we had a nice day in New York, to my cousin and the family.  : So what was it like to be around your father after you . . . : Oh, I love my father very much. But just like separated, lost forever. The way he looked, the way he was. But when I see I think everything come back in a minute. Yeah. : And, well, let's back up a minute. When you were leaving you went to Naples. : Yes. : Now, how did you get from your town to Naples. : By train. : By train. And how long did it take you? : It take a couple hours, more than that. : And then did you leave right away, or did you stay in Naples? : No, we stayed, we spent a night in Naples. : And why did you spend a night there? : Because the boat wasn't ready. So they give us a room. They go with money, to trip. : The steamship company. Did you stay in a place with a steamship? : Yeah. And they paid for the room for us. So in the morning we get up, we have an alarm. Wait till the time come, somebody lead us, they wanted people with the baggage. That is the time they take it in on the boat. : Do you remember what you took with you or what your sister took? Do you remember anything that you packed to take to America? : It were all strange people, some you know, some you don't know. It was always different.  : Well, did you have a suitcase? : Yes. : What was in it? Do you remember? : Clothes. : That's it? : That's it. : Your sister, too? : That's right. She lost it, too. : Do you remember how, you lost it? ( Mrs.  laughs. ) How did you lose it? : We just missed. : When did you lose it? : I think it was in New York. We got everything when we get out of the boat. But I fell. I even twisted my foot, I get off lame. There was those big ropes there, up high, and I was so fresh to go by them. I walk outside, and I fall. One man take me up. I says, right away I walk lame. My foot never did get over that. : And that was getting off that boat? : Yeah. Maybe it was still on the boat. So half of the way to go because it was a lot of people. The boat was full. I don't know how many. : Were you down in the bottom of the boat? : That's right. They used to call it third class. : It was a big dormitory. : Yeah. He had a wall, he had a piece of everything (?) on the night. : Was it bunk beds? : Yeah. : And a lot of them in one big place?  : Oh, yeah. And it was a lot more. : And did, where did you eat when you were on the ship? : We're going to go up and open air, and they put the table. It was six from my home town. We know one another. So they put six together. And my sister was sick. She had, she's sick the second she come in on the boat. She was sick all of the fifteen days. She never eat. : Was she seasick? : She was like this. So they give you vaccination, and the vaccination went wrong. She had an arm big like that, all red. Every day she had to go to take care of that. And they told her if the arm don't get better by next week they're going to send you back. And she was real scared to death. She don't want to go back. I don't blame her. But I was the one a little stronger, yes, whatever. (?) : So do you remember when the boat came into New York Harbor? : Sure, I remember that. We get out there, and they used to call Batteria. You have to walk a little ways, with a bag and a hat. And we reached there, then it was too far, really. So when we were inside there, my God, the people was back. And my sister, she was holding on to me, because I got, that put in line. So when I reach there the man lead me to go to read. It was like this, glass on the top and the writing was on the bottom. So I have to read everything what was there, what they mean.  : You could read it? : Yeah. So I says in Italian, I say to him. I says, "I come to my father." All those words. "My father call us to come over here to be with him, and later on my mother going to come with my sister." That was one for me, another one was for my sister, the same thing. I have to sign my name and I have to sign her name. They'll let you go, you know. Still you can't go to land. They lead to another room. So they took my sister, and she disappear. I was scared to death. I says, "Oh, my God, where is she now? They're going to send her back in Italy." I don't know what to think. Because I see the chalk that they some letter on the back. They're going to stand, like a "C". So I don't know, to me. But later on I see the people we come together all disappeared to one place or another, because we don't come all on the same place. One they go Chicago, Philadelphia, whatever. We don't see no other company we get to eat. So, but finally I was just (?). I see when a man look at me, just look, but he no move. But when I see my sister, they open the door, she come back. I says, "Where you were?" She says, "In there." She says, "They check my eye, gave me maybe some physical check up." I says, "Are you all right?" She says, "Yeah." She didn't talk too much. She was scared. I was the one with the big mouth. I don't like it, but I have to do for her and for me. So anyway they told us to go sit in here (?), we went to sit. No more boat and no more our friend. So we sit and we was feeling angry. I see then that was a little store, now I say that. I know it was a store. I says, "It must sell food." So my sister said, "Where are you going?" It was from here maybe to the garage, my garage. And I see the stuff there. They had bananas. I never see banana before. I see the man walking by, he had a banana, he had a crackers, he had bread. I says, "Oh, I'm going to see what I want." So the man ask what I can do. I said, "That." I pointed to a banana. I say, "Yeah." I said, "That." He said, "Money." He put the three banana in the bag. I said, "A box of crackers." All right, put in a bag. And I see the bread, the same thing. So I was going to see how much it cost, I was going to see, and I had in my hands like this. He says, I don't know if it was five dollars or whatever. I went like this, and I take off the money. ( Mrs.  disturbs her microphone as she demonstrates her gestures. ) I take it out. So he give me the change, but it was Italian money, but he give me back American money. He give me three dollars back. I said, "Geez!" And I see the lady along there, and I tried to make my sister laugh. I says, "Look." "Ah, I don't want to see that." She was still afraid. She don't believe she was on her way out. So we went. At the same time we started to eat a bit, a piece of cheese. The conductor come. He went like this. He motioned pick it up the baggage, to follow him. So we followed him, not too far gone. We were still near the water, practically. And we get in. I thought it was hours. But when we get in, when we sit I can feel the water.  : The ship moving? : The ship move. I says, "Oh, my God." My sister, that's all she had on her mind. I said, "We're going back to Italy." Somebody laugh. They were Italian, we went a little out on deck. That's we see the Liberty statue. So I'm talking to my sister, I say, "Look, La Madonna." I thought it was the Madonna. I don't know why, God bless. And we go back and we sit, and it come the dark. I think it was five o'clock. It was another conductor again, and make like this. It's five o'clock train. We go New London and we get, I couldn't get a job, but I had work. We reach (?), no longer (?). Just five minutes to five. So we get out of there, the conductor come again. Lead inside the station, and we sit. It was full of people. We didn't know nobody, and nobody know us. So we sat there, and all the people go by, back and forth. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO : I said, "Geez, I see the man." I don't tell my sister that. I see the man go back and forth. What he want? I was kind of scared. But then the people started to slow down, he come. He says, "I can ask to work, please." I said, "I understand." Then he started talking Italian. He says, "I want that place there, Palazzo. He says, the motel, everything. He says, "I got a business, and I got coffee and doughnuts downstairs. My wife work there. And I see you two girls ain't got nobody over here, not to say hello, not to give a glass of water." He says, "I offer you my." He was a very nice man. He says, "You're going to stay here overnight, I won't trust it. You have to sleep on those, you know, those, on a seat." My sister says, "Yeah?" He says, "Yeah." So we follow him because it was right across the street. It take two minutes, we have to stop for the car. After we get in there there was the smell already kitchen. And he says, "Get in." We get in, it was one step. He put us to sit on the stool by there, and we drink a coffee. He says, "Have a cup of coffee, doughnut." He says, "On my honor." He was a real nice gentleman. So we eat. Then we lead upstairs. It was one floor. And we passed a couple door. Before the door, he take off his key, a bunch of keys and he open the door. It was a bedroom. He said, "That's the best I can do it." I introduce to his wife first. He says, "Sure, it's a good thing, go ahead." So he opened the door. He said, "That's the bed." There was a bureau, a beautiful room. I never seen in Italy that. Clean carpet. I was real impressed. And I says, "Grazie." And I said, "Thank you very much." He says, "Not yet. Tomorrow morning a train will come five o'clock. The conductor says that again. Ten after five, he have to go away all night, to the five o'clock train. But he come, he was more gentle. He come, he knock on the door. He say, "If you hear my name, open the door, you know that's me. And I do better than that." He says, "I'm going to leave the key right inside. If somebody else want to open they can't open because the key was in." He says, he was a real gentleman. He come, it was a half past four, to take the five o'clock train to come over here. It don't take long, but long enough. And that's it. ( A man makes an off-mike comment in Italian. ) Oh, come on. ( they laugh )  VOICE OFF MIKE: You didn't tell us where the toilet was. : No, that's a shame, no. God forbid, God forbid. He was nice, that man, for everything. But he didn't show us where's the bathroom. So when we get up in the morning we didn't know where to go. Where do we look? There was a door. I didn't want to bother the door. I says it may be somebody else. So we went the other side. So we wait a little bit. What are we going to do? I can't hold it. So I sent a telegram to my father because he take all of my dress over here. The telegram reach there, we was there already, over here already. I ask my father, I says, "Repair a little damage." I says this, that. He says, "What do you want me to do, send the money to that guy?" "Well," I says, "he do a lot of thing. He did a lot for us. We have no place to go." He says, my father never work. (?) better. My mother, she started us off straight, and we started to grow up, but she never said much. What I seen with my own eye, rest her soul. She didn't send nothing after the man to clean the carpet. I'm sorry, it's not that. I said, "Gee, all your life, and now you can't do yourself." There was another one. My father didn't want to work over here, and had enough. I had a big family. And besides, a crippled boy, you know, that take a lot. That's my life. : Let's see. Is there anything else about the voyage or coming into New York or . . . : Just a second. Mark, get me water.  : Is there anything, when you first got to this country, was there anything that struck you as different, that were different from anything you had experienced. : I got (?). We find everything, we don't have any. Every easy way, everything. When we landed to my cousin over here, then it was too far from the station. I see the sink, the water run in the house. You open the jars to make a coffee, and we don't have any of that. I find all the convenience, we never had it. And I thank God He put me in this world and this land. : So were you glad you had come? Soon after you got here, were you glad that you had come? Because you weren't too happy about coming here in the beginning. You didn't want to come that much. : Not that much. : But then when you came here, did you like it right away? : Oh, yeah, I like it. I find my brother over here, he was waiting for us. And we had a bigger store, Jewish, and we had the best clothes in Webster. So the day after this, he said, "Come on." Bring us to the store. He dress up, everything what we needed. I says, "Am I keeping my dress?" He answered, "No." He says, "That's hell. Throw it away." He didn't want me to wear it. And I also liked that dress. My shoes, I had shoes made. Just the same, he wanted me to throw them away. Anyway, he dress up from the shoes to there. : Did he want you to throw away your clothes because he didn't want you to look like an immigrant?  : Maybe things like that, but instead there was a lot that I have to keep. Anyway, I have to get right outfit after. : Do you remember what clothes you came over in? : Huh? : Do you remember the clothes you had on when you came? : Dress, yes. It was handmade. : What were they like? : They were (?), but I never seen anything over here like it. Something like that. And they had a big three button on the front. It was cute. I liked it because it was special, somebody made for me. My sister says, "They're good enough." She was glad, after. And my shoes were nice shoes. They were tennis shoes, same color what they got over here. And that's everything handmade. No machine. They stitch the shoes. They go this way, then the needle go there, another one go over here. That kind of stitch. I remember all that. So little by little and little by little. When I think about my sister, she never have gone out to the door. She sit and she started the crochet. She make a little bedspread. Me, I have to go to work. My father says, "Go look for a job." ( they laugh ) I says, "What?" "Go look for a job." I says, "What's that?" He can't speak English either. ( they laugh ) I can't say that. So my girlfriend, she was half French, but she learned to speak Italian so plain. She says, "He wants you to go to work." I says, "Why don't you go to work?" To my father. He says, "(?), don't go to work." He was (?). Anyway, I have a girlfriend of mine, she found me a job at Stevens. And that was an easy way. I don't know what was harder, to find a job, because you have to change a lot of things, the way you work. But I told them, "Give me easy job. No tough, no do this and no do that." Just put the work inside a (?) a day, if you have the next row. So he did. He was a German guy, a nice gentle man, tall, moustache. And he come. So he give me the job. And the two girls, the, one was my cousin, says, "Now we teach you something. First," she said, "the bus is going to come tomorrow morning." And I asked where. She says, "At the job." I says, "What you want me to do?" She says, "You're going to go like this: Good morning." She says, "You say 'good morning.'" The next morning she says, "You're going to do the same again." I says, "Why do you ask me?" She says you like the job, you say a little bit. But I got a paper to make talk me like that. I last about three weeks. ( they laugh ) I tell you, I went through my hell, and that's what I am. That's awful. But I was nice. They were very, just I would feel sorry for my sister because she never eat a bit, nothing at all. She was real sick.  : Well, then, um . . . : I was sick. I was sorry because she was sick, and I was mad because she push me to come. That's it. But after I forget. I enjoy it, my life, the best I could. : And then your mother came the next year. : My mother the following year, it was 1921. She come to me by the mill. Some French girl deliver to my cousin. So when I see my mother she says, "Oh, my God." Oh, I was so happy then. : What was your mother like? : Oh, she was a nice lady. You know, any time she write a letter, she wanted to know what I'm doing. And I lied to her. I says I go to school and I got nothing else to do. All the while I go to work. I go make a (?) for Domenick. When she saw me I says, "Oh, my God, that's not my daughter." My sister says, "Oh, yes, she is." She come closer and closer and she cry and I cry. It was real happy and sad for a long time. She says, "You're telling me you used to go to school." I says, "I did." I says, "I graduate." ( they laugh ) I don't want to tell her what I was doing. Poor my mother. You know how long she live over here? Nine years. She no live long, and she no wants to go neither. : Were there some kinds of things that your mother tried to have you learn? Are there things that your mother taught you that she wanted you to . . . : My mother, she don't know nothing at all. She just take the way my father want, so he did the best. He says, "You stay there, you don't got nothing at the job." The job, just like a laborer, I'm in jail there, go to work every morning. And he says there's no future. So my sister, she really wanted to come, but me, I was different. I don't want to come. And I told my father in a letter. I says, "If you push me," I says, "you'll be sorry." But I never did nothing, just talk. I like my father just the same. But I like my mother, but I don't want to come. But I was also pretty good. I went to work at Steven's, and after I started he had a little shop upstairs, for the blouse. And I was a little bit smart in that. I used to sew a little bit. They have a dressmaker right next to my, where I used to live. On a Saturday night if she had a lot of work to finish the people from the farm, they all come back on a Saturday and I pick her up to buy things. I says, "You got whatever it is to be done?" She says, "You want to help me?" I says, "Sure." There was another girl named Bianca, Biancina. Every day we worked on a Friday night. She came a couple of lire, and was happy.  : Were there a lot of Italian people in Webster when you came? : Well, there were a lot, but now it's all gone. : Were there a lot of other immigrants from other countries, too? : But there was no one to come from my place. I mean, don't mix. A couple, they come from Sorbino. That's not too far from our place. Some from (?). That's a city for Italy, that place. And Aladri. That's where my sister was living, Aladri, another sister. But to see real people from where I used to live, I don't see. Because I had a lot over here, relations. All the Pizzotti, that's all my relations. That's over fifty or more. But I used to be a secretary practically over there. Everybody know I was writer, I know how to write and read. Those old-fashioned people. They all come with me every day, write me a letter, and I write to parents, to family. There's nobody to write and read. My husband says, "Why don't you charge a lot of money?" I say, "Are you crazy?" And still today, just I stop now. It was my natural role. : How was it for you to learn English? Was it hard to learn English? : Well, I want to say yes, I want to say no. But I went to school for five weeks at night, night school, and the teacher was a real, give me good credit. Because after you learn what it means a letter because I realize the friend, a lot of things. She say, "You catch up fast." Usually she tell me what it was. I says, "Why you don't know that before?" "Because it was easier for me to take a job." Then she put on the blackboard. I went five weeks over here to night school. (?)  : And then did you become a citizen? : Yeah. It was 1940 I become a citizen. And it was hard. Today they give away all the time. Because it was also during the war, and they wanted to know a lot of things, for the Nazi come over here. They try to be boss. They says, "You will not get accepted for that." I don't know if I got to say yes or no. I fill a lot of paper. But I had my daughter, thank, there she is. She was a real smart girl. She was in high school already. And she says, "Ma, they ask this word, you say no." She says, "You want to remember." I says, "You (?). She have to pick up that. You're going to turn like we are." You says, "No." So she teach me pretty good before I went for two years. The first, they call first card, second card. It's the family. It was pretty good. Just I make a mistake, one thing. They ask me for the mayor, the don over here. I couldn't make it up. So Eda, my daughter, says, "Ma, you don't got no mayor, you got a selectman." So I put down selectman. I pass it. I had a man and a woman for a witness. Ruggieri Grazio and (?). : Were you proud of yourself? : Oh, yes. I still got the paper. They're going to frame it when I die. Somebody will take it. ( they laugh ) I still got a passport. I got my mother, my father. I don't throw away nothing. VOICE OFF MIKE: Ask her what happened when her mother died. : What happened when your mother died?  : What happened? What happened? Oh, my father marry. You want to know that? : Yeah. VOICE OFF MIKE: What went on after your mother died? Where did her father go? : Where did your father go after your mother died? : Well, we, all the people, they went home, my family, sisters, husband, they all went home. And he couldn't even get out of the car. And we stopped at (?), and I says, "Pa, ain't you going to go home?" He says, "Oh, no." I said, "What are you going to do?" He says, "Your mother telling me when she's going to die you're going to move (?)." I say, "You're crazy! I don't got enough room for my kids." I had no room, honest to God. I had five, used to live upstairs. And you know my husband, what he did, God rest his soul. He says, "I'll make room." Which he did. I had my hands full, a lot of things slowed down too, but I keep a long. I gave him a chance. He was sick, I take care of him. : How long did your father then stay with you? : He die, almost twenty-one years. ( they laugh ) My mother die in 1929, and he die in 1960. Figure it out what I went through for my father, rest his soul. He was good. Still I like him just the same. I'm mad because I was in between my husband and him. My father was fresh. He had a dozen knife and a bucket. And sometimes he come (?). He says, "Watch." Because I got to play, they call (?), it had a bocci field to play. And at night I go play. I was up. He says, "But your father got a knife and a bucket. He says you want to hit your husband." I say, "Is he crazy?" So I tell him that, to my father. It was me and him. My husband went to work. I says, "What you had on your mind?" He says, "What." I says, "You go after me with a knife?" He says, "Who told you that?" "(?) see you. He tell me." I say, "That better stop, (?) get out of here first." He said, "I don't believe it." But I (?) five weeks, he had another man. He says, "I want to get out, go." I says, "Where you go? I want to know where you go to." He says, "To my sister." I says, "Good, go." And I used to pay insurance for him for twenty-five cents, one policy, and thirty-five cents another policy out of my husband's money, and I had enough to buy milk a lot of times. They keep going. So he took the policy to the book, weekly book, to pay. My husband never know that, never. So he went. Five weeks later, almost five, he bring everything back. He says, "I cannot come back?" "No, not for me." I says, "I ask my husband." He did. Jimmy said, "Sure, why not? I don't chase you out." He was such good to him, and he don't know either. That way my father feel bad. And I gave him a dirty look and I said to him, I says, "You don't know. That's it, you don't know." He come back. When I look in the book where they show rent, I says, "Look, we're five weeks behind." I says, "Who's going to pay for that?" "I don't got no money." I says, "What do you mean you don't got no money." I says, "I know you don't got no money." That book lied because I paid that every week, so I pay for my children. I used to get two dollars a week on welfare, two dollars. We made enough to smoke. I says, "Where I'm going to get money?" He says, "You want me to pay for that all the time?" Right away a (?) come in. I told him it's a better way against them. That's the way you want it. I says, "Now he's an old man, but what I'm going to do?" And I keep paying. He had insurance from Grand Lodge of Italy. That's what it's called. And he sent, he had a policy, two hundred dollars in debt. When he die he got two hundred dollars. It's a big money. And he used to pay a dollar a month. I stretch on that, too, once a month. So after they raise it to five hundred dollars. Not too long before he come to me, he says, "You got my policy?" I say, "Yeah." "Give it to me." I give the policy. He went to the president of the lodge, he pulled three times. Go to my sister, two of my sisters. The oldest one and the younger one, and me I was the last one. So when he give back the policy then I want. Not because I want the policy. See what I mean? I do good, and I don't do nothing, and I'm the one who do everything. So I says, "What'd you do that for?" I says, "Well, what do you think?" She says, "You going to take everything?" I says, "What I got? I don't got nothing? I give it to you every day." I couldn't stand it. (?) for that. Anyway, he died, rest his soul. The president of the lodge, every day wanted three check. You fill that out yourself, five hundred dollars. They no come you, three check and (?) a number. I was the one to get the less. I say, "See?" I thought I'd get a check for life. I says, "My father, what I did for him." He was bad, but he was good through it all. ( she laughs ) I keep him here for thirty years because my mother die in 1929, he die in 1960, February 7th.  : Is there anything else? The tape is about to run out. Is there anything you'd like to say about coming to this country before we close? : No. I'm happy to be where I am. I raise a big family, thank God. I had one little start, for the children, but everybody got to die. Everybody got to be sick. I lost three. One in California and two over here. : And do you have grandchildren? : Oh, yes. I got lots of that. I can't even count. VOICE OFF MIKE: She has about thirty. : You run out of paper? You run out? : I'm running out. You have how many grandchildren? : I think I got sixteen. ( he coughs off mike ) : And do you have great-grandchildren? : Yeah. And I think that's three in California and all the rest over here. VOICE OFF MIKE: Three, seven, eleven. Three, seven, eleven. Thirteen, fourteen. Oh, yeah, Tommy got killed. She had fourteen, uh . . . : Great-grandchildren? VOICE OFF MIKE: Fourteen grandchildren, and they've got one, two, three, probably ten great-grandchildren. : Wow. : I got a lot. : Okay. Well, I want to thank you very much. : That's okay. I thank you. : It's been a pleasure to hear your story. ( tape ends without signoff )
Teresa Cardinale Constantine;Italy;: Okay. This is Janet  for the National Park Service. And today is July 7th, 1993. And I'm here in the Ellis Island recording studio with Teresa Cardinale . Mrs.  came to the United States from Italy in 1917 when she was eight years old. Well, I'm very happy to meet you, and I'm looking forward to hearing your story about coming to this country.  : It was nice meeting you, too. It's a very, privilege for me to be here.  : Wonderful. Okay, well, let's proceed by starting at the beginning. Tell me your birth date and the town you were born in.  : March 9th, 1908. And I was born in a little town in Italy named Casono del Murge.  : How do spell that?  : It's C-A-S-O-N-O. Del Murge is D-E-L, M-U-R-G-E.  : And where is that located, Casono del Murge?  : It's located mostly on the west coast of Italy. And the providence [sic] is Bari. B-A-R-I.   : Now did you live in Casono the entire time, your eight years before you came to the United States?  : Yeah. Yes. Yes.  : Okay. What kind of a place was that? What, was it a big town, a village?  : No, it was mostly a village. And not too big. And we had our home there. But, of course, it's not like here in the United States, you own a home and it's yours. Each floor is owned by a different person.  : Oh. Tell me about the house, whatever you remember about the house you lived in there.  : Well, what I remember, it looked something like in the 1800 of, in this country. It was very plain, different rooms that's just separated by curtains. No doors.  : What was it made out of?  : Stone. Stone homes. That's what they are all made out of stone. Inside it's mostly tile. Not wooden floors. And it, we had it pretty easy, because we were in the town. The farm people had it much harder.  : Did you have, do you remember what your mother cooked on?  : Oh, gee, I really can't remember. But what I, what I do remember, to keep warm there was a little fireplace. It's made out of wood round, and in the center of the, of the fire would be like a copper lining. And in there we used to warm up with the, with the almond shells. We used to light almond shells for fire. And this border around, it would be to put your feet on. You kept warm. (she laughs) Really, really, no bathrooms.   : How did you get water?  : We, we had a well into our own building, and we didn't have it that bad. But there was people, there was a town, you go to the town and they have, well, in many places they had water pipes that people could go in there and fill it up, you know. But we had a well. And my mother also was in business. We had like a country store. A little bit of everything, you know. And we had a nice living. Not expensive living, but nice living. We never went hungry.  : What was your mother's name?  : My mother's name was Victoria.  : Do you remember her maiden name?  : Yes.  : What was that?  : Salvaggi. S-A-L-V-A-G-G-I.  : And, so your mother ran a little store.  : Yes. Yes.  : What do you remember about the store?  : Well, it, that was, we ran the store from our own house. And she was a baker. She used to bake bread. And she was known in the town as "Victoria the Baker." But we used to sell a little bit of everything in there. But my father had passed away and, when I was four years old. And my mother really was a man and the mother of the house.  : Well, now, so you don't remember your father?  : I think I remember him because my mother talked so much about him. But really I have no recognition [sic]. And we have a picture that, you know, that I have now. My brother had it. He's the only one that had a picture of my, of my father. But since he passed away they gave it to me, which I was very happy.   : Well, now, you lived in, the house you lived in, there were different people living on each floor?  : Each floor, yes.  : So that you and your mother and your brother were on the first floor...  : Yes.  : The ground floor?  : Ground floor.  : Which is where she sold things out of?  : Yes. Yes.  : Do you remember any experiences in the store, any things that happened...  : Well, this is what happened, you know. My mother used to bake bread. And she'd make my brother and I get up and help her. Maybe we gave her more trouble, because we had to weigh the dough. And one time I forget to put an ounce on it. And after the bread was all made, my mother had to take it all apart and do it all over again. So I don't think we were too much help. (she laughs)  : Well, did you say you forgot to put an ounce on it?  : We had to weigh the, the dough.  : Uh-huh.  : And I forgot to put, say, it was a pound, and it needed another ounce. I forgot to the weight on it to weigh the bread. And after it was all finished my mother had to break it all apart and start all over again. That's the only thing I really remember of doing it, you know.  : Yeah. What was your brother's name?   : Joseph.  : Joseph. And how about your father? What was his name?  : Thomas.  : Thomas. Okay. And so you and your brother and your mother were the only one's living in your home there?  : Yes. Yes.  : Did you have grandparents?  : I had grandparents, but they lived in their own home.  : In the same town?  : Same town.  : Do you remember any experiences with your grandparents?  : Well, the only thing I remembered is when we came to America, they came to, they came with us to the boat. And we waved good-bye. They were old at the time. They were eighty-six and eighty-five. And six months later my grandmother passed away, in six months that we were in America. And she passed away. And six months later after that my grandfather passed away, so we never seen them. Oh, I wish I would have taken that picture with me today. I would have showed you.  : Oh.  : We had a picture with my mother, my brother and I, and my sister and my mother's grandparents. We had taken it to send to America. My father had been here, and he was here for two years. Then he came back to Italy, and my mother wouldn't let him come back, because they used to say, you're lucky he came home, because a lot of them go away, they never come back home. So my mother wouldn't let him, he was supposed to come, but she wouldn't let him come, so he passed away there.   : I see. Well, now your father, when he left for the United States, was that about 1915?  : Oh, no. I don't think...  : No, it had to be before that.  : I don't think I was born.  : Oh, okay.  : Yeah. But I was two years old when we took this picture to send to my father.  : I see.  : Yeah. So, I don't think, you know, he came back. I was the fifth child. They had six children. But three died and three lived. Maybe...  : Now, who, what was your sister's name, the one who lived?  : Marian.  : And how old was she? You were, now wait a minute. She, did she come to America at the same time you did?  : No.  : No. She came before that?  : Yes. She came six months before with some friends in the, hometown people that were leaving also. And my mother, you know, she asked them to watch over here. She was eighteen.  : Uh-huh.  : See, she was the first child. I'm the fifth. And that, there was ten years difference between her and I. So she came here six months before.  : I see. Now, what, why was the decision made for her to come? Do you remember why she went first?  : Well, I think that, I really don't know the reason, you know. My mother never really talked about it. But she had a brother here. And she wanted her to, to go to the new world and see how it was and how she liked it. And with my uncle everything worked out fine. And she got a job right away. And she worked, she saved money on that ten dollars a week. And before we came, she had her home, she had rented a house, and she had needs. What we needed to, to stay there. Beds, a chair, table and chairs, and where we sleep a little bureau. Only the necessities that was important for us to start our lifetime, you know.   : What was she working at when she was here?  : When she came here she got a job in the chocolate factory. Candy factory.  : Uh-huh. Where was that?  : In New York. But we lived in Brooklyn.  : Okay. So, did you go to school in Italy at all?  : Yes, I did. I was promoted to the second grade.  : Uh-huh.  : I finished second grade, and I was promoted to the third, but I didn't, I didn't use that at all. And at the time I was doing very well with the speaking and, and writing. Now I don't know too much. I forgot all about it. (she laughs)  : Well, now you know English.  : Yes, I do. Yes.  : So, so, what do you remember about school? What do you remember...  : In school?  : ...of your experiences there?  : In Italy?  : Yeah.  : I really don't have too much recollection of it. I think we were taught by the nuns. We used to go to the convent and be taught by the nuns. I don't have, I, I can't recall that period of my school days.  : How about your brother? Was he in the same school?  : He was in the same school. He had finished third grade. And he had promoted to the fourth grade. And in, that is a very good grade in Italy, you know, because they have one year for each class. And really I should know how to speak and write well. But I don't. I forgot all about it. I picked up my new language. I forgot all about the old, you know?   : Uh-huh. Well, who were you closest too in the family?  : My, my original family?  : Yeah.  : I was very close to my brother.  : What was he like, Joseph?  : He was a wonderful person. Very warm. Very loving. And he, he was the father of our home. When I was young he was my father. And if I wanted to go out and he said no, he was strict. I couldn't go out. (they laugh) But he was easier going with his children. But he was wonderful to me.  : Yeah. Well, let's see. How about community life? What did people do in Casono for fun?  : Oh, I don't know. I don't think I ever seen, you know. Just getting together. That was the main thing. Just getting together. Sometime picnics out to the country. Because we were in the town, so we went to the country. That was a big thing, you know. And what I remember there so well, is that you exchanged, my mother had, say, the bread and the spaghettis and the cheese. And the farmer had the vegetables and the meat had the meat. You exchanged. Most of the times it would even up the money. And there was many times people owed my mother money. And this is what I remember so well, because my mother made me do it. She sent my sister, when she was older, never came back with any money. But she sent me, and I talked them to death. (they laugh) And they paid. And my mother says, "I know who to send now." I could have been no more that five, six years old at the time, you know. But I had, I had a gift of gab. Especially making people laugh, you know.   : Wonderful.  : Yeah.  : Well, now, what did you, what people do for work in that town, do you remember?  : Most of them were stone makers. Builders. House builders. That I know of, you know. And, of course, there was, there was banks. There was a bank that, we had a dear friend, he baptized my brother. He was more wealthy person. And he worked in the bank. And most of them, men especially, were, were cement workers. Stone workers that they build the houses with, that I could recall.  : And how about the agriculture?  : Well, there was a lot of farm. There was a lot of farm. And the town was known for almond trees. A lot of almond trees. That's why we were able to burn the almond. (she laughs)  : Yeah.  : That was our fire, you know. That was the, like we have coal here and things. We had the almond shells.  : Let's see. So do you remember any dishes that your mother made that you particularly liked as a little girl?  : Oh, mostly spaghettis. You know, pasta. Mostly pasta. They were...  : What did you put on it? Do you remember?  : Oh, we had cheese and gra, sauce just like you use, like we have it here. The only thing once in a while she would make polenta, and we didn't like it no matter what she put on it. It's like wheatina, you know. It's supposed to be a delicacy, but we didn't care for it. But we had meats, and we had pasta, and we had vegetables. As I said, they exchanged. The money exchange with, with the products that they gave, you know, with each other. And then, you know, that was the way of life that I remember.   : Yeah. Do you remember the religious life. Do you remember any...  : (she coughs) Very.  : ...religious occasions?  : Very. Very, very much the Catholic religion. At that time mostly all Italians were. But not today. They're all mixed. But they were all very strict Catholics.  : Do you remember any either religious celebrations or any...  : Well, we had, like, once a year we had a feast in our home town. The patron saint, they would take her out every year. You see how they do in New York, on Mulberry Street, they bring out the statue, and they bring her all around the town, and this is what was mostly that I remember, that it was celebration, a big celebration with the patron saint of the town.  : And what would you do? What would people do during that celebration?  : Well, they would, they would have music. And they would, you know, dance around, get together, eat, you know. And, nothing too extravagant. (she laughs) The town wasn't that big enough to, it was just simple. Simple.  : Do you remember games that you played as a little girl?  : You know, this is the funniest thing. I don't remember being little. I don't know why, I don't remember my young youth. I think we had to grow up very early, because of my father dying so young. And we had to help out. I don't even remember my young days in America. And I was quite a big girl, eight years old. I should. And I don't remember my young days. We had to, there was no playing. No games. The most fun we had was going on picnics and getting together with friends. That was the big thing. The only thing I remember in Italy during the war time, my mother to raise money, we were selling fruit. We had a camp of, near our home town that the soldiers. And they used to come to buy candles and fruit and whatever we were selling. And I would help my mother by weighing the grapes. You had to weigh it, you know, by the pound, not by the pound. (she laughs) And I would, if the scale didn't go this way it went, I would take the one off. (she gestures) Even if, now that was, and the soldiers were laughing, because of such a small girl like me, trying to save everyone of those, of those grapes, you know. (she laughs) But's that's the only thing I really remember when I was there in Italy.   : So in other words, your mother would, would get fruits and vegetables from the farmers...  : Yes.  : ...and sell them in the little store that she had?  : Yes. Yeah. And this was to raise money during the war time, because we were saving the money for the trip. We were not the wealthy people. We were on average mostly down instead of up. (she laughs) We didn't have wealth. No.  : Do you remember anything about the war?  : Well, all I remember that there was this camp in the town, and the soldiers used to come to the town. And on the trip, when we came, when we were on the trip to America, like our boat, they said it was practice, but it was being shot at. We all had to wear jack...  : Life jackets?  : Life jackets. And we were in danger, and everybody prayed, you know. That's the only thing I remember about the war.  : Okay. Now, so your sister came, went six months before you and your mother and your brother?  : Yes.  : And she was received by your mother's...  : Brother.  : ...brother. And she then, did she send money back?  : No, no.  : No. She...  : She just saved.  : ...just made ready for you...  : Yes.   : ...to come.  : Yes.  : So then your mother made the money...  : Yes.  : ...for your passage?  : Oh, yes. Yeah.  : And, do you remember leaving the town?  : Yes, I remember.  : What was that like?  : It was sad leaving the town. And very, very sad leaving the grandparents. We knew we'd never see them again. They were on in age already. At the time they were already in, in 1917 he was eighty-six and my grandma was eighty-five. And we knew we'd never see them again.  : Do you remember anything that either your grandmother or your grandfather told you?  : No.  : Any kind of...  : Story.  : ...stories or lessons or their ideas of life or anything?  : Well, their ideas of life were very simple. They were already too old, you know, for, for me. And as I said, I don't remember being, we were close to them, but we, you know, we saw them every day, but never sitting down and saying stories or anything to you about anything, you know.  : What would they be doing, like when you would see them? What, what, activities? Did they...  : No.  : ...do things. They were...  : No. Just visit.   : ...they were older. So they were sitting...  : Yeah.  : ...and you would come in and...  : Yes. Yeah.  : Uh-huh.  : They were, we were just visiting, you know, to see Grandma and Grandpa. And maybe share some food, you know, bring them something that my mother would make, and bring them something. But no games and no, you know.  : Okay. So, do you remember anything your mother packed to take with you when you went?  : Oh, just the necessities. The, mostly necessities, clothes. That's about all. We didn't carry too much.  : Do you remember your clothes? Do you remember like what you were wearing when you went to the ship?  : Well, it was a plain cotton dress, you know. I remember a blue ribbon on, on, for a belt. And the first day that we were on the ship, all the children we so happy. We played ring around the rosy, you know, all together. But that was the last day we saw each other, because after that we were all sick. We all got sick, you know, and we didn't see each other. We were, didn't play too much. (she laughs)  : What was the name of the ship?  : The name was ship, it was Dante Alleghieri. And, you want to spell, me to spell it?  : No, that one I've heard. We get, we get that...  : Dante Alleghieri. It, it was nice at the time.   : Do you remember your accommodations on the ship?  : The accommodations, it was like we were all in one room. The women and girls were in one room, and the men were separated from there, from their wives. They were all in another room with the boys. And the accommodations were like, the beds were like hammocks, because this is third class. Not, no, not way down in the boat. We didn't have beds and we didn't have a lot of any luxury at all. But we made it. That's the main thing. (she laughs) We made it.  : Do you remember the food?  : The food was terrible. The smell of the coffee was awful. My mother often bought the second class food, because it was, you know, it was done up a little bit better. We, we didn't eat too much because we were very seasick.  : So in other words your mother would what, go to the dining room for the second class?  : No, she would ask someone, attendants of the third class, and they would bring it down. No, we, we couldn't, no, you didn't go to the dining room. It was just attendants, you say, could we have, you know, some things from the second class. And that was much better, you know, than they were giving us.  : Yeah. Uh-huh. So, is there anything else about the voyage that you remember that we haven't said?  : Well, the voyage, it was quite rough. And as I said, the boat was shipped out, was shot at. And we all had to wear these life jackets because we were in danger. But thank God we made it through, which whatever they did we made it through. Everybody prayed. And the only thing I remember on the boat is that the people, they were so close you think everyone was family. They all loved one another. And they all stayed together. As a child I could remember this, you know.   : You mean the feeling of the...  : The feeling...  : ...of the people...  : ...of the people...  : ...as they were crossing?  : Yes. Yes. Very, very close. Everyone was your sister. Everyone was a member of your family.  : So the, the adults were looking out for the children and...  : Yes.  : Uh-huh. Did they have any music or dancing on the ship?  : No. Not when I came. (she laughs)  : Yeah. Okay. So then, do you remember the ship coming into the New York Harbor?  : Yes I do. When it came in the first thing we saw was the Statue of Liberty. And when we say that beautiful lady we knew we had come to America. (she laughs) Yes. That I remember so well.  : Do you remember what people were doing when, when...  : Cheering, and, and screaming, and everybody was so happy that they have made it. Now we don't know if we would have landed here. (she laughs) When we got to Ellis Island, now that was another thing.  : Well, how about the New York skyline. Do you remember seeing that for the first time?  : Well, there wasn't these tall buildings. There was none of these tall buildings when I, when we came. Now, you know, these, it came after we got here. It was just simple. No high buildings.   : What do you remember that you had heard about Ellis Island before you actually got off the boat and came here? Do you remember what people thought about it?  : At Ellis Island, there wasn't...  : No. Before, before, you actually, like what did you hear on the boat, or what did people expect?  : Nobody mentioned it. Nobody mentioned it about Ellis Island. Everybody looked forward for the Statue of Liberty.  : Oh.  : Yeah. There was no talk about it, you know. About when we got here and what it would be like. I don't think anyone knew.  : I see. Okay. Why don't we pause here, and we'll turn the tape over, and then we'll continue with what you remember about Ellis Island.  : Okay.  : Great.  END OF SIDE ONE  BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO  : Okay. This is Side B now, and we're just about, I'm talking with Teresa Cardinale . And we're about to hear what Ellis Island was like to an eight year old when you first arrived in this country.  : When we first arrived, we had to go through an inspection. And my, there was my cousin that came to America with us. It was my mother's sister's daughter. And she was asked a question. It, it was, my, my cousin that was asked a question by the, the inspector, says, "How many feathers has a chicken?" And so she says, "Well, you count them and let me know." So she passed. Now it's my brother's turn. And there was a man in front of him, and they asked him, half Italian, half in English, "Sei e sette, sei e sette." The man said, "Twelve." He thought he said six and six. He didn't pass. My brother answered thirteen. He passed. Now it came to me. And I had these fever sores on my mouth and my head from an infection of my vaccination. And I got a chalk mark on my arm. And my mother didn't pass because she had to stay here with me.   : Now how, when did you have the vaccination?  : When I first went on the boat.  : So they vaccinated everybody...  : Yes.  : ...on the boat...  : Yes.  : ...shortly after leaving Naples?  : Before.  : Before.  : Before you, when you got on the boat, you were vaccinated. Everybody was vaccinated. Mine got infected. And from the infection of the vaccination I developed these fever sores. And I used to go to the hospital in boat to take care. But by the time I got here they were not any better. And so I had to stay here in Ellis Island.  : Do you remember what the vaccination was for?  : No. I don't know.  : So, so your mother was in good health, but she stayed because you had to be detained?  : I, yes.  : So, so what happened? You were in the line, and they see that you have these fever sores, and then what happened next?  : Then I was taken away with my mother to somewhere else which I didn't know what it was, but it was a doctor's office. They examined me, and they saw that it was nothing that was danger or disease. It was just...  : Infectious or anything?  : Yes. So they separated my mother and I. My mother waited in the waiting room, and they took me in another room. And they examined me, and they kept me there. Then the next thing I know, I was in the hospital. They were bathed and washed and they cleaned me up, and I had to stay there.   : And what was the hospital like?  : It was nice. It was clean. And it was very nice. The doctor's were so wonderful to me, and, and the nurses. I cried every night not knowing where my mother was.  : Nobody told you?  : No. We were just separated. The last time I saw her was in the office room in the doctor's office. And then they took me to the hospital and they left my mother to go back maybe where she had to stay and wait for me. And there was a room where they kept these people. Now my brother couldn't go out because he was under age. And my cousin had to stay there and wait with my mother and my brother, because my sister worked and she could only come on the weekend to get her out. Because she was receiving us with my uncle. And we, they all had to wait. But there was a big where they all stayed together. And...  : Your brother stayed with your cousin and your mother?  : Yes. And, and there were the people that had, did not pass for some, what would you call, a test, or whatever they were giving them. The question they were asking them. There was a girl staying there with my mother in the same room where she had to count twenty backwards. And she was always mixing her, her numbers. And she didn't pass. And my mother left her there. She still was detained on account of these numbers. But, you know, it was a, a silly, there's a word for it that I want to say.   : You mean a silly exercise?  : No. A silly, it's, these questions were not, that you needed, it was a catchy little thing. And it was an intelligent [sic] test. That's what it was. Trying to see how intelligent would ask, answer. This girl count, counting nine, twenty backwards. She would get mixed up, and my mother would hear her practice at night. And she would hear her practice and she would get all mixed up. She would go the next day for the test and she wouldn't pass. She's back there again. And like my cousin. How many feathers has a chicken. Now, if she started to hesitate, well, this one is a dummy. You know. (she laughs) So she gave them the right answer. And she said, "You count them, let me know." And she passed. So, it was a little intelligent test, that's what it was.  : How, were you able to speak to any of the nurses or doctor's in the hospital?  : Well, I spoke Italian.  : Did, did any of them speak Italian? Do you remember?  : They, they understood a little of it. They understood a little of it, but this is a dialect. It's not Italian. (she laughs)  : Oh.  : You know, it's like the southerners have a dialect, the northern, Brooklyn, everybody knows who comes from Brooklyn. They have a way speaking. And it's, so, but they knew a little bit that, you know, that they understood. There wasn't too much to say. Just take care of me. And then they were so nice to me, you know, I cried when I come out. I, I didn't want, I didn't want to come out. (they laugh) Then when I saw my mother I was very happy, you know. And to today, when I pass a bridge, any bridge with lights at night, it reminds me of the time I was at Ellis Island.   : Oh.  : Because I used to look out of the window and I could see the bridge.  : That's from the hospital room.  : Yeah. And I could see that, all the lights lit and wonder where my mother was, and wonder. I thought she went out. But they were all there waiting for me. Then we all come out together.  : Well, let's see. So it was your sister who came and picked you up?  : Yes. My uncle also.  : And your uncle.  : Oh, yes. Yeah.  : Uh-huh. So where did you go when you left Ellis Island?  : Well, we lived in, in Brooklyn in a street called Utica Avenue. And my sister had already rented this little house before we got here, and everything was set before we come.  : Now, how did the house compare with the house you had lived in in Italy?  : Oh, much better. Much better.  : In what way?  : In atmosphere. In privacy, because we didn't have too much privacy, as a curtain, you know, it separated the rooms. And it was made, in Italy it was made like one big room separated with curtains, and these was your bedroom and your kitchen and, you know, whatever you, you know. But it was much nicer. In every way, you know, we found it much nicer. We, we loved this country the first minute we came.   : Do you remember any things about this country that struck you in the beginning as being different?  : Snow. Snow. It, when we first came out, because it was in January, there was a lot of snow. And Italy doesn't have much snow. Very seldom. That was different to us.  : Yeah.  : To, my first impression, when we come out of the, you know, out of Ellis Island, and my sister was waiting. And we had a nice reunion, and we took the train and went home and we saw all this snow, different buildings. Completely different than our own home town. That was all it impressed, you know.  : And how did your mother feel about being here?  : She loved it. She liked it. She was a woman that, I would say she was a pioneer. To leave, not knowing where we were going, and the only thing she had to look forward to that she had a brother here. And she knew that, you know, he would certainly see that we were taken care of.  : What was your uncle's name?  : Thomas. He was my mother's brother.  : Uh-huh. So, let's see. So, did you start school right away?  : Yes. They, I went into second grade. And...  : What was that like?  : Well, it was so, it was so different. You don't know the language. And when you had, this comes to my mind, when I spell. You had to have a name sheet. S-H-E-E-T. And I said "shit." (they laugh) My daughters are laughing. And it was, it was hard at the beginning. But then you, you know, when you're young I think you get into it right away. And it wasn't too bad.   : Do you remember any incidents that happened while you were learning English, where maybe something clicked for you that you understood, or how you learned it, or anything like that?  : No. It, it, you know, you just paid attention, and you learned, and naturally you didn't pronounce the word right at first, but it, no, I don't remember, no, anything of that that it would stay in my mind, you know.  : Do you remember how the school compared with the school you had gone to in Italy, in Casono?  : It was different.  : In what way?  : Well, different buildings, different, in Italy we were taught by the nuns, and here we were taught by the teachers. It was different. It was an adjustment. We had to make a lot of adjustment. But we made, we made it good. (she laughs)  : So, were there any new things for you here as far as playing with, with other kids, or...  : Well, at first we didn't know anyone, you know. And you meet people, you meet friends in school. And you become friends with everybody in the neighborhood where you lived. And we had lots of friends.  : And was the neighborhood a largely Italian neighborhood?  : No. It was mixed. It was all mixed. We had Irish people, Italian, we had the blacks. It was a mixed of, I had a very good friend who was a black girl. We used to go to school together. She had to pass my house, and, and we would al, always go together.   : So there was a real sense of community...  : Oh, yes.  : ...in, in where you were living?  : Oh, yes. Yeah.  : Uh-huh. And what kinds of customs did you or your mother retain, that you had done in Italy and that you just carried into, into the new country?  : Well, it's almost your lifestyle. You, you continued with the same, you know. My mother never learned English. She only remem, she only knew money.  : Oh.  : (she laughs) She knew to count money, and she'd do that. But she never learned how to speak English.  : Did she work here?  : Yes, she did.  : What did she do?  : Well, when we came my sister got her a job also in the candy factory, but a different section. And she worked there a few months. Not knowing, not knowing how to read the English words, she had a poster, that she knew that poster where she had to get off, off the train. And it came the time that they changed the poster. She got lost. And it was one night, eleven o'clock at night. My mother wasn't home, and there was no way we knew where to, eleven o'clock, about eleven thirty. Of course, we're crying, and we were look, and where are we going to look for her. About eleven thirty at night some kind man, understood Italian, took her home. So from then on she didn't go to work anymore. But in Italy my mother taught my sister, she sent her to school for embroidery. And my sister got a job as a forelady in an embroidery shop where they made blouses. Years ago they used to use a lot of embroidery on blouses. And being that she knew so much about it, this man gave her a job. Now she's making eighteen dollars a week. (she laughs) It was a big promotion. So my mother didn't go back to the job because we were afraid she would get lost again, and we didn't want to go through what we went through. So she did some homework, you know, at home. And my sister...   : Would that be sewing?  : It was embroidery. On embroidery. No, not...  : Not sewing.  : Not sewing. No. It was blouses that you embroidered and then it went back to the factory and get sewed up, you know. And her place was right across the way from where we lived. So it was very convenient, and my mother never went back to her, to her job.  : What was your first job?  : My first job, my sister now, she worked for this man for few years. And then there was someone else that come in. It was a little jealous of my sister, and she's telling the boss that my sister is stealing his patterns. Now patterns have no need to steal because they change everyday. But they were ignorant at the time, and he fired her. And my mother went there and says, "My daughter never took anything from you. And now that you did this, I'm putting her into business." So my mother put my sister into business.  : What did that mean?  : She, she opened up her own place on embroidery. And my first job was working on embroidery. (she laughs) Then the beating came in, and then the sequence came in. And my sister from the, from the store where she was doing her business for blouses, then they promoted themselves to dresses. And she put up a big shop on women's wear. And there was, at one time there was a lot of beating to do on women's wear. Dresses. And that was the first job. And, and I stayed with her all, you know, all my lifetime.   : How old were you when you started?  : Nineteen.  : Well, now, what did your sister do? She...  : They were the manuf, they were the contractors.  : So they would make...  : You get the work from the manufacturers. And they would, you would, they would send you all the bundles ready for you to do the embroidery on it. And after this was all, all the work that they send maybe two hundred blouses. Then you send it back. And then, but after that, she went into dress line. She went, they made them there. They come just cut, and then you make them there. Then she promoted herself, they did their own cutting. And then you grow. You, you know, you're doing well, you grow.  : So how many people worked for your sister at the height of, of...  : At the height of, I would say about sixty people.  : Wow.  : Yeah. They had a big place. Then they went into, at that time then I had children and I stopped working.  : Well, how did you meet your husband?  : I met my husband in the, in the shop where we were working.  : How, how, how did that happen?  : How it came about?  : Yeah.  : He, I was, I was the floor girl, they call it. I was on the department, when the dresses were all finished, we would clean them, and we would put all the ornaments on them. They would be ready for shipping when we got through with it, my department. My husband, the, my husband that I met, he was a presser on the, on the dresses. And, well, not ever thinking that I was going to go out with him, because he used to go telling me when he went out with other girls. So I, you know, we were just good friends. And then we took, we went on vacation with his sister and his niece. And a friend...   : Who, you and your sister did?  : No, his sister. And her daughter and myself and my husband and a friend of his went on vacation up in the Catskills. And it was up there where he asked me that he wanted to go steady with me. I...  : But you had never dated him?  : No. No, we were just good friends. Family friends. That his sister had come over, and asked my mother if I could go over. Mother would never let me go. But she depended on these people. She says, well, I was safe to go with her, you know. And it was there to my shocking surprise he asked me to go steady with him. And I said, "Oh, you're lonesome for all those girls you go out," I told. (they laugh) He said, "No." And he had a ring. He says, "I never make anyone wear this ring. This is for you to wear." So I knew that he was kind of serious. I used to like him, but never thought that I, you know, would go out with him.  : So you, so you...  : But that's how we met. Yeah.  : So did you say yes?  : Yeah. Not, yeah, I, I took his ring. But I didn't know that I was going to stay, I was married fifty-two years before he passed away.  : So what, what was your husband's name?  : Patrick.  : And the names of your children?  : My children's name, my older girl is Emily, and my second daughter is Teresa, and my son is Vito. And they were named after relatives. My father-in-law, my husband, it was the only son that had children, a boy, so we named it after my father-in-law. My Teresa, well, we call her Teresa, but her name is Victoria Teresa. And that was my mother's name. And my Emily was his mother's name.   : Okay. Well, when you look back on the fact that you started out your life in Italy for eight years and then came here, what influence do you think that early time had on you in your lifetime? The fact that you started out there and then came here, and really lived out most of your life here.  : Well, it was to, to better yourself. To see that you would improve yourself, which we did. We, we went from nothing, and we raised up to a very nice standard of living. In 1956 my husband and I went into business, also in the dress business. The dress line, the women's wear. And we were until 1970. Then my husband then retired and we sold the shop.  : Now, had your husband always worked in the clothing line?  : In the, in the clothing line, yes. But during the war time he was doing work on, what did they call that, when you worked for the...  : Defense?  : Defense. Yes. He was working on ships, and he was an electrician. He became a foreman. But he gave this up when the war came in. He went into it. And my sister went into doing all army things.  : Oh. Do you remember anything else about the second world war, how it effected you and your family?  : Well, not really. It was a hard time. We made the best of everything. Worked hard. We made a nice living. We never went hungry. And I raised my children I think wonderful. They're three wonderful children. Loving. And they, very caring. Never got into any trouble. And that was a good part of my life.   : Now, did your, was your husband, was your husband born here, or did he also come...  : Yes. No, he was born here. I was the only foreigner. (they laugh)  : Well, what, what could you say about, what brings you happiness at this time in your life?  : I, I have no regrets. I have a lot to look forward to. I love this country. And I don't think I have an enemy because I have been kind, I think. Never try to hurt anybody unless it was, not notice it. And I'm, I'm a very happy person. I don't let nothing get me down. I make the best of the situation and I take one day at a time. I make people laugh with my stories. With my jokes. I'm a good joke teller. (they laugh)  : Okay. Well, is there anything else that you would like to say before we close, either about any advise you'd like to give to your grandchildren and great grandchildren, or anything else you'd like to mention before we end?  : I would like to say to my grandchildren, to love this country, be a good citizen, respect yourself and the law, because if you are a good person it will come back to you always. That's what I...  : I think that's...  : That's what I feel in my heart.  : Well, I think that's a beautiful place to end. I want to thank you very much. It's been very enjoyable talking with you. And this is Janet  for the National Park Service. I've been speaking with Teresa, Teresa Cardinale , and it's July 7th, l993. We're here at the Ellis Island studio, and I want to thank you again, and I'm signing off.  