Name;Country;Text
Esther Lagergren Lipko ;Sweden;This is Andrew  and I'm speaking with Esther , L-I-P-K-O. This is interview number 419 [DP-45]. It's the 30th of August 1989. It's Wednesday. We're commencing this interview at 5:15. And Mrs.  comes from Sweden. Could you tell me your name, where you come from, and what year you immigrated to the United States? : All right. My name was Esther Lagergren, and I came to this country in 1924 in the month of August. : And what year were you born? : 1904. : Could you spell your name, your Swedish, your maiden name? : Yes. L-A-G-E-R-G-R-E-N. : I see. Okay. And could you start by telling me what, could you start by telling me what year you, uh, sorry, what the name of your village was in Sweden? : Yeah. It was an island. S-M-O-G-E-N. And it's pronounced Smogen, because it has two dots over the "O", so that makes it sound a little different.  : Can you tell us a little bit about what your life was like on this island as a little girl? : Yeah. Oh, it was beautiful. IT was, the island now is called "The Pearl of the Ocean" because, you know, it's water surrounded, all around. And my parents were business people, and so we had a good life. Of course, during the wars we were never in the wars but we helped all these other countries. So actually we, in our home, we couldn't have any more food than the rest of the people b most of them were fishermen on the island. And so we, there was a very congenial place, you know. Everybody was working together on this island, so it was beautiful. So I had a very good life. : Can you describe your house for us? What was your house like? : Well, beautiful. It, uh, it's right by the ocean. Uh, it was a three-story home. We had balconies on the top of the, you know, each end. And we had, let's see, all the homes stay right in the ocean, but it's rocks under. So you think that the houses would be floating, you know, but it's that they're built on these rocks. So it's, when we, in our home, we, when I get up on the third floor, we could see the whole ocean, so it was very, very, I had a good life as a child. : What did your father do for a living? : Uh, he was in the grocery business and the bakery business. And, of course, when he retired then my brother, one of my brothers took over. And if he wants to know something about my brothers I could tell you that.  : Tell me a little bit about, how big was the family? : We were actually nine children, and two had passed on before I was born, so I didn't see, know anything about them, you know. So, uh, my, I had a brother that was a sea captain and a brother that was an artist, well, he was also a correspondent. And, uh, then I had, then one of my brothers, my youngest brother is older than me. He lives in Chicago. so that's the only one that's over here right now. : Can you tell us a little bit about your life as a little girl on this island, the kinds of things that you did before you went to school, I mean, before you were of school age. : Yeah, well, I was very active, you know, skating and not so much skiing on the island, but skating. We used to skate in the ocean. And the ocean would be, you know, by our place, would be sixty feet deep of ice. And, uh, so that was most of our activity. You know, we didn't have any movies or anything like that, you know. In fact, I never knew what money was till I was fourteen, when I graduated from school. See, I only had a few years schooling in Europe, you know, not too much. : Tell me why you didn't know anything about money. : Well, because we never, there was no place, you know, to spend it. I remember when I graduated from school, I was fourteen, and my mother gave me a little box, matchbox, with money, to go to the mainland and buy my school clothes, you know, for graduation. It was the first money that I ever had because we was, well, we had little stores like, you know, things you buy every day, you know, like we have over here, you buy, kids buy everything, you know, that they can lay their hands on. ( she laughs ) So, uh, so I think that was a good thing, you know.  : Tell me about your school. : My school. Well, we start school, in those days, I don't know just how it is now, we started school when we were seven and, uh, from seven to fourteen, on the island. And then there's one year, we called it sort of the after school, so there was no, uh, high school or anything, so I didn't have any kind of a, you know, schooling, as far as, well, just reading and writing, you know, and things like that, but there was no, I never, in fact, I, when I came over here, well, you go ahead. I'll come to that later. : I'm just trying to get, trace out some idea, some sense of what life was like for you and the rhythm of your life on the island. Can you tell me about, for instance, what would happen over the period of a day. Your father would go to work, and what would you do, a sense of what the rhythm of life was like for you on this island. : You mean if my Dad wouldn't work, you say? : Just a little bit more of a sense of what life was like for you on this island. : Yeah. Well, it was, you might say normal, you know. There was, uh, there was nobody like, my parents were business people. Most of the people were fishermen, you know. But there was no prejudice. You know, there were no, uh, we all lived so happy together, everyone, all the kids. I can't ever remember having anyone try to hurt anybody. So it was a peaceful situation, you know, just, it was almost, you know, when you see all these things going on now it's almost, you know. So it was, we really had a very, very happy childhood as far as the school, you know, it wasn't much, it was just an ordinary, you know, reading and writing and just to get by, you know. So it, all right, our activities, we took our schooling very seriously. But, uh, then before I came over here there was a kind of a, all these young people wanted to come to America. And, uh, see, my oldest brother sponsored me. I had never seen him because he was, I was born after he left Sweden. See, he left there at sixteen. So then these girls and fellows that came over here from the island, I'd say maybe they were probably about ten, fifteen, and they all went back. I was the only one that stayed. So I was, have always been determined, as a little girl. You asked me about, you know, as a little girl, what my, you know, life was. I was a kind of peculiar little girl because I was very independent, very independent. I was very neat, you know. Everything had to be in place, you know. If anybody touched anything, you know, I would just, you know. So I was kind of a little different than some of the kids because I was, everything had to be just so, you know, and it was very, very compared to my two other sisters, you know. They were different altogether. So I think I carried that through life.  : So tell me a little bit about the fisherman. As a little girl did you have much to do with the fishermen on the island? : Yeah. They were, you know, they were so nice people, you know. They had, their families were like, you know, they were all sort of all together because sometimes the fishing, well, I could go back a little bit. They, uh, I had some girlfriends that they didn't, you know, it was, that was during the war. I was just, you know, a little girl. And, um, we would have extra food in the house, you know, see, because my dad was a business person. We couldn't keep too much because he kept tab on us, you know. And, uh, we would help out these people, you know. I would take some loaves of bread, you know, and things, and go and give, you know, to the kids, you know, that didn't have anything. You know, because everything was rationed then. Bread is one of the main things, you know. That's really the main food. Bread and potatoes and fish, on the island. That was the main thing. We had meat maybe once a week, not always, you know. So, uh . . . : How about vegetables? : Not much. Uh, I know we would have, my mother, she would put up carrots. You'd put them in the sand, I think, and then save them for the winter, you know, and apples. : Tell me a bit about that process. : Yeah. See, the people would come to the island in fall, say, probably around this time, you know, September, October. And these big boats would have, um, all this, you know, fruits and vegetables, see. So we would buy things and then put it, like apples, you put it in sawdust, I think, in big barrels, so it's safe for the winter, and carrots, and beets and things like that. But salads, no. We never had salads.  : So why did you put it in sawdust? : Well, to keep it for, uh, so that it wouldn't, you know, to keep it fresh. : So it wouldn't freeze. : Yeah, well, yeah, and also so that, I guess so, yeah, because it's cold, you know. You see, the only time it's warm over there is the month of July. You might say you can depend on that month. Other months are, uh, it could be cold, real cold, even in June or August. So, uh, it, uh, we had to kind of use our heads so that we could have things for the winter, you know. So it was really, we had to be very economical and, uh, so it was a life that, uh, has helped me a lot to concentrate on things, you know, when I came over here, you know, to just go along, you know, and not because, uh, of course, I'm ahead of myself now. You go ahead. : It's all right. Okay, let's talk a little bit about when you, how old were you when you left this island in Sweden to come to America? : I said eighteen but I was nineteen, I think. Yeah, nineteen, yeah. : Tell me about life for you as a teenager. You went to school, you studied, then you left school on the island. How old were you when you left school? : Uh, I was fourteen. : Fourteen. : Fourteen, yeah. : What happened when you left school? : Well, I, I just, we took some little jobs. I remember I was, helped out in the hotel, you know. I was fourteen. And from fourteen to sixteen I did little odds and ends jobs, you know. My dad was very kind of independent. He didn't want us to go. Most of the girls works with fish. You know, they pack them, you know, in ice, you know. My dad would never want us to do that, so we, I worked, helped out in a hotel and did some of the little things that, uh, give me a little extra of money. So I actually didn't do too much over, you know, as far as getting established in a job or anything like that, over there.  : And what sort of social life did you have as a young girl on the island? : Well, there wasn't much of anything, you know. Uh, the social life, well, it was mostly family life, I think. There was no, we didn't have any movies or any, we had activities in church, you know, and Sunday school, and things like that. But as far as, uh, and then ships would come into the island, you know, and they were mostly military ships. I mean, they were, oh, I'm going to, now I've got something that comes to mind that might be interesting. I was about, let's say I was about fifteen. You know, our activity mostly was swimming in summertime. You know, we swim in the ocean. You know, we swim miles, you know. And, well, this is way back. I was about fifteen. It was during the First World War. And, uh, you know, they had these mines, you know. I don't know if you seen these mines. You see, my brother's a sea captain. He was a sea captain. And, uh, that was some, he picked up a mine and he took it to the island. He had to get permission from the king to take it apart. You know, he was so daring, you know. He would do anything. So on the island he took the mine up. See, a mine is like, you know, it's like a baseball. It has a little thing like this, you know, with a thing in it, and there's a little needle in there, see. And when that needle hit something, you know, the whole thing blows up, see. So, uh, he had, he took one of the mines apart, and he used to, he's got this big thing on the island now with his name on it, you know, that he did that. It was a German mine, I think, yeah. So I was swimming one time and I saw this mine floating, you know, how they bounced, you know. And, uh, I noticed that and I started to run and I had to run, you know, some distance. And they say lightening is faster than sound. I guess you know that. And I saw this just lightning, see, and then that tremendous crash, you know. See, because it's all rocks, you know, on the island. And, uh, so I mean, and other times I would, we would see all these soldiers, you know, floating, you know, in the ocean, you know. All they had on was maybe, you know, they were all beat up, you know, but they would have, uh, some kind of a thing on them to tell them whether they were French or German soldiers. So they, we would go in, go up and tell the police. We had one police on the island. And, uh, so we'd go up and tell him and so he got the other men, you know, to sort of pick them up, you know. And, uh, so we had a little, kind of a little funeral for them, you know. And us kids, you know, we'd go and pick, there was very few flowers on the island. Just between the rocks, you know. And, uh, so we'd go and pick them flowers, and make little bouquets and put them on the graves, you know. And then afterwards we made a monument that was French or German. Of course, we'd never know their names or anything, you know. So some of the things, you know, that, very memorable, you know, that. So we, as I said, it was always something, you know. Of course it was, you know, sort of way back, which I was about fifteen. So it was a, many exciting things, you know.  : These soldiers, where had they been killed? : Well, on ships, I think. Yeah. And, uh, well, now, I was going to tell you something, but that's, that's afterwards in the Second World War when I was over here. There was a lot of things going on then, you know. : So tell me, give us a, tell me why it was, how your family came to the decision, or you came to the decision as a young girl, to leave Sweden and come to America. Tell me about that. Let me just put this in context. The war finishes . . . : Yeah. : And then what happens? : Well, see, I was around fifteen. No, let's see, uh, '24, see, the war, the first war was over in 1918. Well, then, of course, my dad was still in business, you know. And, um, so, well, I guess there was just not, as I say, after that I guess I just took little, I was just working on the island, you know, with little, sort of little jobs, you know. Of course, I knew, when, I remember, when I worked in this hotel, we were just helping out things, and, uh, one day the cook said to me she wanted to read my palm, you know, which I don't believe in that. But anyway, and she said, "You know, you're going to go on a long trip." And I said, "No, I don't know." I says, "I don't think so." And she says, "Yes, you are. You're going to go ton on a long trip and it's not going to be too long." Well, I dismissed it, you know. Well, in the meantime, this older brother that was over here wanted my sister to come because she was older than me. See, well, she had a boyfriend, so she didn't want to go. So I was next in line, you know. But outside of that, as a young girl I, we used to play tennis and I remember the last night in Sweden before I took the ship from island to Goteborg. You see, that's where the big ship was. I was out playing tennis. It was late, about twelve o'clock at night. And my sister comes along and she, I never even thought about coming over here, you know. My sister comes running, she said, "Didn't you know that you're going to America tomorrow?" I says, "Oh, I am?" I didn't know anything. You know, I didn't, you know. We were thinking about it, you know. My mother did all the worrying about, you know, my clothes and things. So, uh, so it was, uh, all I know, it was, I had a good life.  : In other words, there was no anticipation at all. You knew nothing about the fact that you were going to be coming to America. : ( she laughs ) No. : What? How did you know nothing about that? : I don't know. I, you know, I, I could tell you stories that you wouldn't believe, you know. Many things that, you know, since I come over here, you know, beginning with Ellis Island. Sometimes I don't know how I ever made it, you know? Because times were tough in those days. You know, they were hard, you know. There was no welfare, thank goodness. I'm glad of that. The people were thinking for themselves. Either you eat or you don't, you know. : So tell me about leaving Goteborg on the boat, and traveling to Ellis Island. : Yeah. Oh, from New York? : From Sweden. From Goteborg to New York. Is that what happened? : Uh, from, uh, from New York to Goteborg. Well, it was, uh, see, some people could come steerage, mostly Jewish people, you know. They had the poor, you know, and they were, they came steerage. I came, they only had one class at that time. There was, you know, the regular class, you know. But, uh, it was, it was really, it was very exciting, you know. I just never thought about, I didn't think about one thing or the other. You know, it was, we were all Swedes, you know. We had a lot of things in common. You know, we had dancing at night, you know, aboard ship. I mean, we had a really good time. Never thought about what was going to happen, you know. All by myself, never seeing, and my brother, I didn't, he was a stranger to me, you know, because I'd never seen him.  : I still don't understand how it is that you actually came to leave Sweden to come to America. You said you didn't make any plans at all yourself. Your mother made the plans for you. Is that what you said? : Well, yes. As far as, you know, she couldn't make too many plans. She just got my things, my clothes, you know. : She had a brother already over here. : Yeah. I had to. You had to. You wouldn't believe. But you go ahead and, you wanted to ask a question. : Don't worry about that. Your brother was already over here. He acted as a sponsor. Is that what happened? : Yeah. Well, he was my sponsor, see? Now, I could begin with Ellis Island. Do you want me to kind of, okay. We took a ferry. See, we had to stay in New York a month. I think it was three weeks in a month because there was a, um, somebody had some kind of illness, so they wouldn't let us off the ship. So we had to stay there about three weeks, I guess, because it was a long time. Finally we got this ferry that takes us to Ellis Island and how they can keep track of all these people. I don't, you know, everybody spoke their own language, running up the stairs up to Immigration, you know. And I wish so sincerely that they would still have Ellis Island. We would have a so much better country. They would screen people, you would have so much money or you'd go back. I had to have twenty-five dollars. If I didn't have twenty-five dollars, go back on the next ship. They'd screen you, they'd take, I remember they took my eye, you know, they twisted it, you know, to see if there was any, I guess you, they can tell if there was any kind of a sickness or something. And boy they did, they screened you thoroughly. If I had any disease, go back. Any problems, you know, like. And, uh, they give you a big piece of paper, you know, they put it on with some kind of a glue or something, they put it on your chest with your name and where you're going because, you know, all foreign languages. And, uh, they gave you, this is kind of funny, they give you a cup of coffee. They had these big iron cups, you know. They give you some coffee. And then they give you a box, a lunchbox, lunch, you know. And in this lunch was one of these little Jewish rye breads, not sliced, you know, so you had to, you know, something. They gave you a sausage about this long, kind of a rolled-up, you know, and some sardines, without opener. And, you know, you think about it now it's really funny. And here we, you know, take our, you know, take that bread out and take a bite of sausage, you know, and put it back in the box again. And we were sitting on a train. In those days these trains was, you know, sooty. And, uh, we tried to open up these sardines cans. You know, we couldn't open them because, and somebody opened it up with something and we was all over. But all in all it was experiences that, as I say, I wish to this day that we had Ellis Island. The biggest mistake. We wouldn't, why we, all these people, you know, it isn't that. Sure, they should come into this country, but there should be a limit and they should be, the people should be screened a little bit. And I was just reading, I got a paper here from Boston. I don't know if you ever heard of The Christian Science Monitor and I was reading that last night, and I said, "How much the taxpayers are going to, will have to pay for all these people."  : So tell me about some of your personal experiences on Ellis Island, when you were being screened. Were some people who were with you sent back? : Yeah. Oh, yes. A lot of people were sent back. In fact, there was a girl that was on my boat, on my ship that her sister was supposed to wire her some, that twenty-five dollars, and she never did, and they were going to send her back. A real nice looking girl. And, uh, one of the fellows gave her the money so they wouldn't send her back, yeah. But, oh, I tell you, there was no mercy there, you know. There was just, uh, so, as I say, I really felt very, very sad that Ellis Island was taken back because . . . : Did they treat you well? : Yeah. You know, we didn't get much, but they were, as I said, I can't understand how they could keep people organized that you go here and nobody understand each other. There was all kinds of languages. And, uh, I was never scared, you know. I was never afraid. I don't know. I guess I was, I never had fear. Even, my life now, you know, I never really had fear of anything. But it was, uh, as I said, they treated us well, but I can't see how they could understand all these people, you know, and keep track of them. : Okay. I'm going to turn the tape over now. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO : We're continuing on side two with Mrs. , interview number 419 [DP-45].  : Pardon? : I was just putting identification on the tape. : Oh. : Okay. I'm going to turn the tape over now. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO : We're continuing on side two with Mrs. , interview number 419. [DP-45] : Pardon? : I was just putting identification on the tape. : Oh. : Okay, let's continue now. Let's, perhaps, talk about some of your experience after Ellis Island. When you leave Ellis Island what happens? : Well, of course, I came to Chicago, you know, where my brother was. Then, uh, you know, I couldn't speak one word English, you know, not one word. And, uh, school in those days were very expensive, high school, you know. You really had to have a lot of money. And so I did some housework so I could learn the language. And, uh, I guess I probably was what you might call a fast learned because it didn't, in about three months I could speak good English. But I tried, you know. Put little words together, you know, and I couldn't afford to go to school. So I worked in housework for about a year and, uh, I had many experience there that, you know, I, sometimes I didn't last too long because, you know, I did a lot of dumb things, you know, things that I never, you know, had done before. Because in my home, you know, we never, I never scrubbed floors and things like that, you know, because I wasn't, you know, I was working outside. And my folks had a, some people that did work, you know, in the house, because they were busy. So I did a lot of dumb things that, uh, I guess if I knew better I wouldn't have done. But it, uh, sometimes I'd last two weeks, you know, sometimes I'd last one week, you know. But anyway I learned, I learned a lot. I learned things that probably would have took a girl that went to college, you know, because it, uh, something that I, you know, an everyday thing that I had to put up with. So it, uh, oh, yeah, I had many, many, many experiences that . . .  : So when you actually, you're in Chicago, you're working, doing cleaning work . . . : Yeah. Well, it was mostly the people were working. There were some lawyers, and there were some bankers' families and so on, and they had children. So mostly, you know, I did things in the house, but watched the kids too, you know, so that . . . : How long did you do this work for? : For about a year. : And then what happened? : Oh, then I, uh, oh, we had a factory not too far from us that they made Babe Ruth candies. I don't know if they still have Babe Ruth. Are they still making Babe Ruth candies? I don't know. And, um, so I worked there for about, for a few years and, um, and I met some girls and we, uh, we roomed together then. And once in a while I'd go over to my brother's, you know, his family, and stay with them for a while, you know. But I, uh, as I say, I was always, you know, you always had to work, you know. : What sort of living did your brother do, what work? : Uh, he was an interior decorator, my oldest brother, yeah. So, uh, and he had one girl, one daughter, that's on my, maybe you want to ask something, but I was going to break in here or something. But anyway, he had one daughter, she was four when I came over. So we kind of knew each other, you know, from that point, see. But we lost track of each other, even though she lives in Chicago. Beautiful, beautiful girl. She was Miss, uh, she was in for Miss America but she didn't want to go into it. She was Miss Chicago, you know, very. And I hadn't seen her in forty years. One day, last Christmas, I got a letter and it said that she had looked up my name in Denver and, uh, she's a broker. And she said that, uh, she just wanted to contact me, you know, because her parents, you know, her brother, you know, my brother, her Dad, had passed on, so she was all by herself. In fact, I got a letter today from her. And she's so, she said that she's all by herself and, uh, she's, I guess, worth a fortune, you know. And she said that, uh, I'm the only aunt she has. She said that she wants to make out her will. So she'd get me, you know, the, and, uh, but, of course, she'll be seventy here next. I got a card, the 19th of September, I just bought a card for her birthday. And, uh, so, as I say, I mean, I don't, you know, money to me doesn't mean a thing.  : So tell me about life during the Depression in America. You were here then? : Oh, yeah. That was, that was hard. That was hard. That was, uh, my husband Ben, he worked for General Motors, Chevrolet Division, in Detroit. And they had a strike that lasted two years. That was, that was hard. So he did some odd, you know, odds and ends jobs., they thought maybe the thing would be over, you know, and it dragged on and dragged on. And, uh, that was, that was hard. It was very, very, very hard. There was no, uh, and they did have welfare in those days, but not much, you know. Either you had to be a Republican, or you had to be a Democrat. You know, I mean, like, for instance, the Democrats would give people, uh, not that we were just destitute, but, you know, it was tough. Democrats would give you extra stuff so that you turned Democrat, see. And the Republicans, you know, they would try to, you know, I mean, there was just, there was, all political. All, everything was political. And, um, so, of course, my husband, he was Democrat, and I was Republican. So we, you know, I mean, it was, I would, I used to bake bread, you know, huge loaves of bread, sell them for ten cents so we could buy something else with that ten cents, you know. I mean, that was, but, what, it was hard, but experiences that really you couldn't buy that for money, you know what I mean. Really, it made real people, you know, to think. Now you can just go down, you know, and get anything you want. But, uh, you see, people talked about, you know, Sweden is socialist, you know. If you want me to say something about it. Well, socialism, I don't know if you know anything about it, you know the difference between . . .  : We don't really have to talk about that. I'm more interested in talking about some of your experiences during the Depression and after the Depression. : Yeah, yeah. Well, as I say, it was hard because the people lost their homes, just like they do to this day, you know. : But you didn't lose your home. : Well, we rented for the time being, and then we had, we had a home, it wasn't too big. It was kind of small. It was a nice little place, but, and so we didn't pay much, you know. But there were some houses there where . . . : Do you remember how much you did pay? : Pardon? : Do you remember how much you paid? It's not important. : No. I remember when we, down payment on it was one hundred dollars. : But you were buying your own house. : Yeah. We were buying, we paid down a hundred dollars. There was a payment, you know, mortgage payment. And, uh, but that was like probably one thousand dollars then, I don't know. But it was very, it was, our monthly payments, I don't know, probably was about twenty-five dollars or something like that. So you can't compare, you know, with today's. : So after the Depression did life improve very rapidly for you after the Depression? What, how did life affect you? : Uh, yeah. Then after so long, of course, my husband went back to work and, uh, some, that, we lived in Detroit, in, Detroit, Michigan. It was a suburb of Detroit. Hazel Park was the name of it. So we had, as I say, we had a, it was, you know, life was beginning to shape up. You know, get back to some of the things that we couldn't have bought, you know, and everything. We did have a car which was, you know, was not the best but, uh, so, uh, but then, of course, you know, then I had three children. I have a son now that's a veterinarian in Washington. And, uh, and my daughters. So when they got to be, you know, go their own way, you know, and do, why, things always got better, you know, because expenses, you know. So but I wouldn't trade anything for coming over to this country, you know. Because that was, even though I could have had, maybe, you know, I could have had more personal things, you know, if I'd been over there, and things like that but, uh, I was always out for adventure, you know, and I got it, too, you know. Even though sometimes it looked hard, it was hard at times but, uh, it was, I really, you know, I really enjoyed it. I enjoyed this country. It could be so much better if, uh, I do like politics a lot, you know, and when I read some of these things that things could, if people only used their heads, you know, it could be a better country.  : Okay. I think that's about it, is it? : No! : Tell me, what else? : You bet, I, I'm sitting on top of the world, you know. But when I read some of these things that, uh, that could be, I don't say that these people coming over to this country, you know. But I think that it should be a level off a little more. You see, they are taking in so many . . . : I think I'll finish the interview there. We can talk about this, but we don't need this part of it on tape. When you're talking about now we don't really need on tape. : Oh. : I'm really only interested in your own experiences, your own . . . : Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. So it's off now. : It will be. That finishes interview number 419 [DP-45] with bells. ( a clock chimes ) You can count the bells. We've finished at six o'clock.
Martha Lindgren Gustafson;Sweden; Today is November 12, 1995. I'm here in the Lutheran Home in Worcester, Massachusetts, and I'm with Martha , who came from Sweden when she was 22 in 1927. You came to this country with your husband and your two first children. : First children. : Right. And ah, today, Mrs.  is 91 years of age and looks absolutely wonderful. (laughs) : Thank you. (laughing) : And I want to say that I'm looking forward to whatever you can remember. So let's start at the beginning. If you would say where in Sweden you were born. : I was born in [ land] that's in the center of Sweden and I lived there to, to I really went to the United States. I lived there really long, in different places there.  : But within that same  : In that area, all the time. : Okay. Now what's your birthdate? : My birthdate? That's in July 27, nineteen hundred four. : What was your mother's name? : Augusta. : How do you spell that? : [A-U-S-G-A-S-T-A] Augusta. : Augusta. And do you by any chance know her maiden name? : Her maiden name was Anderson. : Okay. And your father, his name? : His name was Oskar. : Oskar. Okay. And did you have sisters and brothers? : Oh yeah. We were nine sisters and brothers. And I was next to the youngest one. I was four and a half years old when my father died, and my brother was only six months old. : Oh. : And my mother took care of the family after that. And she used to weave, and she started to, to, started to do that work to make a living. And she did wonderful. We were nine children. We never starved, we never were without clothes. She was a, just a wonderful person. She used to sit at night. I can remember when we're waking up in the morning sometime, at four o'clock, five o'clock, probably I had to go to toilet. And she sat there and study. Studied. She made curtains. She made vests. Material for dresses. And she made rugs. And she made a lot of tablecloths. Beautiful linen tablecloths, that she sold. And I still have some of them at home. But I gave it away to my children, divided it out to my children, so they could have something to remember her by, because she was really remarkable person. When she was, had gone, had been dead for forty years, they wrote an article about her in her paper. Her picture was in the paper   : In this country? : No. In Sweden. After she was gone for forty years, and wrote what she had done. There was my mother. : So she supported all of you children. : She supported, of course there, all my elderly brothers, they were working then because they were twenty-one and eighteen and seventeen and things. So they were working and helped too, see, but she supported, supported us. : Do you want me to turn it off for a minute? (tape resumes) We're resuming now. We were talking, you were telling about your mother and how she supported the entire family. Now, what kind of a person was she? : Well she, she was a quiet person. She was very religious. Every Saturday we, she took us, her children to her father, to her husband's grave. My father's grave. Every Saturday. And of course, in the wintertime, when it was cold she couldn't go. But when she'd go it was always every Saturday afternoon we would bring flowers to the grave. : And she was a Lutheran? : She was a Lutheran. : And what about church? Did you go to church? : Oh, yes. Oh, yes. We had to go to church, yeah. : And what about religious occasions? Do you remember religious holidays and what you did? : Oh, yes. We had a lot of holidays there. And there was all, they was all more religious than here, you know it? They were all from the Bible. I can't even describe them. We had, when Jesus got, got blessed, when the, right now I can't explain it --in the Bible on the ah, he got blessed from heaven, there was a certain day   : On Easter? : No. Easter was Easter. But then, I can't remember exactly what day it was, but I'm remembering it was (pauses, mutters) What's the name of that day now? (nursing home announcement in the background). : What did you do on that day? : Huh? : What did you do on that day? : Now everybody, nobody worked. Nobody worked. It was a holiday. The first holiday we had after that was ah, in February when there was, Varfrudagen. It was when Maria got blessed. We called that Varfrudagen. There was in the last part of February or somewhere. There was a holiday. We all, nobody worked then. : And what did you do? You went to church? : We went to church. And we went to [ ] and had coffee and homemade things and coffee bread and cake and cookies and things like that. Went door to door. And visited each other. We did a lot of that in Sweden. We went to visit. We were very caring about each other. What happened to one. Very caring. : Now, the town that you were living in, Borgord? : Borgord, yes. : Borgord. How big a place was that? Were there a lot of people there? : There was a small, just a small, small city or town outside [Norrkopen] a larger city. : What was the larger city? : Norrkopen.  : How would you spell that? : N-O-R-R-K-O-P-E-N. Norrkopen. : So would you go to Norrkopen for certain reasons? Would you go to the larger city? : Well, yes. We used to go in to do some shopping and things like that in larger stores that they had. Because it was a small city, what we had. : And what was the kind of work that most people did in Borgord? : They, they made pitchforks. My father made  I can remember going visit him in the shop, though I only was four and a half years old. I used to go at eleven o'clock in the morning with coffee and coffee bread and things like that for him. And four o'clock in the afternoon because they worked a long day. And I used to go down with coffee. I had a little, little ah, coffee pot. And then of course I had that little basket, and this was my job, when I could. When I was this old. And I was my father's pet, see. So I used to go down with the coffee. And he had, it was a big, big oven. Big long, like an oven where they heated all the material that they made those pitchforks from. So those boys were standing there taking care of it. And then my father took those hot, and put it in the big, big machine and then stepped on something and made it split, and it made (laughs) in that material, so after that he made the pitchfork out of it. And some people made screws and bolts and they made an awful lot of everything in different parts of the factory. And in one part of the factory they made material, wood material. Something out of wood, like um, ah, clothespins. I never saw clothespins like they made them here. Like they were made out of, they had a spring in the middle, you know some of the clothespin we have? That's the only clothespin I know cause that's what they made there, see? And they made tops to play with, you know, that had a, put a string around them and play with those tops. They made them there too. So they were quite busy working people there.  : Did you have any particular toys that you remember? : Huh? : Do you remember any toys you had when you were a little girl? : Any toys? : Toys, uh, huh. : Oh, yes. I had my, the most I had are dolls that are made out of everything. All kinds of material. Probably then porcelain head. You know, the head of made of porcelain, but then you know the other things were made, my mother made the other things. The arms and the body and all that. She used to make. : So you played dolls. Did you play by yourself or did you have friends? : No. We had, there were a lot of friends. I lived, we lived in a, an apartment building so there was quite a few people there. So I had a lot of friends. Oh, I wouldn't say a lot, but we were at least, we were at least eight or nine girls that used to go together and play. : What else did you play with your friends, besides with the dolls? : What? : What other things did you play with your girlfriends? : Oh, we played games. All kinds of games and things like that. And we used to run and hide and we had to find out where this was hiding [ ]. But things like that. We played games. : Can you describe the apartment where you lived? : Hm? : Could you describe the apartment where you lived.  : My brothers, they lived upstairs on the third floor in that apartment building because that way, we lived on the first floor, my mother and the girls. There were three rooms. And then there was a big hallway that we walked into. And then my mother had, in one of those three rooms she had the loom where she was doing the weaving on. : And how many girls were there? How many girls? : Oh, there were  One girl was married so ther wars, we were four girls. : Four girls and how many brothers? : We were nine. There were five brothers. But they, we didn't live, they were married. Three of them were married. Three of my brothers were married, see. : And what did your brothers do for work as they got older? : Oh, they worked in the factories. Made screws and all that kind of material. : Now, did they have to do an apprenticeship or did they just go after school, after they finished school they went. : Well, yes. There was, not at that time, they picked it up at the father's, you know, their uncles, whatever they did see. : Did you have grandparents there in Sweden that you knew? : No. My, my grandmother husband, he went to United States. And he went to Maine, and they never heard of him. They never heard, know what happened to him. This one was on my mother's side. But on my father's side, his parents went to United States and they took all the children with them. But my father and my aunt didn't like it over here so they went back to Sweden.  : Oh. When, do you know when your father was here in the United States? : I couldn't say. I know my grandmother and my grandfather died in Holden. : Holden, Massachusetts. Oh. So did your father stay here very long before he returned? : No. That I don't know either. I don't think he stayed a year. : This was before he was married? : Before he was married. So then he went home, he met my mother and married her. : Did they ever tell you about how they met? : No. I can't say that they did. : Were they both from the same town? : Oh, yeah. : Can you think of any other holidays or festivals? : Oh, yes. We had, of course there was New Year, but there was nothing too special about New Year. Everybody didn't, nobody worked. And then we had a holiday where we took out the Christmas tree. There was the thirteenth, in January. (silence) What did we call that? Julendeknut. That's what we called that holiday. : Could you spell it? : Twenty, twenty, I had to spell that, twenty. Juledeknut. T--U-S-U-O-N-D-E K-N-U-T. [It's know as Tyvendedagen] : It's two words. : Yeah. : And what does it mean? : That we threw out the Christmas tree.  : So what was . : It was twenty days after Christmas. : Oh, I see. So what would happen on that day? : That day we danced around the Christmas tree. We all danced around our Christmas tree. And then we had candy, there was, it was wrapped into paper, beautiful paper and inside there were candy. : What kind of candy? : There was (pause) regular candy. Hard candy. And we, my mother, and in all the houses, the mother or father just stood and dealt out this candy. We all were supposed to have exactly, exactly used as many candy from the Christmas tree. : Oh, before that, the candies were hanging on the tree? : Before they were hanging on the tree. So then we danced around the tree and then after we danced around the tree we took those candy off, and then, in a pile, and then my mother, in my house, took the, took one candy and then 'till we all got just as many. : And what else was on the tree besides the candy? : Oh, we had light and we had all kind of decorations, and bulbs and you know  Oh, yes. Christmas was a big, big holiday in Sweden. It's the biggest holiday, you know. (train whistle in the background) : What did you do on Christmas do on Christmas day or Christmas Eve? : Well, Christmas, we started Christmas in Sweden on the 13th of December. That's when we celebrated the nun that came over from Russia years and years and hundreds of years ago. And she used to come over, she came, she was a Lutheran. She was an, ah, of course Russia was Catholic, Roman Catholic and you know they were very strict against the, the Lutheran people see? So she escaped over that Baltic Sea and come over to Sweden, but she, she was a nun really. And she was so nice. She went from house to house and she made up clothes and she took old clothes and washed them and took 'em apart and made clothes for younger kids out of it. That's all she did, went from house to house to do that. She was very nice person. So from then on we celebrate that the 13th of January. We call it Lucia Day, Lucia Day.  : L-U-C-I-A. : Ya. How do you spell -cia? Lucia Day. : That was the 13th of December. : That was the 13th of December. That was the first holiday in December. There was a holiday too. Nobody worked then. They celebrate the way that she did it. And then we ah, (coughs)  : When you celebrated that day, what did you do? : Well, we just celebrate. We didn't work. We went to visit each other. : And then what was the next holiday in December? : Then come Christmas. : And what did you do on Christmas Eve? Did you do anything special? : On Christmas Eve, of course, first we went and got the Christmas tree. But we did that before Christmas Eve probably, a couple days. So then it's all decorated Christmas Eve already. And there was a lot of food. You started to cook before Christmas. All kinds of foods. Herring was done and the, the, what do you call [silta] all kinds of meat put together in one that you cut up, what do you call that? You call that [silta] anyway. And all kind of food was cooked before Christmas, because Christmas you were not supposed to work too harshly. So we had (laughs a little), everybody went from house to house. And if you came into one house, you couldn't get out of there. You had to have a cookies or something because otherwise you walked out with the Christmas. So you had to be treated or something. It doesn't matter who you were, if we never saw you before in all our life, if you happened to come into our house, they had to be treated a coffee or coffee bread and cookies and homemade stuff. That was Christmas Eve. And Christmas Day we went to church. It was very quiet, Christmas Day. That was a quiet day. But then we had a second Christmas. Second day of Christmas. And then they started to go out and dance and have fun, people. The second day of Christmas.  : Did you dance? : Oh gosh, yes. I danced. (laughing a lot) : (Laughing) You enjoyed it I take it. What kind of music did you have? : Well we had my ah, my brothers was in, had a musical corp. They went from place to place in their spare time and entertained people. And they entertained and they had one of those - what do you call them? : Accordion? : Accordion. Anything. : And did you, was there any such a thing as a Santa Claus idea, or gifts? : Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There was Christmas Eve, there were Tomte Gubben. Tomte, T-O-M-T-E, Gubben, G-U-B-B-E-N. Tomte Gubben was a man. Tomte Gubben. Ya. Oh, ya. He was dressed in red. And he came at night and gave us all the presents. And people they had farms that put out some bowls with cooked rice and a little milk. In the farm. This is long time ago, you know. For that tomte gubben, so he was going to have something to eat. And naturally that was gone in the morning. They got the cats, or somebody or other ate it. (they laugh) But that was done anyway. Absolutely. People they had farms, you know. : And then twenty days later you had the taking down the tree. : Hm. : After twenty days  : Yeah, then we had julen knut. Then we throw out the Christmas Tree. : Are there any other holidays that you can think of?  : Oh, yeah. There were lots of holidays. I can't remember them all just now. The 20 February we celebrate three days. There was [Junfebriasse] [--- dorg] when she was told she was gonna have Jesus. There were three holidays then. I thought it was in that last part of February. : And how about, did you ever  : And then of course we had Easter, and then we had what we called Pingst. That was when the Holy Spirit come over their apostles. We had that for holiday. : What did you call that one? : You call that Pingst. P-I-E-N-G-E-S-T. We had three days off then too, that we just celebrated. : And you said it was when, : It was when the Holy Spirit come over the apostles from the Bible. And of course we had Easter. And then we had Middsoman, of course that wasn't a holiday. That was a holiday, but it wasn't after the Bible, see? : Did you celebrate May Day? : Yes! The first of May. : What was that like? : Well, then they open up all the parks. All the parks on the outside. They had dancing in them. And entertaining. They opened them up the first of May. Then everybody had the day off and we were going on parades and things like that. (coughs) And we go and they've opened up those parks and they have all kinds of entertainment in the parks.  : Like musical entertainment? : Yeah. And sometimes they had a little place, a place where they have a little theater in the parks where they put on a play. Any kind of play. : Do you ever remember a wedding in Sweden? : A wedding? Oh, yes. : What was that like? : That was like, well, in the church, in the Lutheran church, the church had a crown, a gold crown, a little gold, beautiful, really gold crown, and if they bride want to she could wear that when she got married in the church. : How about funerals? Were the funerals any different than they are here? : The funerals. Of course there, in Sweden, you know, they don't pay for anything. I mean, everything the government is taking care of, see. So there was the same as here. You know they had a service and the, the funeral parlors was, the cemeteries, were usually around the church, the cemeteries, as a rule. They were around the church. So all my, all my relatives that I have in Sweden that passed away - my mother, father, they're buried in one of the lots that were around that big church, see? It's an immense cemetery there. They usually were around the churches. : And do you have any other memories of your father besides when you were four and a half and you took him his coffee? : Yeah, every Sunday morning, every Sunday morning, of course we had to go, we didn't have running water you know, so we had to get our water then, see. But the water, we had a, a well, a little ways away from where we lived, in the, in the woods. And that well was so, it was such a beautiful, was a good water. So clear and so nice water. People went there with their buckets, you know, and collected water used for drinking, see? And every Sunday morning my father and I used to go to that well. (Laughing) And I can remember I want to look just like my father all the time, see?  : You wanted to look like him? : Like the way he did, I did. So when he went out he had his hat even on the side of his head. So I had a white hat. A white hat that looked like fur. But I guess it wasn't fur. But it looked like a fur hat anyway. And the minute I come outside the door, I looked to see if my mother saw me, then I put mine (laughing) on the side of my head. And then when I, when we come back again, I forgot to straighten it out, see. So I can remember my mother looked at my father, said, Oskar, can you see what that girl doing now? She's trying to look just like you, she said. That wasn't, that wasn't nice you know, for a little girl like me to have my hat on the side like a man, no. Oh, I'll never forget it. And I was only four and a half years old when he died. Can you imagine? And I can remember his face, even. I got a grandson by the name of David. He looks so much like his grandfather. That when we're together I can't help but look at him all the time. END SIDE A BEGIN SIDE B : What did he look like? : He was an ordinary person, just an ordinary  But always happy. He was always happy. : Do you remember any particular foods that your mother made or that you remember enjoying when you were a little girl? Any dishes? : Ya, we had beautiful dishes. I don't know how we got them, but they call it [Ekdah]. They came from England.  : Oh. But I mean particular foods. : Oh, you mean food. You mean food. Well, know, of course you know meatball, Swedish meatball (laughs). We had that. And we had the regular, we had the pot roast and regular dinner like we have here. : Did you have a favorite kind of food? : Yea. We had a lot of fish. Because we had, went fishing all the time. We ate a lot of fish. : Now, did you go to school. : Yea, I went to school. And we had to walk quite a while to school then. There was at least two miles to school  more probably. And we walked. And in the winter time when there was, because there was a lot of ah, ah, streams and things like that. So then when they were frozen we used to go, we used to go to school on our, our skates. We used to skate to school sometimes, see. Because there was at the end of that stream, the school. : And how long did you stay in school? : Well, this is years ago, remember. We had to, we start school eight in the morning, had to stay 'til four o'clock in the afternoon. But we had an hour off for dinner. And we had some time off for rest in the morning and afternoon. But not much, I guess, about fifteen minutes probably. When we could go out to play. But then in the middle of the day we had an hour off. But we start at eight o'clock in the morning 'til four o'clock in the afternoon. So in the wintertime it was dark when we, when we walked home.  : And what did you do after you finished school? : After I finished school? Well, I worked in the restaurant. I worked, I helped, I was a helper to the cook. Spare cook or whatever you call it. And after that I took that up so I did a lot of cooking. I used to, be head for cooking in the, in some restaurants and I come here, I used to go out and cook here too. : Were these restaurants in Borgord? : Yes. But not a big one in Borgord. But in the next city there, [Finsbogen] was a large one, was a big restaurant we used to go to. : So you met your husband in Sweden. : Oh, ya. He was from Borgord. He was from the same place as I was. But of course, he was older than I was. Then as I grow older we started to go together. I can remember when he met me when I was a young girl. He used to say, you know, I'm going to marry you. And we used to laugh together, you know it? But that was all. We didn't go out together or anything. But he just told me, I'm gonna marry you. : And did you like him? : Ya, of course I did. We were married fifty years. We never had any, never was anything bother between us. Never. I don't believe in that. And my children is the same way. They're very happy married people, all of them. So I believe that, their home makes it. You know, by the home you come from. : What was your husband's name?  : Harold. : Harold. : Harold, Harold . And his father was a contractor in Sweden. And he didn't, we didn't have, on my husband's side there was nobody over here when we left there. And we had no reason to go because he had, he had a good job. But I don't know. There's a Viking in you, you know. You want to see something else, see. And I had a sister and brother that had gone over here, and at that time, around 1927, there were a lot of people that left for the United States. But ah, we were only going to be here two years. : Why was that? : No. That's all we were going, we were just going to see United States and see how it was and go back home again. And we came in 1927 and then they had they Depression here, 1929. That was terrible. : Well, first before we talk about the Depression, tell me about leaving Borgord, and do you remember leaving? Do you remember packing up to leave? : Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I remember that all right. We sold all our home, our furnishings and everything. And there was spotless, everything we sold you know. We were not married that long, see. And then we walked from there to my mother's place. And that was outside, so on that side of the city, it was a farmland so there was, there was a field on one side of the street, the, the, the road. And then there was some woods on the other side. And this was in the last part of April. And the spring comes early in Sweden than it does here, see. So all those fields were nice and green. I'll never forget it. And the sun was hitting. And I'll never it, how I started to cry. And my husband said, why are you crying. I said, what do we know what we're going into, Harold, I said, look at how beautiful it is. And what we left. Now, what do you think? So ya. I didn't tell you, when we come over to (laughs) New York. We were on the (pauses)  I never forget that. We never, I never saw a black man before in all my life, you know. There was no black people in Sweden, see. After we gone through Sears Island, you know, and the long row there, just going through there, and I remember this black man, you know, helped us with the luggage when we come to New York. And we had just changed our money for American money. And you know, the dimes, you know, are so small and then the nickels were larger, and we thought, you know, the nickels were worth more than a dime. (laughing) When that man had helped us, we didn't know, we didn't know what else was, so my husband gave him three nickels instead of the dimes, you know. And I'll never forget that he said something, though I don't know what he said. But it wasn't something nice, because I could tell on his face. But we didn't know the difference, see. He thought we would give him more. Three nickels and three dimes. And then we, they took us all to a hotel in New York.  : Well, do you remember, do you know what you brought with you? : From Sweden? : Yeah. : Yes, we brought, I had a lot of antiques from Sweden. I always like the antiques. And we brought a lot of that. We had three big wooden boxes full of stuff with us. With rugs and towels and my mother made a, some dishtowels and everything. And I had all of those with me, and a couple dozen of those. And lot of the linen tablecloths she had made and all that. Some, I don't think I had some curtain with me. But linen tablecloths. An awful lot of linen tablecloths. And, and some dishes that we didn't want to throw away, that probably was given to, you know. And knick-knacks that we didn't want to throw away and things like that. I can remember that the man, he took a look, they were kind of late in the afternoon when we, when it was our turn to go through the custom in New York. And he took a look at those three things that we said, and he said, I wish I could go through 'em he said, but get going. He said, get out of here. (Laughing). : Well, do you remember anything about the voyage. When you were on the ship? : Oh, yes. Oh, yes. (laughing) I, there was my husband and my two boys. We had one cabin together. The kids were small, see. But there were some other people that we know that came too, that we know from Sweden. And they, they were so sick. The, the, the place was, it was a mess, they were so terrible sick. And my husband and my kids, we were not sick at all. When we come down to the dining room, they were hardly anybody in the dining room. People were sick. They were seasick. And then after a while, I thought,and they aren't ever going to get over this you , know, to be sea sick. I thought it smelled terrible, [ ] cabin, see. So then (laughs), I find out they've been drinking a lot too. (chuckling) Of course, my husband and I, we didn't drink, see. So that probably was more in that, that these were both that seasick. Oy, yo, yo. Terrible.  : And what were your son's names. Your children, who came with you? : Their, one's name was Bertil, and Jan, my oldest son is Jan, and the other son was Bertil. And they're both passed away now, and their wives have passed away too. So I only got my youngest son, and his wife. The sons. But I got plenty of grandchildren. And they're very, very nice to me. They're very nice to me. : So do you remember when the ship.. The name of the ship was the what? : Huh? : The name of your ship? : Drottningholm. You got that. : Drottningholm. Right. And do you remember when that ship came into the New York harbor? : Oh, yes. I remember when we saw the Statue of Liberty, we first saw that. And everybody was up on the deck looking at it, you know. And I said, Harry coming into New York now, see. : And tell me anything you can remember about Ellis Island. : Well, when you first come in, there, we had to, before we, we went, we went into the, they made us go into some rooms, see. And the ladies had to go into one room and the men another room, and we had to go doctors examine. The doctors examined us. I remember that. And of course I had the two children. I could take them with me when I went in. And then we met my husband again. Then we had to go, and, and from, show our identification, who we were, you know, our passports and all that. And we had to have so much money to get in, we had to show 'em where we were goin'. The name of the people where we were going. We had to show 'em that. And we had to have, we had to have, two hundred dollars apiece in American money to come in.  : So, do you remember anything specific about the examinations? : Well, we went into the doctor and there wasn't much of an examination. But they listened to our heart (there is a nursing home announcement in the background) and they examine us. It wasn't much of an examination, but we had to go through it anyway. (loud voices in the hallway) I can't remember. But, when they exam you, naked. You wasn't naked. : No. : No. : We're going to pause for a minute because there's a lot of noise outside right now. Okay, we're resuming now after some noise in the hall has stopped. So, did someone meet you? When you were told you could go ahead, where did you go? : In New York? Well, there was a man there that took us to, took us to a hotel. I can't remember the name of the hotel. That took us to the hotel. And ah, signed us in there. And we had to stay to that hotel into the morning. : Did you ever have any contact with the Seamen's Institute? : What? : The Seaman's Institute? It's a Swedish organization in New York? Did you ever have any contact with that? : I don't know. I might be them that took us. I don't know. There was somebody that took us. : And what was it like there, where you stayed? : There was like a hotel. We had a room and stayed overnight. And they would give us food there and everything. And then the next morning they took us and put us on the train to Bos-, to Worcester.  : Now, was this mainly Swedish people in the hotel where you were? : Yes. Ya. : Do you have any idea where it was? : No. I don't know where it was really. : Well, you wouldn't . : There was a man and a woman, I remember. But the man seems to have more, the most to say. I was worried more about my children, I guess, so they wouldn't, I had to take care of the two children, see. : Do you remember those first few days and weeks in this country? Any things that struck you as very different? : (silence) Well, the first thing in New York, when I saw the United States, I saw that there were a lot of black people that was workin', you know. And they were, and this is years ago now, you know. They had those, those things that you, what you call it, there's with one wheel that you shove around with, full with things  : Wheelbarrow? : Ya, wheelbarrows. They had wheelbarrows. And they were walkin' around and workin' with those wheelbarrows. I don't know, the, and they were terrible dirty and they was ragged. And I thought, my gosh, is this United States? So my husband looked at me, so he says, Marta, he said, do you think we doing the right thing? (laughs) He looked at me. Of course, we had never seen black people before and we, the Swedes, you know, are very, if you had a rip in something, they was sewed up so they wouldn't show, you know, see. And you didn't go out ragged. Not at that time. They probably do now, but not at that time. If you had rags, anything that wasn't all, you didn't wear it, that's all there was to it. Until it was all sewed up. Clean. And when we saw all that dirt, they was terrible. The most people  I don't think it's as bad now as it was then. It was terrible.  : So then you came to Worcester. You were in Worcester. : Yeah. : And what did your husband do for work? : He was a carpenter. He worked with Swedish carpenter. A Swedish contractor. And then he worked with him and then that contractor, he worked with him, so he was four men to that contractor. His name was [Arlene]. And then we went back to Sweden in nineteen hundred thirty seven. And we were going to stay in Sweden, see. : Well, wait. Before you tell about that, you had one more son. : Ya. Rolf, Rolf . : Rolf? : Rolf. R-O-L-F  He's still here. : And so, why did you go back to Sweden. : We were going to go home. We were just going to be here two years when we came here. Now we've been here since 1927, this is 1939. So then we were going to go back home. So we did. We sold everything we had and went back to Sweden. : Well, tell me about the Depression, when you were here. : Oh, they was terrible. You had to be, I went out and I scrubbed floors on my knees for 25 cents an hour. It was terrible. And my husband had to work, he, with that Arlene, he got a job and he'd let my husband, and his brother was here, he'd give them the whole job, the whole building, that's on [Berkon Street], in the [Berkon] section. All of those big houses my husband built. And you know what he used to get? He used to get four hundred crown, dollar, for, from this, for the whole house, for the inside that finished the whole house. Everything. He got four hundred dollars. Two hundred dollars apiece. It was terrible. Terrible. So I had to go out and work. And I went out and did housework, so I scrubbed floors on my knees and then after you scrubbed them on your knees, you had to go and put the wax on, and then after you did that, you had to have an old skirt, a woolen skirt that they gave you and shine up so they were shiny all over. (low and drawn out) Oh, I hated it. You know, I just hated it. I'm sorry to say now, but I did. But we never, we never went hungry. We always had something to eat.  : Were there a lot of Swedish people in Worcester?  : Oh, yes. There was a lot of Swedes. Where I lived. Up on Belmont Hill. There were almost all Swedes up there, see. There was a lot of Swedes. But ah, they thought we made, they always asked, how you make it? I used to take all the pants apart for my husband and wash them and take pieces and make pants for the kids, sew the kid's pants. And if there was a shirt from my husband, you know, there was hole and things like that, I cut them out and sew them. Made a little shirt for the boys, you know. You had to take care. I was, I was, I wonder what people would do today, if they had to go through it. But we didn't ask for anything. We never asked for anything. Not a dollar. : Did you have certain attitudes that you tried to pass along to your sons? : What? : Were there certain attitudes that you had? : Well, I suppose maybe the same attitude, because they're the same as we are. : Were there things like that you mother tried to instill in you that you also passed along to your children? : Oh, yeah. To be honest, and never, to respect other property and respect other people, you know, and respect other people's opinion, ah, like we did. There. And they have. I got a very nice family. Everybody tells me so. My granddaughter comes and sees me all the time from the Oxford. Now, she was here yesterday, and she'll come tomorrow. And she has married to a nice boy. They have a very nice family. Her oldest boy is going to the, (pauses) to college now. He's taken up, what you call it   : Computer? : No. Not computer. When they, try, you have to scratch your leg. Sometime I forget the words, you know what? They have 'em here. : A medical career. : Yes. God, help me. I forgot. They'll come to me. : Okay. So what was it like for you and your family when you went back to Sweden in 1939. : Oh, well, my husband worked over there. He worked as a carpenter. He got work right along. And we had an apartment over there for almost two years. : And were you glad you had returned? : Huh? : Were you happy that you had returned? : Yeah, sure. I got to say after I, everything, and then it started the war. Hitler started the war. So we were sure that Hitler was gonna take Sweden. He took Yugoslavia, you know, first. And he went, Lithuania started. So everybody started to go back because they knew sons, my oldest son, the sons, they had to be in war if you stay here, you know, see. So then we were going to go back again until the war was over. Oh, ya. We had to make, we stayed here since 1969 then. : So you returned when? When did you come back here? : To here? Nineteen hundred seventy. In '69, '71. Well, I didn't stay all the time. We come back, we come back for two years because we were gonna, we were afraid Hitler was gonna take Sweden. And the kids were gonna be in the war.  : So you went to Sweden in 1939. : '39. : And you came right, how long did you stay before you came back? : '41. : Til '41 and then you came back. I see. : And then we come back here again. And of course, Hitler didn't take Sweden. He didn't touch Sweden. But my, my boys were in the war here. My three boys were in the war. My second boy was a paratrooper in the Second World War and my oldest boy was a, was in the army. He was, they were over in Germany and fought. And then they get home, and then the Korean War started, so then my youngest boy had to go to the Korean War, fighting down there. : Well, we're getting short on time. I want to ask you a few questions. What do you feel proud of, that you've done in your life? What makes you feel satisfied that you have done? : That I've drawn up my family. : Do you think  Go ahead. : And whatever I went through before, I never had to ask for anything. I always went out and work. I used to cook. : And how do you feel when you think, you're Swedish and also American. How do you think about yourself? : Well, I will always be a Swede. I'll always be a Swede. : And do you think, do you think the fact that you immigrated and then went back and forth, do you think that made a difference in the way you saw things and the kind of person you were?  : Well, the first time we come back, nineteen hundred forty one, that was because of the war. And then we back again, nineteen hundred sixty nine, and my husband was sick. And he was the nicest man you could come across but he got an idea that he want to be, he was going to go home and stay in Sweden and then come and visit the children here. So we went. And then he got sick. He got a tumor on his brain and it was like a, it was like a sponge that couldn't be operated on at that time. This was 23 years ago, see. So, then in Sweden he got an idea that was account, it was because he was in Sweden that he got the, the climate or something. You know when you get something the matter with your brains you don't think the same. You don't get to be the same way. So then you want to go back to America. And everybody, the doctors and everybody told me, not to go. Don't go. He was such a good man, so I couldn't have it on my, my conscious that I didn't go back when he wanted to. So we came back here in September. And he passed away in March the next year. : Well, how is this time in your life? : I always worked. I always worked. : And how is it for you now? : Well now, I can't do anything but sit here (laughs). And to a hard working person, I worked, I enjoy working. I enjoy it. I do, I always enjoy work. But they're very nice here, people. Very nice. : Do you wish that you were in Sweden? Would you prefer it?  : Oh, yes. Oh, yes. : You prefer it? : I sure does. : Yeah. : Yeah. I really, I remember homes and the place and the people and well, there's a different, there's a different country. You can't make a country out of United States but look at all the people we have here. They're all different, they have all different religions. There's cultures all different. You know what? That's hard to make a solid country out of it, isn't it? I think so anyway. : Did you ever hear of the idea of a melting pot? They talk about the United States as being a melting pot of people from everywhere? : Ya. Ya. It is. Naturally, because they were made out of, made out of all kinds of people from the whole world, United States is. So there's so many different kind of people. There's a big beautiful country. It's a big beautiful country. They got a lot of beautiful things. To what I mean, to make a living and everything. But ah, does that, some people doesn't appreciate things. I don't know how to express it, that's not  They  Some people seem to think that what they can get, get out of anything they can get out of it, and not give anything back. Oh, probably it's my own idea, you know it. : Well, that's a valid opinion. Sure. Okay. Well, we're at the end of the tape now. I want to thank you so much for a very interesting interview.  : Thank you, it was nice talking to you too. And I suppose I remember hundred things I should have told you afterwards. (laughing) : Okay. I've been speaking with Martha . She came here in 1927 with her husband and two of her sons, and stayed here 'til 1939, went back for two years, came back again until 1969
Hildur Soderburg Lawrence;Sweden;Today is July 21st, 1995. And I'm here in Worcester at the Lutheran Home. And I'm here with Hildur ... : Yeah. : ...who came from Sweden when she as twenty-three years old in 1922. And I'm delighted to be here, and I'm looking forward to whatever you can remember. (Mrs.  laughs) I know you came at twenty-three, so you probably remember your life in Sweden... : Yeah. : ...in the early days. Okay. Hildur, would start by saying your birth date for the tape? Your birth date. : 192', yeah. (unintelligible) : That's okay. It's June 24th, right? : "Ja." [sic] : And it was... : 1999. 1899. : 1899. You were... : I think, I think it is. : Okay. Okay. So that makes you ninety-six now. : Yeah. : Yeah. Okay. Where in Sweden were you born.  : Well, if you can spell. Lysekil. : Lysekil? : L-, L-Y, L-, you have it here? : Yes. (she reads) Lysetil [sic]. Lysekil. : Ja, Lysekil. : Okay. And do you remember, did you live up until you were twenty-three and you left for, for America. Did you live in Lysekil up until you left? : Oh, ja. I, I lived there. I was in Stockholm for two years. : Right before you left? : Ja. : Uh-huh. : No, long before I left. : Oh. : But that's all right. That doesn't matter. : Okay. Well, let's start at the beginning when you were a little girl, and then you can kind of fill me in. (they laugh) When you were a little girl, what, who was in your family? How many children? : There was, well, (unintelligible) I was the oldest one. There were three after that. And after that I can't remember how many there was. : Okay. So you were the oldest, and then you had what? Sister or brother? Who came after you? : A brother. Erik. : Erik. Uh-huh. : And then there was John... : John. : And Robert and Axel and Sven. (they laugh) : Now, were they all born in Sweden? All your brothers?  : Oh, oh, ja. They were all born in Sweden. : Did you have any sisters? : One sister. Anna. : Okay. : My grandmother had thirteen children. So you can see what a family that was. And I was the oldest one. The grand, of the grandchildren. : Oh, you were the first grandchild. Tell me about your grandmother. What do you remember about her? : Oh, she was the most wonderful person you ever would meet. : Really? : She died when she was eighty-nine. : Uh-huh. What was, what was so wonderful about her? What did you like about her? : Well, you could, you had to like her, because she was the most wonderful person that you would meet. : Did you ever do things with her? Did you go visit her, or... : Well, (unintelligible), the family, and I was at my grandmother's house very often and quite a little. Ja. : And what would you do there? When you went to your grandmother's house, what would you do? : (she laughs) Well, we was playing, and we, then we, we started school when we were seven years old. And then we have two years in what they call kindergarten here, but first grade. And then there was four years after that in higher. : Uh-huh. : Ja.  : And... : So there was six years in, in school. : I see. And what do you remember about the school? Was it a big school? : Well, we were quite a few. That's, but, but what, what can I say? : Were you, was it different classes in the same room? : Oh, yeah. There was different classes. : Uh-huh. : So there was first grade and second grade. And then we went up to the higher one. I think it was, if I'm not mistaken, it was four, four or six years after that. That all depends on what, what year you wanted to continue your school to. : What year did you continue to? : About four years. : Four years. Now, do you remember your teacher? : Ja. Her name was, ja. (she laughs) What was her name. I can't remember. : Her name? Do you, what do you remember about her? : Oh, she was wonderful. She was a very, very nice woman. And so, what was her name? Well, I can't... : That's okay. Was she, was she a strict teacher? : Huh? : Was she strict with the children? : Well, sometimes she was, but otherwise she was a wonderful teacher. Ja. There was first or second grade, and after that we went higher. And we had, when we got up in the fourth grade we had a cooking school. So we had to learn to cook some of it. And I was up about six o'clock in the morning to clean the stove so we could do the baking and cooking after that.  : How come you got that job? : Don't know. (they laugh) : Did you like doing that? : Well, you had to. : Uh-huh. : So. But you learned quite a bit of that, too. : Now, the, did you know what you wanted to be when you grew up? Did you have an idea... : No. : ...of what you would do when you got be an... : No. I've been working house work all my life. : Uh-huh. : Yeah. And I went to Stockholm and worked there for, was it four years? I think it was four years I was up in Stockholm. : And what was your job there? : House work. : Well, did you work for one family? : Yeah. It was a doctor. And, he was a dentist. And, but you hardly ever saw him. (she laughs) : Did you enjoy it when you were there in Stockholm? : Sometime. : What did you like about it? : The woman was, she was a terror. : Oh. What did she do? : Everything she could to, to the (unintelligible). No, I didn't like her. But you had to (unintelligible). You never did anything right for her. So. But that doesn't make it. : But then, so then you left there and you went back home to Lysekil?  : Ja. And then I worked house work. And after that I went over here. : I see. Well, you were a little girl, what did you like to do? Did you have games that you played... : Well, we were playing little of everything. So. : What do you remember that you enjoyed as a little girl? : Ja. That's hard to tell. : Do you remember things that your mother baked or made? Different foods that you liked? : No. I won't say that. Well, I did little of this, a little of that. That's, so. : What was your father's name? Your father's name? : Ja. Karl Soderburg. Karl. : Karl. Uh-huh. And your mother? : Linnea [PH]. : Linnea. And what was your mother's maiden name? : My name? : Your mother's maiden name. Do you remember that? : That, that I don't remember. : No. : No. : Okay. : No. : And could you describe your father? : Hmm? : Could you describe your father? : Well, he was a working man. That's all. I would... : What did he do for work? : Stone cutter. : Oh. Was there a quarry in your town?  : Ja. "Det var." And my grandfather was a tinsmith. He had his own business. : Oh. And did your mother work ever? : Ja. She was, well, to start with, you know what all the herring come from in? Ja? : Yeah. : She was in the factory there. So. But we call them "fabrik". I don't know what it mean anything to you. But when they come in the cans. : That's what they're called? : "Sill." (Swedish) Or work, canned "sill." Either one. : And did you eat a lot of fish? : Oh, yeah. Yeah. That was the cheapest. So : And was there a market in town? Was... : Market? : Uh-huh. : Well, but it was small stores, that's all. And every Saturday they had an open market. And all the people around come around with different things. And some come by water and some come by horse. That all depends on where they were living. : Do you remember market days? Did you used to go to the market? : Well, we went there, but there was what they call it an open market. That was on the open place. And it was tents just to, to cover up the people that was having the stores. : Would you ever go to market and buy things? : (she laughs) If I had any money. Money was scarce at the time, so. But if you get five cents, that was a big, big. So.  : Well, now you were the oldest child. : I was the oldest one, ja. : Being the oldest one, did you have certain responsibilities or duties that... : I had, after the children came, ja, I had to watch (unintelligible). Then I had to do little of work beside that, too. When I went to school, there was two, two old ladies what living alone. And at noontime when we had a recess, I had to go there and empty the water and bring in water and (unintelligible). And then I got my lunch there. : Was that your payment, or did you get also money? : Yeah. No, that was the payment. You didn't pay anything if you didn't... : Uh-huh. They paid you by lunch? : Ja. (she laughs) : That was your payment. : Ja. : Yeah. : So, a different life when you... : Yeah. : ...when you think of it. You wouldn't, you wouldn't know anything of what, what we had to go through when we was. : Yeah. What other things can you think of that were different when you were growing up in Sweden? That... : Well, there was all the different things that we had to do, and all the, you started working very young. We had to. And by the time we grow up we had the different places and the different work that we had to do. So I was working in a bakery. Well, no. In the store.  : Was... : After, the bakery. And selling. And then sometime I had to work in the bakery. So, it was a different life. : Did you have fun as a child? Do you remember times that were pleasant? : Oh, ja. We had, well, we had such a big family with the grandmother's all. I don't how many great grandchildren, how many grand, grandchildren there was. That I can't remember. : But a lot? : After such, such a big family, you know, so. So. Ja. Otherwise it was, and after I came here I had the best life. : Oh, so your life changed for the better? : Ja. And a wonderful, wonderful husband. : Oh, good. Well... : No drinking. No smoking. : Uh-huh. Well, was your family religious in Sweden. No? : We, well, if they had a chance to go to church they did, but otherwise, no. : Were you closest to any particular brother that you had, or were you close to your sister? : My sister was, we were close. So, but then my oldest brother he came here. So he was here, and he get married. And, but he went to Florida and lived in Florida. So, I didn't... : So... : ...I didn't see too much of him. : Now, was your brother the first one to come to this country?  : Ja. : Uh-huh. And how was that he happened to come? : Huh? : Why was it that your brother came? : He just wanted to come, that's all. : Uh-huh. : Ja. : And so then after he came, did he write to you? Did he write about this country and let you know what... : Well, he lived in Worcester for, for a time. (unintelligible) he moved on to Florida. : I see. : Ja. : Do you remember getting letters from him? : (she laughs) No. : When you were still in Sweden? No. : No. : Were you the next to come after your brother came? Your brother... : I was the first one. : Yeah. But after your brother came to America... : Yeah. : ...then did you come after that? : My brother? : No... : He, no, he come after me. : Oh, you came first? : Oh, ja. I was here long before him. : Oh. How was it you decided to come? : My uncle was home. And he send the ticket. So I came back here, I come here. My uncle, and then we lived in Hyde Park in Boston. And then I started house work down there, and then they moved to Worcester, and he got work here in Worcester. My uncle. So we moved up there. And then I started working with families here. If you heard about name of Daniels.  : Daniels? : Daniel. Was a very rich family. : In Worcester? : Ja. So I was there for almost, almost two years. : Uh-huh. Well, now, did you remember your uncle from Sweden? When you were still in Sweden did you know that uncle? : No. : Oh, you never knew him? : Not, not until they come back here. : I see. : They come back here. I didn't, can't remember what they look like or anything. : So, so he, this uncle sent you money to come to America? : Ja. : And did, were the one because you were the oldest one? Is that why you were the one to come? : Ja. I was the oldest one, so. And then after that my brother, it was a few years after that he came. So. : Do you remember leaving Sweden? : Me? : You remember saying good-bye to your family? : (she laughs) Ja. And, but they, we went back, after I got married we went back a couple of times. After the, the Depression here, my husband didn't want to go on welfare, so we sold everything that we had went back to Sweden and stayed for two years. : Oh. Okay... : There, there was man that worked for (Swedish) Sweden. And he said, I'm going back, he says, why don't you go, too. So we sold everything and back we went. And I enjoyed every single day of it after that.  : Okay. Well, tell me about when you first, where did you leave from? When you left your, your home, home... : Lysekil. : Yeah. : Ja. : And then how did you, how did you go to the port? How did you get to the ship? : Well, we, in the little town that I, we had to walk down to the water there, ship, to the, where the water's laying. : Oh, you walked there? : Oh, ja. It didn't take more that five minutes. : Uh-huh. And what was the name of the ship that you came... : Kungsholm. Kungsholm. : Kungsholm. And what, what, were you, when you were on the ship, do you remember anything about the crossing, coming to this country? : Yes. We were four in, in a room. And it was two that were very, very sick. We had to take them up because we couldn't stand it. It was too much. And we had quite a bit of a storm. So the boat was rolling. But otherwise everything was fine. : Now, you were travelling alone? : Yes. : You were by yourself when you came? : Ja. : How did you feel about coming to this country when you were coming here? : Well, it was, I don't know what it, well, kind of different I would say. And when I come to Hyde Park, my aunt there, she worked in a factory sort of making man's clothes. So she get me in there. But my eyes started to get bad, so I, I had to quit. So I took a house work with a family with four children. One morning I get up quite early, did the washing, hung it out. And when the man come down for breakfast, he looked out, said, "Did you wash?" And it was fourteen below zero, and I didn't know. That didn't mean anything to me. Fourteen below zero. I put the clothes on the line and it was hanging there stiff as can be. (she laughs) If you know what I mean.  : Yeah. : So when, when, in the afternoon I had to take them in. I could have stood, but the man used to wear union suits. I could have stand it in the corner, and it was all stiff. (she laughs) But everything was fine. : Well, you were used to the cold. : Well, we had cold in Sweden, too, so, that didn't make a difference to me. When you're young you don't think about anything like that, so. : Yeah. : So, and then they moved to Worcester, went to Worcester. : Well, do you remember when the ship came into the New York Harbor? Do you remember when you were on the ship... : Ja. : ...and it came into New York? : Ja. : Do you... : And then we went into Ellis Island. : What do you remember about that? : Well, all I can remember is that quite a few of us went down, down there. And if I'm not mistaken we had a cup of coffee. And after that there was a boat to, outside Worcester. We had a boat ride from Ellis Island to Boston, but I can't remember the name of the boat. : Do you remember being examined at Ellis Island? : No, not that I can remember. : Uh-huh. : No. : And, did, no one met you? You were just put on another boat...  : Yes. : ...directed to another boat to go to Boston? : Ja. It was a small boat. It wasn't far from Ellis Island to Boston. : Do, do you have any other impressions of Ellis Island? : No. We didn't stay long (unintelligible). We just was in, in the room when we had a cup of coffee and that's all. : Now did you know anybody else who was on your ship... : I have no idea who they were. : Yeah : It was all stranger to me. : Yeah. Did you speak any English? : (she laughs) You can hear my English now? : Well, your English is fine now. : So. : Well, now, so, what was it like for a young, a young woman of twenty-three to be travelling alone to this country and going to Boston on... : Well, you didn't think much about anything like that. You just think that you were coming to another country. That's all. And the first Sunday I was here, they took me down to Revere Beach. (she laughs) And I was, the women were, were dressed in union suits, almost... : They were like bathing suits? : Bathing. (she laughs) I couldn't believe when I saw them. They had almost dress, with long stockings and union suit that went way. (she indicates) : What, what kind of bathing suits had you seen in Sweden? What was the difference?  : Well, we had the bathing suits, of course. And many times we went without. That all depends on where we were. So, when it was warm we never heard of any bathing suits. But after a while we had the bathing suits on. So. It's a different life. : Yeah. : But I had a wonderful life here. : Can you think of anything else struck you as different when you were first, when you were new to this country? : Well, well, first there was the language, of course. You didn't know anything, if it was telling you anything or whatever it was. I didn't know what (unintelligible). That's all. : And how was it for you learning English? : Well, you had to pick up like a little here and little there. You can here it now, how I can't express, explain everything even now, either. But I'm doing the best I can. : You do very well. I, there's no problem. : And I have two wonderful daughters. : Okay. Well, first tell me how, you got a job right away. First in the factory and then you went to work for the family, right? : Ja. : And then, when along the way did you meet your husband? : In Sweden. We went together for four years, two years in Sweden. : Oh, so he was your boyfriend when you came here? : He, ja, he came here two years after I did.  : Ah. Okay. So you, you planned that you would come here and then he would come here? : I didn't know that he was coming, but he did come. : Did he come because you were here? : Ja. : What was his name? : John. : John. And, so John ? : Well, we say it was Lowrenson [PH]. : Lowrenson? : Ja. : How do you spell that? : L-O, Lo, L-R-N, C-, C-, or what it's call it [sic]. S-O-N. Lowrenson. : Lowrenson. Uh-huh. And then when he came here he changed it? He changed his name... : Ja. Because his name, I don't what happened, but he, he called himself Johannson. Johannson. : Uh-huh. : But he changed that when he came here because there was too many Johannsons. When he was working and so forth, he went over to his father's name. Lowrenson. But he changed that to , instead of to Lowrenson, because it was harder to spell Lowrenson than it is to spell . : And so he had changed his name from Lowrenson to  before you married him? : No. After. : After. So for a while your name was Lowrenson, too? : Ja. : Uh-huh. And then, tell me how you met him.  : Huh? : How did you meet in the beginning? : In Sweden? : Yeah. : Well, (unintelligible) that's a small town, so almost everybody knows everybody else. And we had a big party going to get money. And... : What was the money for? : Huh? : What was the money for? : Well, for different things. They gave to charity and they gave to this and that and, can I say it? : Yeah. : That we belonged to the Temperance Society, if you know what that is. : Yes. : No drinking, no smoking. So that's, that's what we were doing. Little of everything like that. : So you met, you, you were both involved with the Temperance Society? You were both... : Oh, ja. And we had a big, large ham in Worcester. Eggs. Two, two or three of them. Temperance. So there was no drinking here in our house. No smoking, either, for that matter. So, but all those is gone. There's no more temperance anymore. : Well, it sounds like... : Which is too bad. : It sounds like that was very important to you. : You said it. Ja. No. We just (unintelligible) like that. : Were there Temperance Societies in Sweden as well?  : Oh, ja. Oh, that's a big, there still are. Oh, there, that's a big organization. The temperance. I wish it was here, too. Ja, we had a quite a, we had three temperance lodges here, Temperance Society. One on (unintelligible), and one at (unintelligible) and one on, I think it was Fairmount Street. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO : Can you remember when your husband first came here to this country and you, and you saw him for the first time. : Well, the first. (she laughs) He came, I was working, so I didn't know, I know he was coming. And then I was on the street car, riding, and there was somebody walking down the street. And that's the first time I saw him when he come back here. : And what did he say? What did he, did he say that he had come back for you? : No. We were happy to see each other after two years. So. No. And after that it was (unintelligible). : Did you get married then soon after that? : No, we get married two years after that. And then I had the first babies two years after that. : What were, what was your first babies name? : Lillian. Did you go to the museum up here? : Yes. : She was one of the, the big workers up there. : Oh. : All her translation from Swedish to English or from English to Swedish, and all that papers, it's in the library up there. She work for John Jepson quite a bit.  : Now did you have other children, too? : I have one other girl. And she works at Astra (unintelligible) Pharmaceutical. She is sixty years old, and Lillian, the oldest one is sixty-eight. : And, and what's the younger one's name? : Ingrid. : Ingrid. : She's been at Astra Pharmaceutical for four, four years. No. More than that. She's been forty-six, forty-six years I think it is at Astra. We know the owner that started the Astra. Jarla, if you heard about him. : What's his name? : Jarla. : Jarla. : You don't remember Ivan Johnson, the dentist? Well, they started the Swedish pharmacy. The Astra. : How do you spell that, Astra? : A-S-, A-S, S-T-R. Astra. : Uh-huh. : Pharmaceut, that's in Westborough. That's a big com, I'll get, they have the medicine here, too, I would believe. : So, did you work after you had your children? : No. : No. : My husband didn't want it. : And what was your husband doing for work? : He worked at the Norton Company for, for, where was he? Well, he worked at Norton Company. : Northern? : Huh? : Did you say Northern Company?  : No, Norton. : Oh, Norton. : Norton Company. Ja. : Uh-huh. And when did you and your husband go back to Sweden? : The Depression here. Was it 192'... : It could have been '29 or '30's. : Ja. See, he sold everything because my husband didn't want to go on welfare. He didn't want that on his record. So we sold everything and went back to Sweden and stayed for two years. And then come back, because there was a man from Chicago that told my husband, I'm going back. He says, why don't you do the same. So here we are. : Now what was it like for you going back and living in Sweden again? : Well, it was kind of different. : What was different? : But you get used to it after all, so. : What were the differences that, that you had to get used to again when you went back? : Well, that I can't really say. There was much... : Well, did you live in the same, I mean, was the way you lived different? I mean, the house and the... : Well, we had to have the tenement. You only get one room, and it was a real small one. And then the kitchen. That's all. That's not like here. So. But. : How about like electricity and water and all the things that... : Well, that's are all was the same as here.  : It was all the same. : Ja. : Uh-huh. : So. : And what was it like being around your family again after, after all that time? : Well, it was different. Just had to get used to again after so, being away for a quite a while. Ja. But it was nice to see them. But you don't what it means when you say I'm happy when I come back here. (she laughs) : You mean you were happy to come back to the United States. : You said it. : Uh-huh. : Ja. : Well, do you know why you were so happy to come back? : Well, the living is different. So we had a wonderful living here. And still have for that matter. Now I won't say it, but we had a wonderful, wonderful home life. Two very nice children. So. : Was there a large Swedish population in Worcester when you were... : There was, ja, there was, there was quite a few Swedish people here then. We had three, I think it was three Temperance Societies here. : Were they mostly Swedish people in the Temperance Society? : Ja. Ja. Well, you can, maybe somebody else. I, I wouldn't know. But the one that I belonged to were all Swedes. So. Ja. (unintelligible) I had a wonderful life here. : Now, what do you feel proud of?  : Huh? : What do you feel proud of? : Well, everything is nice. I won't say anything. The people is nice, but, (unintelligible) that we belong to, well, you know what I mean. : The people that you belong to? : Well, I mean, nice, the Swedish people, and a lot of things that they have had. Sorry. : Did, did you and your husband becomes citizens at some time? : Oh, ja. Oh, ja. We were citizen here. Ja. Ja. And he worked at Norton for many years. He was a wonderful worker. : So he was happy in this country, too. : Ja. Ja. So, that's the story. : Okay. Well, now, what do you, how do you think it made a difference to you, the fact that you grew up in Sweden and you came here when you were twenty-three years old and... : Well, it's hard to tell. It's an awful lot of difference in working conditions, there and here. I had wonderful places here that I worked. So. As I say, otherwise, it's. (she laughs) You're recording all this? : Yes. Yeah, it's all of interest. Now, let's see. Is there anything else that you can say? Are there qualities that you have that you consider Swedish, and are there qualities that you have that you consider American? How do you think about yourself that way? : Well, I would almost say they're about the same. I would say. Ja.  : What kinds of things do you carry over from Sweden? Are there any customs, or any ways of doing things... : Well, there are a lot of, lot of Swedish customs that, it's here, take them over here many times. Like they, they made similar parties that they have here. You don't know anything about those, do you? : No. Tell me about them. : Well, they dress up in costumes, and have different dances and different, they all (unintelligible) is very important in here in this count, in Sweden. And they carry over. So there are a lot, a lot of Swedish things going on here, too. : Oh. : You can only look at the museum up there at the, ja, what's going on there. So. : Uh-huh. Did you and your husband and children, did you, did you participate in these Swedish... : Huh? : Did your, did you participate in these Swedish festivities? : No, not much. Well, we were, it made similar things that we have down there. The Temperance Society did quite a bit of doings at midsummer and so forth. : Did they have parties? Did they have, where people dressed up in costumes and... : Some of them were in Swedish costumes. Ja. So. : How about cooking? Do you still cook some Swedish dishes? : Oh, some, oh, ja. We do that, too.  : Yeah? What kind of Swedish cooking did you continue making in this country? : (she laughs) You heard about "sill?" : Sill? : Herring? : Yes. : That's, that's good. : Uh-huh. : And otherwise it's about the same. So. : Swedish meatballs? : You said it. (they laugh) Ja. That's all the daughter is what doing now. She had the house now when I moved out. So, she had, so happy to, she had to do her own cooking now. My mother did before. So. Ja. : And, when you look back over your life, what makes you feel very good? : Well, I would say that I have a very nice home life here the whole time. So, a wonderful husband and nice children, and so forth, and a wonderful son-in-law, if I can say it. : Oh, good. : Ja. : Did your children marry Swedish men? : No. : No. : She married to, he's German. Born here, of course. They met while playing together when they were two years old. : Oh. : And after, after a few years, they get marr, after we come back from Sweden, they started to get together again. He is a wonderful, wonderful person. : So when you and your husband went to Sweden, your daughters were already born? They went with you?  : One, one was born here. And, the oldest one was born here. The other one was born in Sweden. : Oh. : Ja. Well, we didn't want a, well, as I said before we didn't want to go on welfare. So we went back home. : And what did you husband do when you went back home to Sweden? : He worked in the big factory. So. : And did you work when you went, no, you, you had your child. : My husband didn't want me to work. He said you stay home, and, so. Ja. So now you know my life. : And how is your life now? How is your life at this stage? : Well, now, it's different for me here, but otherwise at home, we had a wonderful home life. Ja. The children was very good, and the son-in-law as I said. And, but now, no, the oldest one was working with General Electric for forty-seven years. And now the youngest one is at Astra for forty-four years. : And do you have grandchildren? : No. : No. : No. : And how about life here in the Lutheran home? How is that? : It's, it's different, but it's all right. So. : You feel well cared for? : Huh? : You feel well cared for here? : Ja. So. We have to. That's all. : You have to. Right.  : Ja. No, they, I can't complain. Everything is fine. : So, to what do you attribute such an old age that you've, that you've managed to live to? : Huh? : I say, you've lived to quite a ripe old age. : Yeah. : Is that, does that run in your family? : No. : Did your mother and father live to be in their nineties? : No, no, no. My grandmother was eighty-nine. My mother was sixty-seven, I think, when she died. I can't remember when my father died. I thought that maybe it was after I get here, so. So. : Yeah. : Ja. : Well, is there anything else you can think of about life in Sweden and coming to this country and then marrying your husband and going back to Sweden and... : (she laugh) Well, there are a lot of different things. So. No, we had a wonderful life here, and we had a, when we're back there, we had a wonderful home life there, too. So, but that's not, you can't compare. : What would have been different if you had stayed in Sweden, if you had never left? : Well, they had, get used to it, that's all. : You would have gotten used to it? Yeah? : Yeah. But I had two wonderful brother-in-laws and a sister-in-law. She is ninety, and one of the boys is eighty-nine, eighty-seven, and the other one, well, he is over eighty, anyways [sic], so. Wonderful people.  : And do you see them? Do you still see them? : No, I don't see them, but we write and we call. : Oh, good. : Ja, so we contact with them. So. : Yeah. : No, he had, my husband had a wonderful family, too, so. : Well, good. Well, I think maybe we can stop here. I thank you so much. Very, very interesting. : Well, if there is anything to you, that's, I mean. : Well, now this tape will be at Ellis Island. (Mrs.  laughs) And it will be preserved so people can listen to it now and in the future. : Ja. So. : It's people like you that made this country what it is, and so you... : Well, we had tried to. No drinking, no, not smoking and not destroying anything, if I can say it. Ja. Well, you hear what's going on now, that's sickening. Isn't it? Ja. : Would you have any advice to give to somebody who was just coming to this country? : No, I wouldn't. I wouldn't. But that's, can I say it? : Sure. : You wouldn't dare to go down to Worcester nowadays with all what's going on there. Isn't it true? : Yes. : Ja. : Okay. We're going to stop here. And I've been speaking with Hildur , who is ninety-six. And this is Janet  for the National Park Service, and I'm signing off. (Mrs.  laughs) Okay.